{"id": "39040", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39040", "title": "Ernest Lawrence", "text": "American accelerator physicist (1901\u20131958)\nErnest Orlando Lawrence (August 8, 1901 \u2013 August 27, 1958) was an American accelerator physicist who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1939 for his invention of the cyclotron. He is known for his work on uranium-isotope separation for the Manhattan Project, as well as for founding the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.\nA graduate of the University of South Dakota and University of Minnesota, Lawrence obtained a PhD in physics at Yale in 1925. In 1928, he was hired as an associate professor of physics at the University of California, Berkeley, becoming the youngest full professor there two years later. In its library one evening, Lawrence was intrigued by a diagram of an accelerator that produced high-energy particles. He contemplated how it could be made compact, and came up with an idea for a circular accelerating chamber between the poles of an electromagnet. The result was the first cyclotron.\nLawrence went on to build a series of ever larger and more expensive cyclotrons. His Radiation Laboratory became an official department of the University of California in 1936, with Lawrence as its director. In addition to the use of the cyclotron for physics, Lawrence also supported its use in research into medical uses of radioisotopes. During World War II, Lawrence developed electromagnetic isotope separation at the Radiation Laboratory. It used devices known as calutrons, a hybrid of the standard laboratory mass spectrometer and cyclotron. A huge electromagnetic separation plant was built at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, which came to be called Y-12. The process was inefficient, but it worked.\nAfter the war, Lawrence campaigned extensively for government sponsorship of large scientific programs, and was a forceful advocate of \"Big Science\", with its requirements for big machines and big money. Lawrence strongly backed Edward Teller's campaign for a second nuclear weapons laboratory, which Lawrence located in Livermore, California. After his death, the Regents of the University of California renamed the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory after him. Chemical element number 103 was named lawrencium in his honor after its discovery at Berkeley in 1961.\nEarly life.\nErnest Orlando Lawrence was born in Canton, South Dakota, on August 8, 1901. His parents, Carl Gustavus (1871\u20131954) and Gunda Regina (n\u00e9e Jacobson) Lawrence (1874\u20131959), were both the offspring of Norwegian immigrants who had met while teaching at the high school in Canton, where his father was also the superintendent of schools. He had a younger brother, John H. Lawrence, who would become a physician, and was a pioneer in the field of nuclear medicine. Growing up, his best friend was Merle Tuve, who would also go on to become a highly accomplished physicist.\nLawrence attended the public schools of Canton and Pierre, then enrolled at St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota, but transferred after a year to the University of South Dakota in Vermillion. He completed his bachelor's degree in chemistry in 1922, and his Master of Arts (M.A.) degree in physics from the University of Minnesota in 1923 under the supervision of William Francis Gray Swann. For his master's thesis, Lawrence built an experimental apparatus that rotated an ellipsoid through a magnetic field.\nLawrence followed Swann to the University of Chicago, and then to Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, where Lawrence completed his Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degree in physics in 1925 as a National Research Fellow, writing his doctoral thesis on the photoelectric effect in potassium vapor. He was elected a member of Sigma Xi, and, on Swann's recommendation, received a National Research Council fellowship. Instead of using it to travel to Europe, as was customary at the time, he remained at Yale University with Swann as a researcher.\nWith Jesse Beams from the University of Virginia, Lawrence continued to research the photoelectric effect. They showed that photoelectrons appeared within 2 x 10\u22129 seconds of the photons striking the photoelectric surface\u2014close to the limit of measurement at the time. Reducing the emission time by switching the light source on and off rapidly made the spectrum of energy emitted broader, in conformance with Werner Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.\nEarly career.\nIn 1926 and 1927, Lawrence received offers of assistant professorships from the University of Washington in Seattle and the University of California at a salary of $3,500 per annum (). Yale promptly matched the offer of the assistant professorship, but at a salary of $3,000. Lawrence chose to stay at the more prestigious Yale, but because he had never been an instructor, the appointment was resented by some of his fellow faculty, and in the eyes of many it still did not compensate for his South Dakota immigrant background.\nLawrence was hired as an associate professor of physics at the University of California in 1928. He became a full professor two years later, becoming the university's youngest professor. Based on Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric and Ir\u00e8ne Joliot-Curie's 1934 published work on artificial radioactivity, Lawrence discovered the nitrogen-13 isotope by firing high-energy protons into a carbon-13 element in his laboratory. He and his team including Martin Kamen and Samuel Ruben accidentally discovered the carbon-14 isotope by bombarding graphite with high-energy protons. Robert Gordon Sproul, who became university president the day after Lawrence became a professor, was a member of the Bohemian Club, and he sponsored Lawrence's membership in 1932. Through this club, Lawrence met William Henry Crocker, Edwin Pauley, and John Francis Neylan. They were influential men who helped him obtain money for his energetic nuclear particle investigations. There was great hope for medical uses to come from the development of particle physics, and this led to much of the early funding that Lawrence was able to obtain for research.\nWhile at Yale, Lawrence met Mary Kimberly (Molly) Blumer, the eldest of four daughters of George Blumer, the dean of the Yale School of Medicine. They first met in 1926 and became engaged in 1931, and were married on May 14, 1932, at Trinity Church on the Green in New Haven, Connecticut. They had six children: Eric, Margaret, Mary, Robert, Barbara, and Susan. Lawrence named his son Robert after theoretical physicist Robert Oppenheimer, his closest friend in Berkeley. In 1941, Molly's sister Elsie married Edwin McMillan, who would go on to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1951 with Glenn T. Seaborg.\nDevelopment of the cyclotron.\nInvention.\nThe invention that brought Lawrence to international fame started out as a sketch on a scrap of a paper napkin. While sitting in the library one evening in 1929, Lawrence glanced over a journal article by Rolf Wider\u00f8e, and was intrigued by one of the diagrams. This depicted a device that produced high-energy particles by means of a succession of small \"pushes\". The device depicted was laid out in a straight line using increasingly longer electrodes. At the time, physicists were beginning to explore the atomic nucleus. In 1919, the New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford had fired alpha particles into nitrogen and had succeeded in knocking protons out of some of the nuclei. But nuclei have a positive charge that repels other positively charged nuclei, and they are bound together tightly by a force that physicists were only just beginning to understand. To break them up, to disintegrate them, would require much higher energies, of the order of millions of volts.\nLawrence saw that such a particle accelerator would soon become too long and unwieldy for his university laboratory. In pondering a way to make the accelerator more compact, Lawrence decided to set a circular accelerating chamber between the poles of an electromagnet. The magnetic field would hold the charged protons in a spiral path as they were accelerated between just two semicircular electrodes connected to an alternating potential. After a hundred turns or so, the protons would impact the target as a beam of high-energy particles. Lawrence excitedly told his colleagues that he had discovered a method for obtaining particles of very high energy without the use of any high voltage. He initially worked with Niels Edlefsen. Their first cyclotron was made out of brass, wire, and sealing wax and was only in diameter\u2014it could be held in one hand, and probably cost a total of $25 ().\nWhat Lawrence needed to develop the idea was capable graduate students to do the work. Edlefsen left to take up an assistant professorship in September 1930, and Lawrence replaced him with David H. Sloan and M. Stanley Livingston, whom he set to work on developing Wider\u00f8e's accelerator and Edlefsen's cyclotron, respectively. Both had their own financial support. Both designs proved practical, and by May 1931, Sloan's linear accelerator was able to accelerate ions to 1 MeV. Livingston had a greater technical challenge, but when he applied 1,800\u00a0V to his 11-inch cyclotron on January 2, 1931, he got 80,000-electron volt protons spinning around. A week later, he had 1.22 MeV with 3,000 V, more than enough for his PhD thesis on its construction.\nDevelopment.\nIn what would become a recurring pattern, as soon as there was the first sign of success, Lawrence started planning a new, bigger machine. Lawrence and Livingston drew up a design for a cyclotron in early 1932. The magnet for the $800\u00a011-inch cyclotron weighed 2 tons, but Lawrence found a massive 80-ton magnet rusting in a junkyard in Palo Alto for the 27-inch that had originally been built during World War I to power a transatlantic radio link. In the cyclotron, he had a powerful scientific instrument, but this did not translate into scientific discovery. In April 1932, John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton at the Cavendish Laboratory in England announced that they had bombarded lithium with protons and succeeded in transmuting it into helium. The energy required turned out to be quite low\u2014well within the capability of the 11-inch cyclotron. On learning about it, Lawrence sent a wire to Berkeley and asked for Cockcroft and Walton's results to be verified. It took the team until September to do so, mainly due to lack of adequate detection apparatus.\nAlthough important discoveries continued to elude Lawrence's Radiation Laboratory, mainly due to its focus on the development of the cyclotron rather than its scientific use, through his increasingly larger machines, Lawrence was able to provide crucial equipment needed for experiments in high energy physics. Around this device, he built what became the world's foremost laboratory for the new field of nuclear physics research in the 1930s. He received a patent for the cyclotron in 1934, which he assigned to the Research Corporation, a private foundation that funded much of Lawrence's early work.\nIn February 1936, Harvard University's president, James B. Conant, made attractive offers to Lawrence and Oppenheimer. The University of California's president, Robert Gordon Sproul, responded by improving conditions. The Radiation Laboratory became an official department of the University of California on July 1, 1936, with Lawrence formally appointed its director, with a full-time assistant director, and the university agreed to make $20,000 a year available for its research activities (). Lawrence employed a simple business model: \"He staffed his laboratory with graduate students and junior faculty of the physics department, with fresh Ph.D.s willing to work for anything, and with fellowship holders and wealthy guests able to serve for nothing.\"\nReception.\nUsing the new 27-inch cyclotron, the team at Berkeley discovered that every element that they bombarded with recently discovered deuterium emitted energy, and in the same range. They, therefore, postulated the existence of a new and hitherto unknown particle that was a possible source of limitless energy. William Laurence of \"The New York Times\" described Lawrence as \"a new miracle worker of science\". At Cockcroft's invitation, Lawrence attended the 1933 Solvay Conference in Belgium. This was a regular gathering of the world's top physicists. Nearly all were from Europe, but occasionally an outstanding American scientist like Robert A. Millikan or Arthur Compton would be invited to attend. Lawrence was asked to give a presentation on the cyclotron. Lawrence's claims of limitless energy met a very different reception in Solvay. He ran into withering skepticism from the Cavendish Laboratory's James Chadwick, the physicist who had discovered the neutron in 1932, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1935. In a British accent that sounded condescending to Lawrence's ears, Chadwick suggested that what Lawrence's team was observing was contamination of their apparatus.\nWhen he returned to Berkeley, Lawrence mobilized his team to go painstakingly over the results to gather enough evidence to convince Chadwick. Meanwhile, at the Cavendish laboratory, Rutherford and Mark Oliphant found that deuterium fuses to form helium-3, which causes the effect that the cyclotroneers had observed. Not only was Chadwick correct in that they had been observing contamination, but they had overlooked yet another important discovery, that of nuclear fusion. Lawrence's response was to press on with the creation of still larger cyclotrons. The 27-inch cyclotron was superseded by a 37-inch cyclotron in June 1937, which in turn was superseded by a 60-inch cyclotron in May 1939. It was used to bombard iron and produced its first radioactive isotopes in June.\nAs it was easier to raise money for medical purposes, particularly cancer treatment, than for nuclear physics, Lawrence encouraged the use of the cyclotron for medical research. Working with his brother John and Israel Lyon Chaikoff from the University of California's physiology department, Lawrence supported research into the use of radioactive isotopes for therapeutic purposes. Phosphorus-32 was easily produced in the cyclotron, and John used it to cure a woman afflicted with polycythemia vera, a blood disease. John used phosphorus-32 created in the 37-inch cyclotron in 1938 in tests on mice with leukemia. He found that the radioactive phosphorus concentrated in the fast-growing cancer cells. This then led to clinical trials on human patients. A 1948 evaluation of the therapy showed that remissions occurred under certain circumstances. Lawrence also had hoped for the medical use of neutrons. The first cancer patient received neutron therapy from the 60-inch cyclotron on November 20. Chaikoff conducted trials on the use of radioactive isotopes as radioactive tracers to explore the mechanism of biochemical reactions.\nLawrence was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in November 1939 \"for the invention and development of the cyclotron and for results obtained with it, especially with regard to artificial radioactive elements\". He was the first at Berkeley as well as the first South Dakotan to become a Nobel Laureate, and the first to be so honored while at a state-supported university. The Nobel award ceremony was held on February 29, 1940, in Berkeley, California, due to World War II, in the auditorium of Wheeler Hall on the campus of the university. Lawrence received his medal from Carl E. Wallerstedt, Sweden's Consul General in San Francisco. Robert W. Wood wrote to Lawrence and presciently noted \"As you are laying the foundations for the cataclysmic explosion of uranium ... I'm sure old Nobel would approve.\"\nIn March 1940, Arthur Compton, Vannevar Bush, James B. Conant, Karl T. Compton, and Alfred Lee Loomis traveled to Berkeley to discuss Lawrence's proposal for a 184-inch cyclotron with a 4,500-ton magnet that was estimated to cost $2.65 million (). The Rockefeller Foundation provided $1.15 million to get the project started.\nWorld War II and the Manhattan Project.\nRadiation Laboratory.\nAfter the outbreak of World War II in Europe, Lawrence became drawn into military projects. He helped recruit staff for the MIT Radiation Laboratory, where American physicists developed the cavity magnetron invented by Mark Oliphant's team in Britain. The name of the new laboratory was deliberately copied from Lawrence's laboratory in Berkeley for security reasons. He also became involved in recruiting staff for underwater sound laboratories to develop techniques for detecting German submarines. Meanwhile, work continued at Berkeley with cyclotrons. In December 1940, Glenn T. Seaborg and Emilio Segr\u00e8 used the cyclotron to bombard uranium-238 with deuterons producing a new element, neptunium-238, which decayed by beta emission to form plutonium-238. One of its isotopes, plutonium-239, could undergo nuclear fission, which provided another way to make an atomic bomb.\nLawrence offered Segr\u00e8 a job as a research assistant\u2014a relatively lowly position for someone who had discovered an element\u2014for US$300 a month for six months. However, when Lawrence learned that Segr\u00e8 was legally trapped in California, he reduced Segr\u00e8's salary further to US$116 a month. When the regents of the University of California wanted to terminate Segr\u00e8's employment owing to his foreign nationality, Lawrence managed to retain Segr\u00e8 by hiring him as a part-time lecturer paid by the Rockefeller Foundation. Similar arrangements were made to retain his doctoral students Chien-Shiung Wu (a Chinese national) and Kenneth Ross MacKenzie (a Canadian national) when they graduated.\nIn September 1941, Oliphant met with Lawrence and Oppenheimer at Berkeley, where they showed him the site for the new cyclotron. Oliphant, in turn, took the Americans to task for not following up the recommendations of the British MAUD Committee, which advocated a program to develop an atomic bomb. Lawrence had already thought about the problem of separating the fissile isotope uranium-235 from uranium-238, a process known today as uranium enrichment. Separating uranium isotopes was difficult because the two isotopes have very nearly identical chemical properties, and could only be separated gradually using their small mass differences. Separating isotopes with a mass spectrometer was a technique Oliphant had pioneered with lithium in 1934.\nLawrence began converting his old 37-inch cyclotron into a giant mass spectrometer. On his recommendation, the director of the Manhattan Project, Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves Jr., appointed Oppenheimer as head of its Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico. While the Radiation laboratory developed the electromagnetic uranium enrichment process, the Los Alamos Laboratory designed and constructed the atomic bombs. Like the Radiation Laboratory, it was run by the University of California.\nElectromagnetic isotope separation used devices known as calutrons, a hybrid of two laboratory instruments, the mass spectrometer and cyclotron. The name was derived from \"California university cyclotrons\". In November 1943, Lawrence's team at Berkeley was bolstered by 29 British scientists, including Oliphant.\nIn the electromagnetic process, a magnetic field deflected charged particles according to mass. The process was neither scientifically elegant nor industrially efficient. Compared with a gaseous diffusion plant or a nuclear reactor, an electromagnetic separation plant would consume more scarce materials, require more manpower to operate, and cost more to build. Nonetheless, the process was approved because it was based on proven technology and therefore represented less risk. Moreover, it could be built in stages, and would rapidly reach industrial capacity.\nOak Ridge.\nResponsibility for the design and construction of the electromagnetic separation plant at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, which came to be called Y-12, was assigned to Stone &amp; Webster. The calutrons, using 14,700 tons of silver, were manufactured by Allis-Chalmers in Milwaukee and shipped to Oak Ridge. The design called for five first-stage processing units, known as Alpha racetracks, and two units for final processing, known as Beta racetracks. In September 1943 Groves authorized construction of four more racetracks, known as Alpha II. When the plant was started up for testing on schedule in October 1943, the 14-ton vacuum tanks crept out of alignment because of the power of the magnets and had to be fastened more securely. A more serious problem arose when the magnetic coils started shorting out. In December Groves ordered a magnet to be broken open, and handfuls of rust were found inside. Groves then ordered the racetracks to be torn down and the magnets sent back to the factory to be cleaned. A pickling plant was established on-site to clean the pipes and fittings.\nTennessee Eastman was hired to manage Y-12. Y-12 initially enriched the uranium-235 content to between 13% and 15%, and shipped the first few hundred grams of it to Los Alamos laboratory in March 1944. Only 1 part in 5,825 of the uranium feed emerged as final product. The rest was splattered over equipment in the process. Strenuous recovery efforts helped raise production to 10% of the uranium-235 feed by January 1945. In February the Alpha racetracks began receiving slightly enriched (1.4%) feed from the new S-50 thermal diffusion plant. The next month it received enhanced (5%) feed from the K-25 gaseous diffusion plant. By April 1945 K-25 was producing uranium sufficiently enriched to feed directly into the Beta tracks.\nOn July 16, 1945, Lawrence observed the Trinity nuclear test of the first atomic bomb with Chadwick and Charles A. Thomas. Few were more excited at its success than Lawrence. The question of how to use the now functional weapon on Japan became an issue for the scientists. While Oppenheimer favored no demonstration of the power of the new weapon to Japanese leaders, Lawrence felt strongly that a demonstration would be wise. When a uranium bomb was used without warning in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Lawrence felt great pride in his accomplishment.\nLawrence hoped that the Manhattan Project would develop improved calutrons and construct Alpha III racetracks, but they were judged to be uneconomical. The Alpha tracks were closed down in September 1945. Although performing better than ever, they could not compete with K-25 and the new K-27, which commenced operation in January 1946. In December, the Y-12 plant was closed, thereby cutting the Tennessee Eastman payroll from 8,600 to 1,500 and saving $2\u00a0million a month. Staff numbers at the Radiation laboratory fell from 1,086 in May 1945 to 424 by the end of the year.\nPost-war career.\nBig Science.\nAfter the war, Lawrence campaigned extensively for government sponsorship of large scientific programs. He was a forceful advocate of Big Science with its requirements for big machines and big money, and in 1946 he asked the Manhattan Project for over $2 million for research at the Radiation Laboratory (). Groves approved the money, but cut a number of programs, including Seaborg's proposal for a \"hot\" radiation laboratory in densely populated Berkeley, and John Lawrence's for production of medical isotopes, because this need could now be better met from nuclear reactors. One obstacle was the University of California, which was eager to divest its wartime military obligations. Lawrence and Groves managed to persuade Sproul to accept a contract extension. In 1946, the Manhattan Project spent $7 on physics at the University of California for every dollar spent by the university.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo most of his colleagues, Lawrence appeared to have almost an aversion to mathematical thought. He had a most unusual intuitive approach to involved physical problems, and when explaining new ideas to him, one quickly learned not to befog the issue by writing down the differential equation that might appear to clarify the situation. Lawrence would say something to the effect that he didn't want to be bothered by the mathematical details, but \"explain the physics of the problem to me.\" One could live close to him for years, and think of him as being almost mathematically illiterate, but then be brought up sharply to see how completely he retained his skill in the mathematics of classical electricity and magnetism.\nLuis Alvarez\nThe 184-inch cyclotron was completed with wartime dollars from the Manhattan Project. It incorporated new ideas by Ed McMillan, and was completed as a synchrocyclotron. It commenced operation on November 13, 1946. For the first time since 1935, Lawrence actively participated in the experiments, working with Eugene Gardner in an unsuccessful attempt to create recently discovered pi mesons with the synchrotron. C\u00e9sar Lattes then used the apparatus they had created to find negative pi mesons in 1948.\nResponsibility for the national laboratories passed to the newly created Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) on January 1, 1947. That year, Lawrence asked for $15 million for his projects (), which included a new linear accelerator and a new gigaelectronvolt synchrotron which became known as the bevatron. The University of California's contract to run the Los Alamos laboratory was due to expire on July 1, 1948, and some board members wished to divest the university of the responsibility for running a site outside California. After some negotiation, the university agreed to extend the contract for what was now the Los Alamos National Laboratory for four more years and to appoint Norris Bradbury, who had replaced Oppenheimer as its director in October 1945, as a professor. Soon after, Lawrence received all the funds he had requested.\nNotwithstanding the fact that he voted for Franklin Roosevelt, Lawrence was a Republican, who had strongly disapproved of Oppenheimer's efforts before the war to unionize the Radiation Laboratory workers, which Lawrence considered \"leftwandering activities\". Lawrence considered political activity to be a waste of time better spent in scientific research, and preferred that it be kept out of the Radiation Laboratory.\nIn the chilly Cold War climate of the post-war University of California, Lawrence accepted the House Committee on Un-American Activities's actions as legitimate, and did not see them as indicative of a systemic problem involving academic freedom or human rights. He was protective of individuals in his laboratory, but even more protective of the reputation of the laboratory. He was forced to defend Radiation Laboratory staff members like Robert Serber who were investigated by the university's Personnel Security Board. In several cases, he issued character references in support of staff. However, Lawrence barred Robert Oppenheimer's brother Frank from the Radiation Laboratory, damaging his relationship with Robert. An acrimonious loyalty oath campaign at the University of California also drove away faculty members. When hearings were held to revoke Robert Oppenheimer's security clearance, Lawrence declined to attend on account of illness, but a transcript in which he was critical of Oppenheimer was presented in his absence. Lawrence's success in building a creative, collaborative laboratory was undermined by the ill-feeling and distrust resulting from political tensions.\nThermonuclear weapons.\nLawrence was alarmed by the Soviet Union's first nuclear test in August 1949. The proper response, he concluded, was an all-out effort to build a bigger nuclear weapon: the hydrogen bomb. He proposed to use accelerators instead of nuclear reactors to produce the neutrons needed to create the tritium the bomb required, as well as plutonium, which was more difficult, as much higher energies would be required. He first proposed the construction of Mark I, a prototype $7 million, 25 MeV linear accelerator, codenamed Materials Test Accelerator (MTA). He was soon talking about a new, even larger MTA known as the Mark II, which could produce tritium or plutonium from depleted uranium-238. Serber and Segr\u00e8 attempted in vain to explain the technical problems that made it impractical, but Lawrence felt that they were being unpatriotic.\nLawrence strongly backed Edward Teller's campaign for a second nuclear weapons laboratory, which Lawrence proposed to locate with the MTA Mark I at Livermore, California. Lawrence and Teller had to argue their case not only with the Atomic Energy Commission, which did not want it, and the Los Alamos National Laboratory, which was implacably opposed but with proponents who felt that Chicago was the more obvious site for it. The new laboratory at Livermore was finally approved on July 17, 1952, but the Mark II MTA was canceled. By this time, the Atomic Energy Commission had spent $45 million on the Mark I, which had commenced operation, but was mainly used to produce polonium for the nuclear weapons program. Meanwhile, the Brookhaven National Laboratory's Cosmotron had generated a 1 GeV beam.\nRadiological weapons.\nLawrence was a staunch advocate of the US offensive radiological weapons program in the immediate post-war period. He was a member of an ad-hoc AEC panel recommending their further study, in which he urged fellow members to not draw comparisons to the more established fields of chemical and biological weapons. He also argued one advantage was their lack of an analogue to the taboo against atomic weapons. Lawrence suggested a fleet of \"twenty or thirty\" production reactors dedicated to the program, for the weaponized isotope ultimately selected as tantalum-182. This would supplant the B Reactor which was at the time dedicated to plutonium-239 and polonium-210 production for nuclear weapons.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn addition to the Nobel Prize, Lawrence received the Elliott Cresson Medal and the Hughes Medal in 1937, the Comstock Prize in Physics in 1938, the Duddell Medal and Prize in 1940, the Holley Medal in 1942, the Medal for Merit in 1946, the William Procter Prize in 1951, Faraday Medal in 1952, and the Enrico Fermi Award from the Atomic Energy Commission in 1957. He was elected a member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1934, and both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society in 1937. He was made an Officer of the Legion d'Honneur in 1948, and was the first recipient of the Sylvanus Thayer Award by the US Military Academy in 1958.\nIn July 1958, President Dwight D. Eisenhower asked Lawrence to travel to Geneva, Switzerland, to help negotiate a proposed Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union. AEC Chairman Lewis Strauss had pressed for Lawrence's inclusion. The two men had argued the case for the development of the hydrogen bomb, and Strauss had helped raise funds for Lawrence's cyclotron in 1939. Strauss was keen to have Lawrence as part of the Geneva delegation because Lawrence was known to favor continued nuclear testing. Despite suffering from a serious flare-up of his chronic ulcerative colitis, Lawrence decided to go, but he became ill while in Geneva, and was rushed back to the hospital at Stanford University. Surgeons removed much of his large intestine, but found other problems, including severe atherosclerosis in one of his arteries. He died in Palo Alto Hospital on August 27, 1958, nineteen days after his 57th birthday. Molly did not want a public funeral but agreed to a memorial service at the First Congregational Church in Berkeley. University of California President Clark Kerr delivered the eulogy.\nAlmost immediately after Lawrence's death, the Regents of the University of California voted to rename two of the university's nuclear research labs after Lawrence: the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award was established in his memory in 1959. Chemical element number 103, discovered at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 1961, was named lawrencium after him. In 1968 the Lawrence Hall of Science public science education center was established in his honor. His papers are in the Bancroft Library at the University of California, Berkeley.\nIn the 1980s, Lawrence's widow petitioned the University of California Board of Regents on several occasions to remove her husband's name from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, due to its focus on nuclear weapons Lawrence helped build, but was denied each time. She outlived her husband by more than 44 years and died in Walnut Creek, California, at the age of 92 on January 6, 2003.\nGeorge B. Kauffman wrote that: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Before him, \"little science\" was carried out largely by lone individuals working with modest means on a small scale. After him, massive industrial, and especially governmental, expenditures of manpower and monetary funding made \"big science,\" carried out by large-scale research teams, a major segment of the national economy.\nLawrence is portrayed by Josh Hartnett in Christopher Nolan's 2023 film \"Oppenheimer\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39043", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39043", "title": "African clawed frog", "text": "Species of amphibian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis), also known as simply xenopus, African clawed toad, African claw-toed frog or the platanna) is a species of African aquatic frog of the family Pipidae. Its name is derived from the short black claws on its feet. The word \"Xenopus\" means 'strange foot' and \"laevis\" means 'smooth'.\nThe species is found throughout much of Sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria and Sudan to South Africa), and in isolated, introduced populations in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia. All species of the family Pipidae are tongueless, toothless and completely aquatic. They use their hands to shove food in their mouths and down their throats and a hyobranchial pump to draw or suck things in their mouth. Pipidae have powerful legs for swimming and lunging after food. They also use the claws on their feet to tear pieces of large food. They have no external eardrums, but instead subcutaneous cartilaginous disks that serve the same function. They use their sensitive fingers and sense of smell to find food. Pipidae are scavengers and will eat almost anything living, dying, or dead and any type of organic waste.\nIt is considered an invasive species in several countries, including across Europe.\nDescription.\nThese frogs are plentiful in ponds and rivers within the south-eastern portion of Sub-Saharan Africa. They are aquatic and are often a mottled greenish-grey-brown in color, sometimes with yellowish botches, and with a pale white-cream belly. African clawed frogs have been frequently sold as pets, and are sometimes misidentified as African dwarf frogs. Albino clawed frogs are common and sold as animals for laboratories.\nAmphibians reproduce by fertilizing eggs outside of the female's body (see frog reproduction). Of the seven amplexus modes (positions in which frogs mate), these frogs are found breeding in inguinal amplexus, where the male clasps the female in front of the female's back legs until eggs are laid, and the male fertilizes the egg mass with the release of sperm.\nAfrican clawed frogs are highly adaptable and will lay their eggs whenever conditions allow it. During wet rainy seasons they will travel to other ponds or puddles of water to search for food and new ponds. During times of drought, the clawed frogs can burrow themselves into the mud, becoming dormant for up to a year.\n\"Xenopus laevis\" have been known to survive 15 or more years in the wild and 25\u201330 years in captivity. They shed their skin every season, and eat their own shed skin.\nAlthough lacking a vocal sac, the males make a mating call of alternating long and short trills, by contracting the intrinsic laryngeal muscles. Females also answer vocally, signaling either acceptance (a rapping sound) or rejection (slow ticking) of the male. This frog has smooth, slippery skin which is multicolored on its back with blotches of olive gray or brown. The underside is creamy white with a yellow tinge.\nMale and female frogs can be easily distinguished through the following differences. Male frogs are small and slim, while females are larger and more rotund. Males have black patches on their hands and arms which aid in grabbing onto females during amplexus. Females have a more pronounced cloaca and have hip-like bulges above their rear legs where their eggs are internally located.\nBoth males and females have a cloaca, which is a chamber through which digestive and urinary wastes pass and through which the reproductive systems also empty. The cloaca empties by way of the vent which in reptiles and amphibians is a single opening for all three systems.\nBehaviour.\nAfrican clawed frogs are fully aquatic and will rarely leave the water except to migrate to new water bodies during droughts or other disturbances. Clawed frogs have powerful legs that help them move quickly both underwater and on land. Feral clawed frogs in South Wales have been found to travel up to between locations. The feet of \"Xenopus\" species have three black claws on the last three digits. These claws are used to rip apart food and scratch predators.\nClawed frogs are carnivores and will eat both living and dead prey, including fish, tadpoles, crustaceans, annelids, arthropods, and more. Clawed frogs will try to consume anything that is able to fit into their mouths. Being aquatic, clawed frogs use their sense of smell and their lateral line to detect prey rather than eyesight like other frogs. However, clawed frogs can still see using their eyes and will stalk prey or watch predators by sticking their heads out of the water. Clawed frogs will dig through substrate to unearth worms and other food. Unlike other frogs, they have no tongue to extend to catch food, so clawed frogs use their hands to grab food and shovel it into their mouths.\nThese frogs are particularly cannibalistic; the stomach contents of feral clawed frogs in California have revealed large amounts of the frog's larvae. Clawed frog larvae are filter feeders and collect nutrients from plankton, allowing adult frogs that consume the tadpoles to have access to these nutrients. This allows clawed frogs to survive in areas that have little to no other food sources.\nClawed frogs are nocturnal, and most reproductive activity and feeding occurs after dark. Male clawed frogs will grab onto other males and even other species of frogs. Male frogs that are grasped will make release calls and attempt to break free.\nIf not feeding, clawed frogs will just sit motionless on top of the substrate or floating, legs splayed below, at the water's surface with their nostrils and eyes sticking out.\nBiology.\nThyroid.\nThe clawed frog liver responds to low temperatures by increasing production of type II iodothyronine deiodinase . This in turn spurs the thyroid to increase T3 to increase body temperature. (This T3 increase also induces germ cell apoptosis, mediated through genes left over from tadpole metamorphosis.)\nThe effects of provocation of T hormone release are broadly differentiated by where it starts: If centrally, within the mediobasal hypothalamus, then it stimulates seasonal testicular growth; if peripherally, then testicular regression and cold-season thermogenesis.\nThese observations are regarded as widely applicable across vertebrate thyroid systems.\nLipidomics.\nThe lipidomics of \"Xenopus\" oocytes have been studied by Tian et al 2014 and Phan et al 2015.\nEpigenetic aging.\nIn \"X. laevis\", epigenetic methylation changes in neural-developmental genes associated with aging are analogous to aging related epigenetic changes in mammalian species. This finding suggests that, during their evolutionary divergence, patterns of epigenetic changes in neural-development genes during aging have been conserved between frogs and mammals C.\nIn the wild.\nIn the wild, \"X. laevis\" are native to wetlands, ponds, and lakes across arid/semiarid regions of Sub-Saharan Africa. \"X. laevis\" and \"X. muelleri\" occur along the western boundary of the Great African Rift. The people of the sub-Saharan are generally very familiar with this frog, and some cultures use it as a source of protein, an aphrodisiac, or as fertility medicine. Two historic outbreaks of priapism have been linked to consumption of frog legs from frogs that ate insects containing cantharidin.\nAfrican clawed frogs in the wild are found at higher densities in artificial water bodies, such as ponds, dams and irrigation canals, rather than in natural lagoons or streams or rivers. There is no evidence of predation on native anurans, but rather on their own larvae. They face predation from native birds.\nCause of concerns from African clawed frogs include reaching both lower and higher altitudes than formerly estimated, and being able to migrate overland to colonise other water bodies, causing ecological disruption and spreading diseases.\n\"X. laevis\" in the wild are commonly infected by various parasites, including monogeneans in the urinary bladder.\nUse in research.\n\"Xenopus\" embryos and eggs are a popular model system for a wide variety of biological studies, in part because they have the potential to lay eggs throughout the year. This animal is widely used because of its powerful combination of experimental tractability and close evolutionary relationship with humans, at least compared to many model organisms. For a more comprehensive discussion of the use of these frogs in biomedical research, see \"Xenopus\".\n\"Xenopus laevis\" is also notable for its use in the first widely used method of pregnancy testing. In the 1930s, two South African researchers, Hillel Shapiro and Harry Zwarenstein, students of Lancelot Hogben at the University of Cape Town, discovered that the urine from pregnant women would induce oocyte production in \"X. laevis\" within 8\u201312 hours of injection. This was used as a simple and reliable test up through to the 1960s.\nIn the late 1940s, Carlos Galli Mainini found in separate studies that male specimens of \"Xenopus\" and \"Bufo\" could be used to indicate pregnancy Today, commercially available hCG is injected into \"Xenopus\" males and females to induce mating behavior and to breed these frogs in captivity at any time of the year.\n\"Xenopus\" has long been an important tool for \"in vivo\" studies in molecular, cell, and developmental biology of vertebrate animals. However, the wide breadth of \"Xenopus\" research stems from the additional fact that cell-free extracts made from \"Xenopus\" are a premier \"in vitro\" system for studies of fundamental aspects of cell and molecular biology. Thus, \"Xenopus\" is the only vertebrate model system that allows for high-throughput \"in vivo\" analyses of gene function and high-throughput biochemistry.\n\"Xenopus\" oocytes are a leading system in their own right for studies of various systems, including ion transport and channel physiology. Xanthos et al 2001 uses oocytes to uncover T-box expression earlier than previously found in vertebrates.\nAlthough \"X. laevis\" does not have the super short generation time, or genetic simplicity generally desired in genetic model organisms, it is an important model organism in developmental biology, cell biology, toxicology and neurobiology. \"X. laevis\" takes 1 to 2 years to reach sexual maturity and, like most of its genus, it is tetraploid. It does have a large and easily manipulated embryo, however. The ease of manipulation in amphibian embryos has given them an important place in historical and modern developmental biology. A related species, \"Xenopus tropicalis\", is considered a more viable model for genetics, although gene editing protocols have now been perfected for.\nRoger Wolcott Sperry used \"X. laevis\" for his famous experiments describing the development of the visual system. These experiments led to the formulation of the chemoaffinity hypothesis.\n\"X. laevis\" have been used as a model organism in vertebrae cardiogenesis, human congenital heart defects, and in GWAS studies of congenital heart defects.\n\"Xenopus\" oocytes provide an important expression system for molecular biology. By injecting DNA or mRNA into the oocyte or developing embryo, scientists can study the protein products in a controlled system. This allows rapid functional expression of manipulated DNAs (or mRNA). This is particularly useful in electrophysiology, where the ease of recording from the oocyte makes expression of membrane channels attractive. One challenge of oocyte work is eliminating native proteins that might confound results, such as membrane channels native to the oocyte. Translation of proteins can be blocked or splicing of pre-mRNA can be modified by injection of Morpholino antisense oligos into the oocyte (for distribution throughout the embryo) or early embryo (for distribution only into daughter cells of the injected cell).\nExtracts from the eggs of \"X. laevis\" frogs are also commonly used for biochemical studies of DNA replication and repair, as these extracts fully support DNA replication and other related processes in a cell-free environment which allows easier manipulation.\nThe first vertebrate ever to be cloned was an African clawed frog in 1962, an experiment for which Sir John Gurdon was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2012 \"for the discovery that mature cells can be reprogrammed to become pluripotent\".\nAdditionally, four female African clawed frogs and stored sperm were present on the Space Shuttle \"Endeavour\" when it was launched into space on mission STS-47 on 12 September 1992, so that scientists could test whether reproduction and development could occur normally in zero gravity.\n\"Xenopus laevis\" also serves as an ideal model system for the study of the mechanisms of apoptosis. In fact, iodine and thyroxine stimulate the spectacular apoptosis of the cells of the larval gills, tail and fins in amphibians metamorphosis, and stimulate the evolution of their nervous system transforming the aquatic, vegetarian tadpole into the terrestrial, carnivorous frog.\nStem cells of this frog were used to create xenobots.\nGenome sequencing.\nEarly work on sequencing of the \"X. laevis\" genome was started when the Wallingford and Marcotte labs obtained funding from the Texas Institute for Drug and Diagnostic Development (TI3D), in conjunction with projects funded by the National Institutes of Health. The work rapidly expanded to include \"de novo\" reconstruction of \"X. laevis\" transcripts, in collaboration with groups around the world donating Illumina Hi-Seq RNA sequencing datasets. Genome sequencing by the Rokhsar and Harland groups (UC Berkeley) and by Taira and collaborators (University of Tokyo, Japan) gave a major boost to the project, which, with additional contributions from investigators in the Netherlands, Korea, Canada and Australia, led to publication of the genome sequence and its characterization in 2016.\nAs transexpression tool.\n\"X. laevis\" oocytes are often used as an easy model for the artificially induced expression of transgenes. For example, they are commonly used when studying chloroquine resistance produced by specialized transporter mutants. Even so the foreign expression tissue may itself confer some alterations to the expression, and so findings may or may not be entirely identical to native expression: For example, iron has been found by Bakouh et al 2017 to be an important substrate for one such transporter in \"X. l.\" oocytes, but as of 2020[ [update]] iron is merely \"presumptively\" involved in native expression of the same gene.\nOnline Model Organism Database.\nXenbase is the Model Organism Database (MOD) for both \"Xenopus laevis\" and \"Xenopus tropicalis\". Xenbase hosts the full details and release information regarding the current v10 \"Xenopus laevis\" genome released in 2022.\nAs pets.\nThe clawed frog have been kept as pets and research subjects since as early as the 1950s. They are extremely hardy and long lived, having been known to live up to 20 or even 30 years in captivity.\nAfrican clawed frogs are frequently mislabeled as African dwarf frogs in pet stores. Identifiable differences are:\nAs pests.\nAfrican clawed frogs are voracious predators and easily adapt to many habitats. For this reason, they can easily become a harmful invasive species. They can travel short distances to other bodies of water, and some have even been documented to survive mild freezes. They have been shown to devastate native populations of frogs and other creatures by eating their young.\nIn 2003, \"Xenopus laevis\" frogs were discovered in a pond at San Francisco's Golden Gate Park. Much debate now exists in the area on how to exterminate these creatures and keep them from spreading. It is unknown if these frogs entered the San Francisco ecosystem through intentional release or escape into the wild. San Francisco officials drained Lily Pond and fenced off the area to prevent the frogs from escaping to other ponds in the hopes they starve to death.\nDue to incidents in which these frogs were released and allowed to escape into the wild, African clawed frogs are illegal to own, transport or sell without a permit in the following US states: Arizona, California, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Vermont, Virginia, Hawaii, Nevada, and Washington state. However, it is legal to own \"Xenopus laevis\" in New Brunswick (Canada) and Ohio.\nFeral colonies of \"Xenopus laevis\" exist in South Wales, United Kingdom. In Yunnan, China, there is a population of albino clawed frogs in Lake Kunming, along with another invasive: the American bullfrog. Because this population is albino, it suggests that the clawed frogs originated in the pet trade or a laboratory.\nThe African clawed frog may be an important vector and the initial source of \"Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis\", a chytrid fungus that has been implicated in the drastic decline in amphibian populations in many parts of the world. Unlike in many other amphibian species (including the closely related western clawed frog) where this chytrid fungus causes the disease Chytridiomycosis, it does not appear to affect the African clawed frog, making it an effective carrier.\nInvasive.\nThe African clawed frog is considered invasive by the Centre of Invasive biology from Stellenbosh University with this species even going as far as predating on other species. There has even been a concerted effort to remove this species to ensure the survival of other indigenous species.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39044", "revid": "39174407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39044", "title": "Mesoderm", "text": "Middle germ layer of embryonic development\nThe mesoderm is the middle layer of the three germ layers that develops during gastrulation in the very early development of the embryo of most animals. The outer layer is the ectoderm, and the inner layer is the endoderm.\nThe mesoderm forms mesenchyme, mesothelium and coelomocytes. Mesothelium lines coeloms. Mesoderm forms the muscles in a process known as myogenesis, septa (cross-wise partitions) and mesenteries (length-wise partitions); and forms part of the gonads (the rest being the gametes). Myogenesis is specifically a function of mesenchyme.\nThe mesoderm differentiates from the rest of the embryo through intercellular signaling, after which the mesoderm is polarized by an organizing center. The position of the organizing center is in turn determined by the regions in which beta-catenin is protected from degradation by GSK-3. Beta-catenin acts as a co-factor that alters the activity of the transcription factor tcf-3 from repressing to activating, which initiates the synthesis of gene products critical for mesoderm differentiation and gastrulation. Furthermore, mesoderm has the capability to induce the growth of other structures, such as the neural plate, the precursor to the nervous system.\nDefinition.\nThe mesoderm is one of the three germinal layers that appears in the third week (in humans) of embryonic development. It is formed through a process called gastrulation. There are four important components, which are the axial, \u2063paraxial, intermediate, and lateral plate mesoderms. The axial mesoderm gives rise to the notochord. The paraxial mesoderm forms the somitomeres, which give rise to mesenchyme of the head, and organize into somites in occipital and caudal segments, and give rise to sclerotomes (cartilage and bone), and dermatomes (subcutaneous tissue of the skin). Signals for somite differentiation are derived from surroundings structures, including the notochord, neural tube, and epidermis. The intermediate mesoderm connects the paraxial mesoderm with the lateral plate. Eventually it differentiates into urogenital structures that consist of the kidneys, gonads, their associated ducts, and the adrenal cortex. The lateral plate mesoderm gives rise to the heart, blood vessels, and blood cells of the circulatory system, as well as to the mesodermal components of the limbs.\nSome of the mesoderm derivatives include the muscle (smooth, cardiac, and skeletal), the muscles of the tongue (occipital somites), the pharyngeal arches muscle (muscles of mastication, muscles of facial expressions), connective tissue, the dermis and subcutaneous layer of the skin, bone and cartilage, dura mater, the endothelium of blood vessels, red blood cells, white blood cells, microglia, the dentin of teeth, the kidneys, and the adrenal cortex.\nDevelopment.\nDuring the third week, a process called gastrulation creates a mesodermal layer between the endoderm and the ectoderm. This process begins with the formation of a primitive streak on the surface of the epiblast. The cells of the layers move between the epiblast and the hypoblast, and begin to spread laterally and cranially. The cells of the epiblast move toward the primitive streak and slip beneath it, in a process called \"invagination\". Some of the migrating cells displace the hypoblast and create the endoderm, and other cells migrate between the endoderm and the epiblast to create the mesoderm. The remaining cells form the ectoderm. After that, the epiblast and the hypoblast establish contact with the extraembryonic mesoderm until they cover the yolk sac and amnion. They move onto either side of the prechordal plate. The prechordal cells migrate to the midline to form the notochordal plate. The chordamesoderm is the central region of trunk mesoderm. This forms the notochord, which induces the formation of the neural tube, and establishes the anterior-posterior body axis. The notochord extends beneath the neural tube from the head to the tail. The mesoderm moves to the midline until it covers the notochord. When the mesoderm cells proliferate, they form the paraxial mesoderm. In each side, the mesoderm remains thin, and is known as the lateral plate. The intermediate mesoderm lies between the paraxial mesoderm and the lateral plate.\nBetween days 13 and 15, the proliferation of extraembryonic mesoderm, primitive streak, and embryonic mesoderm take place. The notochord process occurs between days 15 and 17. Eventually, the development of the notochord canal and the axial canal takes place between days 17 and 19, when the first three somites are formed.\nParaxial mesoderm.\nDuring the third week, the paraxial mesoderm is organized into segments. If they appear in the cephalic region and grow with cephalocaudal direction, they are called somitomeres. If they appear in the cephalic region but establish contact with the neural plate, they are known as neuromeres, which later will form the mesenchyme in the head. The somitomeres organize into somites which grow in pairs. In the fourth week, the somites lose their organization and cover the notochord and spinal cord to form the backbone. In the fifth week, there are 4 occipital somites, 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral and 8 to 10 coccygeal that will form the axial skeleton. Somitic derivatives are determined by local signaling between adjacent embryonic tissues, in particular the neural tube, notochord, surface ectoderm and the somitic compartments themselves. The correct specification of the deriving tissues, skeletal, cartilage, endothelia and connective tissue is achieved by a sequence of morphogenic changes of the paraxial mesoderm, leading to the three transitory somitic compartments: dermomyotome, myotome and sclerotome. These structures are specified from dorsal to ventral and from medial to lateral. Each somite will form its own sclerotome that will differentiate into the tendon cartilage and bone component. Its myotome will form the muscle component and the dermatome that will form the dermis of the back. The myotome and dermatome have a nerve component.\nMolecular regulation of somite differentiation.\nSurrounding structures such as the notochord, neural tube, epidermis and lateral plate mesoderm send signals for somite differentiation Notochord protein accumulates in presomitic mesoderm destined to form the next somite and then decreases as that somite is established. The notochord and the neural tube activate the protein SHH, which helps the somite to form its sclerotome. The cells of the sclerotome express the protein PAX1 that induces the cartilage and bone formation. The neural tube activates the protein WNT1 that expresses PAX 2 so the somite creates the myotome and dermatome. Finally, the neural tube also secretes neurotrophin 3, so that the somite creates the dermis. Boundaries for each somite are regulated by retinoic acid and a combination of FGF8 and WNT3a. So retinoic acid is an endogenous signal that maintains the bilateral synchrony of mesoderm segmentation and controls bilateral symmetry in vertebrates. The bilaterally symmetric body plan of vertebrate embryos is obvious in somites and their derivates, such as the vertebral column. Therefore, asymmetric somite formation correlates with a left-right desynchronization of the segmentation oscillations.\nMany studies with \"Xenopus\" and zebrafish have analyzed the factors of this development and how they interact in signaling and transcription. However, there are still some doubts in how the prospective mesodermal cells integrate the various signals they receive and how they regulate their morphogenic behaviours and cell-fate decisions. Human embryonic stem cells for example have the potential to produce all of the cells in the body and they are able to self-renew indefinitely so they can be used for a large-scale production of therapeutic cell lines. They are also able to remodel and contract collagen and were induced to express muscle actin. This shows that these cells are multipotent cells.\nIntermediate mesoderm.\nThe intermediate mesoderm connects the paraxial mesoderm with the lateral plate mesoderm, and differentiates into urogenital structures. In upper thoracic and cervical regions, this forms the nephrotomes. In caudal regions, it forms the nephrogenic cord. It also helps to develop the excretory units of the urinary system and the gonads.\nLateral plate mesoderm.\nThe lateral plate mesoderm splits into the parietal (somatic) and visceral (splanchnic) layers. The formation of these layers starts with the appearance of intercellular cavities. The somatic layer depends upon a continuous layer with mesoderm that covers the amnion. The splanchnic layer depends upon a continuous layer that covers the yolk sac. The two layers cover the intraembryonic cavity. The parietal layer, together with overlying ectoderm, forms the lateral body wall folds. The visceral layer forms the walls of the gut tube. Mesoderm cells of the parietal layer form the mesothelial membranes or serous membranes, which line the peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39047", "revid": "1318635572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39047", "title": "Peter Tork", "text": "American musician and actor (1942\u20132019)\nPeter Halsten Thorkelson (February 13, 1942\u00a0\u2013 February 21, 2019), better known by his stage name Peter Tork, was an American musician and actor. He was best known as the bass guitarist and keyboardist of the Monkees and co-star of the NBC television series of the same name (1966\u201368).\nTork grew up in Connecticut, and in the mid-1960s as part of the Greenwich Village folk scene in New York City, he befriended musician Stephen Stills. After moving to Los Angeles with Stills, he auditioned for a new musical television sitcom, \"The Monkees\". The series ran from 1966 to 1968 and made Tork and his co-stars teen idols. In addition to albums released with the band, Tork released on Beachwood Recordings one solo album, \"Stranger Things Have Happened\" (1994), and later toured with James Lee Stanley, with whom he also recorded three duet albums (\"Two Man Band\", \"Once Again\" and \"Live/Backstage at the Coffee Gallery\"), as well as his band, Shoe Suede Blues.\nEarly life.\nTork was born at the former Doctors Hospital in Washington, D.C., in 1942, though many news articles incorrectly report him as having been born in 1944 in New York City\u2014the date and location listed in early press releases for \"The Monkees\" television show. He was the son of Virginia Hope (n\u00e9e Straus) and Halsten John Thorkelson, an economics professor at the University of Connecticut. His paternal grandfather was of Norwegian descent, while his mother was of half German Jewish and half Irish American ancestry.\nTork began studying piano at the age of nine, showing an aptitude for music by learning to play several different instruments, including the banjo, acoustic bass, and guitar. He attended Windham High School in Willimantic, Connecticut, and was a member of the first graduating class at E. O. Smith High School in Storrs, Connecticut. He attended Carleton College before he moved to New York City, where he became part of the folk music scene in Greenwich Village during the first half of the 1960s. While there, he befriended other up-and-coming musicians, such as Stephen Stills.\nThe Monkees.\nIn 1965, auditions were held for a new television sitcom called \"The Monkees\", about a fictional pop-rock band called The Monkees. Stephen Stills auditioned but was rejected because the show's producers felt his hair and teeth were not photogenic. When Stills was asked if he knew of someone with a similar \"open, Nordic look\", Stills recommended Tork. Tork was chosen along with musician Michael Nesmith, actor/musician Micky Dolenz, and Davy Jones (who was already under contract to Screen Gems). Tork was the oldest member of the group.\nTork was a proficient musician before he joined the Monkees. Though other members of the band were not allowed to play their instruments on their first two albums, he played what he described as \"third-chair guitar\" on Michael Nesmith's song \"Papa Gene's Blues\" on their first album. He subsequently played keyboard, bass guitar, banjo, harpsichord, and other instruments on the band's recordings. He co-wrote, along with Joey Richards, the closing theme song of the second season of \"The Monkees\", \"For Pete's Sake\". On the show, he was relegated to acting as the \"lovable dummy\", a persona he had developed as a folk singer in Greenwich Village.\nThe DVD release of the first season of the show contains commentary from various band members. In it, Nesmith states that Tork was better at playing guitar than bass. Tork commented that Davy Jones was a good drummer, and had the live performance lineups been based solely on playing ability, it should have been him on guitar, Nesmith on bass, and Jones on drums, with Micky Dolenz taking the fronting role (instead of Nesmith on guitar, Tork on bass, and Dolenz on drums). Jones filled in briefly for Tork on bass when Tork played keyboard.\nRecording and producing as a group was Tork's main interest, and he hoped that the four members would continue working together as a band on future recordings. However, the four did not have enough in common regarding their musical interests. In his commentary for the DVD release of the second season of the show, Tork said that Dolenz was \"incapable of repeating a triumph\". Dolenz felt that once he had accomplished something and became a success at it, there was no artistic sense in repeating a formula.\nIn 1967, free from Don Kirshner's restrictions, Tork contributed instrumental flourishes, such as the piano introduction to \"Daydream Believer\" and the banjo part on \"You Told Me\", as well as exploring occasional songwriting with the likes of \"For Pete's Sake\" and \"Lady's Baby\".\nTork was close to his maternal grandmother, Catherine McGuire Straus, staying with her sometimes during his Greenwich Village days and after he became a Monkee. \"Grams\" was one of his most ardent supporters and managed his fan club, often writing personal letters to members and visiting music stores to make sure they carried Monkees records.\nSix albums were produced with the original Monkees lineup, four of which reached No.\u00a01 on the \"Billboard\" chart. This success was supplemented by two years of the television program, a series of successful concert tours across America and abroad, and a trippy psychedelic movie, \"Head\", which is considered by some to have been ahead of its time. However, musical and personal tensions were increasing within the group. The band finished a Far East tour in October 1968 (where Tork's copy of \"Naked Lunch\" was confiscated by Australian Customs) and then filmed an NBC television special, \"33\u2153 Revolutions per Monkee\".\nNo longer getting the group dynamic he wanted, and pleading \"exhaustion\" from the grueling schedule, Tork bought out the remaining four years of his contract for $160,000, leaving him with little income. In the DVD commentary for the \"33\u2153 Revolutions per Monkee\" TV special \u2013 originally broadcast April 14, 1969 \u2013 Dolenz noted that Nesmith gave Tork a gold watch as a going-away present, with the engraving \"From the guys down at work.\" Jones noted at the time that \"Peter's soul left us two and a half years ago. He was a banjo player from Greenwich Village who was made into an actor and finally decided that he didn't want to be a Marx Brother forever. His heart was back in the Village, that's all.\" Dolenz reflected on Tork's departure, saying, \"Three of us more or less play ourselves in the series. The odd one out is Peter Tork. Offstage he's a real serious guy who thinks a lot about things like religion and problems in the world. But in the show, he throws off all that and becomes a dumb-but-likable character who is always doing the wrong thing at the wrong time. He kind of moons around with a lovesick expression on his face \u2014 not like the real Peter Tork at all.\"\nPost-Monkees.\nDuring a trip to London in December 1967, Tork contributed banjo to George Harrison's soundtrack to the 1968 film \"Wonderwall\". His playing was featured in the movie, but not on the official \"Wonderwall Music\" soundtrack album released in November 1968. Tork's brief five-string banjo piece can be heard 16 minutes into the film, as Professor Collins (Jack MacGowran) is caught by his mother while spying on his neighbor Penny Lane (Jane Birkin).\nTork went solo with a group called Peter Tork And/Or Release with then-girlfriend Reine Stewart on drums (she had played drums on part of \"33\u2153\u00a0Revolutions Per Monkee\"), Riley \"Wyldflower\" Cummings (formerly of the Gentle Soul) on bass and \u2013 sometimes \u2013 singer/keyboard player Judy Mayhan. Tork said in April 1969, \"We sometimes have four. We're thinking of having a rotating fourth. Right now, the fourth is that girl I'm promoting named Judy Mayhan.\" \"We're like Peter's backup band\", added Stewart, \"except we happen to be a group instead of a backup band.\" Release hoped to have a record out immediately, and Tork said that they did record some demos that he may still have stored away somewhere. According to Stewart, the band was supposed to go to Muscle Shoals as the backing band for Mayhan's Atlantic Records solo album \"Moments\" (1970), but they were ultimately replaced. They mainly played parties for their \"in\" friends, and one of their songs was considered for the soundtrack to \"Easy Rider\", but the producers \u2013 who had also produced \"Head\" \u2013 eventually decided not to include it. The Release could not secure a record contract, and by 1970, Tork was once again a solo artist. As he later recalled, \"I didn't know how to stick to it. I ran out of money and told the band members, 'I can't support us as a crew anymore, you'll just have to find your own way.'\"\nTork's record and movie production entity, the Breakthrough Influence Company (BRINCO), also failed to launch, despite such talent as future Little Feat guitarist Lowell George. He sold his house in 1970, and he and a pregnant Reine Stewart moved into the basement of David Crosby's home. Tork was credited with co-arranging a Dolenz solo single on MGM Records in 1971 (\"Easy on You\" backed with \"Oh Someone\"). An arrest and conviction for possession of hashish resulted in three months in an Oklahoma penitentiary in 1972. He moved to Fairfax in Marin County, California, in the early 1970s, where he joined the 35-voice Fairfax Street Choir and played guitar for a shuffle blues band called Osceola. Tork returned to southern California in the mid-1970s, where he married, had a son, and took a job teaching at Pacific Hills School in West Hollywood for a year and a half. He spent a total of three years as a teacher of music, social studies, math, French and history, and coached baseball at several schools.\nOn July 4, 1976, Tork joined Dolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart onstage at Disneyland for a guest appearance during their concert tour. Later that year, he reunited with Jones and Dolenz in the studio for the recording of the single \"Christmas Is My Time of Year\" backed with \"White Christmas\", which saw a limited release for fan club members that holiday season.\nBetween 1982 and 1985 Micky and Peter came on the Howard Stern afternoon show on WNBC to play Mystery Guest, Peter played Inventions in F Major on a casio keyboard.\nTork returned to the film world in 2017 in the horror movie \"I Filmed Your Death\", written and directed by Sam Bahre.\nSire Records.\nA chance meeting with Sire Records executive Pat Horgan at the Bottom Line in New York City led to Tork recording a six-song demo, his first recording in many years. Recorded in summer 1980, it featured Tork, who sang and played rhythm guitar, keyboards, and banjo. He was backed by Southern rock band Cottonmouth, led by guitarist/singer/songwriter Johnny Pontiff, featuring Gerard Trahan on guitar, keyboards, and vocals, Gene Pyle on bass guitar and vocals, and Gary Hille on percussion.\nWith George Dispigno as an engineer, Horgan produced the six tracks, which included two Monkees covers, \"Shades of Gray\" and \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\". The four other tracks were \"Good Looker\", \"Since You Went Away\" (which appeared on the Monkees' 1987 album \"Pool It!\"), \"Higher and Higher\", and \"Hi Hi Babe\". Also present at the sessions were Joan Jett, Chrissie Hynde, and Tommy Ramone. The tracks were recorded at Blue Horizon House at 165 West 74th Street, home of Sire Records, but Seymour Stein, president of Sire, rejected the demo, stating \"there's nothing there\". Tork recorded the second set of demos in New York City, but little is known about these recordings, other than one track was another version of \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\" featuring an unknown rock band and a violin solo.\nDuring this time, Tork appeared regularly on \"The Uncle Floyd Show\", broadcast on U-68 out of New Jersey. He performed comedy bits and lip-synced the Sire recordings. Floyd claimed Tork was the \"first real star\" to appear on the show. (Later, Davy Jones, the Ramones, Shrapnel, and others would follow in his footsteps.)\nIn 1981, Tork released the single \"(I'm Not Your) Steppin' Stone\" (backed with \"Higher and Higher\") with the New Monks. He also did some club performances and live television appearances, including taking part in a \"Win a Date With Peter Tork\" bit on \"Late Night with David Letterman\" in July 1982.\nMonkees reunions, other bands, and activities.\nIn 1986, after a 1985 tour with Jones in Australia, Tork rejoined fellow Monkees Jones and Dolenz for a highly successful 20th-anniversary reunion tour (Nesmith was not available for a reunion). Tork and Dolenz recorded three new songs for a greatest hits release. The three Monkees recorded \"Pool It!\" the following year. A decade later, all four group members recorded \"Justus\", the first studio album with the full group lineup since 1968; it would be another 19 years until that happened again, with the release of \"Good Times!\". The quartet performed live in the United Kingdom in 1997, but for several years following, only the trio of Tork, Dolenz, and Jones toured together. The trio of Monkees parted ways in 2001 following a public feud, then reunited in 2011 for a series of 45th-anniversary concerts in England and the United States.\nSince 1986, Tork had intermittently toured with his former bandmates and also played with his bands, the Peter Tork Project and Shoe Suede Blues. In 1991, he formed a band called the Dashboard Saints and played at a pizza restaurant in Guerneville, California. In 1994, he released his first album-length solo project, \"Stranger Things Have Happened\", which featured brief appearances by Dolenz and Nesmith. In 1996, he collaborated on an album called \"Two Man Band\" with James Lee Stanley. The duo followed up in 2001 with a second release, \"Once Again\".\nIn 2001, Tork took time out from touring to appear in a leading role in the short film \"Mixed Signals\", written and directed by John Graziano.\nIn 2002, Tork resumed working with his band Shoe Suede Blues. The band performed original blues music, Monkees' covers (including blues versions), covers of classic blues hits by greats such as Muddy Waters, and shared the stage with bands such as Captain Zig. The band toured extensively in 2006-2007 following the release of the album \"Cambria Hotel\".\nTork also had a pair of appearances in the role of Topanga Lawrence's father Jedidiah Lawrence on the sitcom \"Boy Meets World\". In his second appearance in 1995, he joined Jones and Dolenz in Season 3, Episode 8 (\"Rave On\"), although they did not appear as the Monkees. Tork was again cast as Jedidiah Lawrence, while Jones was Reginald Fairfield, and Dolenz's character was Gordy. At the program's climax, the three took the stage together to perform the Buddy Holly song \"Not Fade Away\" and the Temptations' \"My Girl\". As an inside joke, actor Dave Madden (best known as band manager Reuben Kincaid on \"The Partridge Family\"), cameoed as a manager who appeared, wanting to manage the \"new\" group, telling them that they \"could be bigger than the Beatles.\" Purportedly, both Nesmith and Pattie Boyd (former wife of Beatle George Harrison) attended the taping.\nTork was also a guest character on \"7th\u00a0Heaven\". In 1995, he appeared as himself on the show \"Wings\", bidding against Crystal Bernard's character for the Monkeemobile. In 1999, he appeared as the leader of a wedding band in \"The King of Queens\" in Season 1, Episode 13 (\"Best Man\").\nIn early 2008, Tork wrote an online advice and info column called \"Ask Peter Tork\" for the webzine \"The Daily Panic\".\nIn 2011, he joined Dolenz and Jones for \"\" in 2011.\nIn 2012, Tork joined Dolenz and Nesmith on a Monkees tour in honor of the 45th anniversary of their album \"Headquarters\", as well as in tribute to the late Jones. The trio would tour again in 2013 and 2014. In 2016, Tork toured with Dolenz as the Monkees, in what would be his final tour before his death in 2019. Nesmith also played at some of the concerts.\nPersonal life.\nIn later life, Tork resided in Mansfield, Connecticut. He was married four times, with marriages to Jody Babb, Reine Stewart, and Barbara Iannoli ending in divorce. From 2013 until his death, he was married to Pamela Grapes. He had three children: a daughter, Hallie, with Stewart; a son, Ivan, with Iannoli; and another daughter, Erica, from a previous relationship with Tammy Sestak. As an adult, Tork identified as having Asperger syndrome.\nIllness and death.\nOn March 3, 2009, Tork reported on his website that he had been diagnosed with adenoid cystic carcinoma, a rare, slow-growing form of head and neck cancer. A preliminary biopsy showed that cancer had not spread beyond the initial site. \"It's a bad news/good news situation\", explained Tork. \"It's so rare a combination (on the tongue) that there isn't a lot of experience among the medical community about this particular combination. On the other hand, the type of cancer it is, never mind the location, is somewhat well known, and the prognosis, I'm told, is good.\" Tork underwent radiation therapy to prevent the cancer from returning.\nOn March 4, 2009, Tork underwent surgery in New York City. On June 11, 2009, a spokesman for Tork reported that his cancer had returned. Tork was reportedly \"shaken but not stirred\" by the news and said that the doctors had predicted an 80% chance of containing and shrinking the new tumor.\nIn July 2009, while undergoing radiation therapy, he was interviewed by \"The Washington Post\": \"I recovered very quickly after my surgery, and I've been hoping that my better-than-average constitution will keep the worst effects of radiation at bay. My voice and energy still seem to be in decent shape, so maybe I can pull these gigs off after all.\" He continued to tour and perform while receiving his treatments.\nTork documented his cancer experience on Facebook and encouraged his fans to support research efforts of the Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma Research Foundation. His cancer returned in 2018, and he died at his home in Willimantic, Connecticut, on February 21, 2019.\nNesmith made the following statement:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Peter Tork died this AM. I am told he slipped away peacefully. Yet, as I write this my tears are awash, and my heart is broken. Even though I am clinging to the idea that we all continue, the pain that attends these passings has no cure. It's going to be a rough day. I share with all Monkees fans this change, this 'loss,' even so. PT will be a part of me forever. I have said this before\u2014and now it seems even more apt\u2014the reason we called it a band is because it was where we all went to play. A band no more\u2014and yet the music plays on\u2014an anthem to all who made the Monkees and the TV show our private\u2014dare I say 'secret'\u2014playground. As for Pete, I can only pray his songs reach the heights that can lift us and that our childhood lives forever\u2014that special sparkle that was the Monkees. I will miss him\u2014a brother in arms. Take flight, my Brother.\nNesmith later commented on his often-difficult relationship with Tork. \"I never liked Peter, he never liked me. So we had an uneasy truce between the two of us. As clear as I could tell, among his peers he was very well liked. But we rarely had a civil word to say to each other\", Nesmith admitted. When he learned of Tork's death, \"I broke into tears. What are you going to do?\"\nDolenz expressed his grief via Twitter, saying \"There are no words right now...heartbroken over the loss of my Monkee brother, Peter Tork.\"\nSong list.\nSongs written or co-written by Tork include the following:\nwith The Monkees\nwith James Lee Stanley\nwith Shoe Suede Blues\nSolo\nDiscography.\nSolo:\nWith the Monkees:\nWith James Lee Stanley:\nWith Shoe Suede Blues:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39048", "revid": "19297870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39048", "title": "Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics", "text": "Research organization at the University of Colorado Boulder\nThe Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) is a research institute at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Founded in 1948, LASP employs 750+ scientists, engineers, and students dedicated to space science research in fields including solar physics, planetary atmospheres, dusty plasmas, geophysics, and space weather. The institute received over $1 billion in research revenue since 2013, predominantly from NASA contracts. LASP employs over 250 students and is the only academic institute to send spacecraft instruments to all 8 planets in the Solar System. LASP has also sent missions to Pluto, the Sun, and multiple planetary moons. \nAs of 2025, LASP has a yearly budget exceeding $200 million and manages or supports 26 active space missions.\nHistory.\nFounded after World War II, the first scientific instruments built at LASP were launched into space using captured German V-2 rockets. In 1963, the University of Colorado received $791,500 from NASA for the construction of a 25,000 square-foot building to study \"ultraviolet physics, solar ultraviolet-radiation data from rockets, and the testing of solar-rocket pointing-control mechanisms\". LASP maintains a suborbital rocket program through periodic calibration instrument flights from White Sands Missile Range. It was originally named the Upper Air Laboratory, but changed to its current name in 1965. LASP has historical ties to Ball Aerospace Corporation and the Center for Astrophysics and Space Astronomy (CASA). \nThe University of Colorado receives more NASA funding than any public university in the country, due in large part to LASP programs. Multiple companies have spun-off from research at LASP, including on electron beam dust mitigation for NASA.\nFacilities.\nLASP has two main facilities located in the University of Colorado Boulder Research Park: the LASP Space Technology Research Center (LSTR) and Space Science (SPSC). Two additional facilities - Astrophysical Research Lab (ARL) and Space Learning Lab (SLL/NPL) - are also part of LASP.\nThe facilities allow LASP to execute almost every aspect of space missions. Hardware facilities and cleanrooms allow for the construction of single instruments or entire spacecraft. A Mission Operations Center allows for the control of spacecraft data collection, and a large research staff analyzes the data for science research. \nAs part of the university, LASP has heavy student involvement in every aspect of its operations, including science, hardware design, spacecraft integration, and mission operations. Graduate students regularly lead instrument development under the supervision of professors and scientists at the institute. Notable student-led instruments include the Venetia Burney Student Dust Counter on New Horizons and the Student Nitric Oxide Explorer (SNOE) as part of NASA's Explorers Program.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39049", "revid": "47362818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39049", "title": "Robert S. Mulliken", "text": "American physicist and chemist (1896\u20131986)\nRobert Sanderson Mulliken (June 7, 1896 \u2013 October 31, 1986) was an American physical chemist, primarily responsible for the early development of molecular orbital theory, i.e. the elaboration of the molecular orbital method of computing the structure of molecules. Mulliken received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1966 and the Priestley Medal in 1983.\nEarly years.\nRobert Mulliken was born in Newburyport, Massachusetts on June 7 1896. His father, Samuel Parsons Mulliken, was a professor of organic chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. As a child, Robert Mulliken learned the name and botanical classification of plants and, in general, had an excellent, but selective, memory. For example, he learned German well enough to skip the course in scientific German in college, but could not remember the name of his high school German teacher. He also made the acquaintance, while still a child, of the physical chemist Arthur Amos Noyes.\nMulliken helped with some of the editorial work when his father wrote his four-volume text on organic compound identification, and thus became an expert on organic chemical nomenclature.\nEducation.\nIn high school in Newburyport, Mulliken followed a scientific curriculum. He graduated in 1913 and succeeded in getting a scholarship to MIT which had earlier been won by his father. Like his father, he majored in chemistry. Already as an undergraduate, he conducted his first publishable research: on the synthesis of organic chlorides. Because he was unsure of his future direction, he included some chemical engineering courses in his curriculum and spent a summer touring chemical plants in Massachusetts and Maine. He received his B. S. degree in chemistry from MIT in 1917.\nEarly career.\nAt this time, the United States had just entered World War I, and Mulliken took a position at American University in Washington, D.C., making poison gas under James B. Conant. After nine months, he was drafted into the Army's Chemical Warfare Service, but continued on the same task. His laboratory techniques left much to be desired, and he was out of service for months with burns. Later, he contracted a bad case of influenza, and was still hospitalized at war's end.\nAfter the war, he took a job investigating the effects of zinc oxide and carbon black on rubber, but quickly decided that this was not the kind of chemistry he wanted to pursue. Hence, in 1919 he entered the Ph.D. program at the University of Chicago.\nGraduate and early postdoctoral education.\nMulliken got his doctorate in 1921 based on research into the separation of isotopes of mercury by evaporation, and continued in his isotope separation by this method. While at Chicago, he took a course under the Nobel Prize-winning physicist Robert A. Millikan, which exposed him to the old quantum theory. He also became interested in strange molecules after exposure to work by Hermann I. Schlesinger on diborane.\nAt Chicago, he had received a grant from the National Research Council (NRC) which had paid for much of his work on isotope separation. The NRC grant was extended in 1923 for two years so he could study isotope effects on band spectra of such diatomic molecules as boron nitride (BN) (comparing molecules with B10 and B11). He went to Harvard University to learn spectrographic technique from Frederick A. Saunders and quantum theory from E. C. Kemble. At the time, he was able to associate with J. Robert Oppenheimer and many future Nobel laureates, including John H. Van Vleck and Harold C. Urey. He also met John C. Slater, who had worked with Niels Bohr.\nIn 1925 and 1927, Mulliken traveled to Europe, working with outstanding spectroscopists and quantum theorists such as Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Paul A. M. Dirac, Werner Heisenberg, Louis de Broglie, Max Born, and Walther Bothe (all of whom eventually received Nobel Prizes) and Friedrich Hund, who was at the time Born's assistant. They all, as well as Wolfgang Pauli, were developing the new quantum mechanics that would eventually supersede the old quantum theory. Mulliken was particularly influenced by Hund, who had been working on quantum interpretation of band spectra of diatomic molecules, the same spectra which Mulliken had investigated at Harvard. In 1927 Mulliken worked with Hund and as a result developed his molecular orbital theory, in which electrons are assigned to states that extend over an entire molecule. In consequence, molecular orbital theory was also referred to as the Hund-Mulliken theory.\nEarly scientific career.\nFrom 1926 to 1928, he taught in the physics department at New York University (NYU). This was his first recognition as a physicist. Though his work had been considered important by chemists, it clearly was on the borderline between the two sciences and both would claim him from this point on. Then he returned to the University of Chicago as an associate professor of physics, being promoted to full professor in 1931. He ultimately held a position jointly in both the physics and chemistry departments. At both NYU and Chicago, he continued to refine his molecular-orbital theory.\nUp to this point, the primary way to calculate the electronic structure of molecules was based on a calculation by Walter Heitler and Fritz London on the hydrogen molecule (H2) in 1927. With the conception of hybridized atomic orbitals by John C. Slater and Linus Pauling, which rationalized observed molecular geometries, the method was based on the premise that the bonds in any molecule could be described in a manner similar to the bond in H2, namely, as overlapping atomic orbitals centered on the atoms involved. Since it corresponded to chemists' ideas of localized bonds between pairs of atoms, this method (called the Valence-Bond (VB) or Heitler-London-Slater-Pauling (HLSP) method), was very popular. In attempting to calculate the properties of excited states (molecules that have been excited by an energy source), the VB method does not always work well. With its description of the electron wave functions in molecules as delocalized molecular orbitals that possess the same symmetry as the molecule, Hund and Mulliken's molecular-orbital method, including contributions by John Lennard-Jones, proved to be more flexible and applicable to a vast variety of types of molecules and molecular fragments, and has eclipsed the valence-bond method. As a result of this development, he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1966.\nMulliken became a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1936, the youngest member in the organization's history at the time. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1940 and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1965. He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRs) in 1967.\nMulliken population analysis is named after him, a method of assigning charges to atoms in a molecule.\nPersonal life.\nOn December 24, 1929, he married Mary Helen von No\u00e9, daughter of Adolf Carl No\u00e9, a geology professor at the University of Chicago. They had two daughters.\nLater years.\nIn 1934, he derived a new scale for measuring the electronegativity of elements, which he defined as the average of an atom's ionization enthalpy and electron affinity. This does not entirely correlate with the scale of Linus Pauling, but is generally in close correspondence.\nIn World War II, from 1942 to 1945, he directed the Information Office for the University of Chicago's Plutonium project. Afterward, he developed mathematical formulas to enable the progress of the molecular-orbital theory.\nIn 1952. he began to apply quantum mechanics to the analysis of the reaction between Lewis acid and base molecules. (See Acid-base reaction theories). In 1961, he became Distinguished Professor of Physics and Chemistry at Florida State University, and continued in his studies of molecular structure and spectra, ranging from diatomic molecules to large complex aggregates. In 1981, Mulliken became a founding member of the World Cultural Council. In 1983, Mulliken received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. He retired in 1985. His wife died in 1975.\nAt the age of 90, Mulliken died of congestive heart failure at his daughter's home in Arlington County, Virginia on October 31, 1986. His body was returned to Chicago for burial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39051", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39051", "title": "Cape Cod National Seashore", "text": "Protected area on Cape Cod, Massachusetts\nThe Cape Cod National Seashore (CCNS) encompasses on Cape Cod, in Massachusetts. CCNS was created on August 7, 1961, by President John F. Kennedy, when he signed a bill enacting the legislation he first co-sponsored as a Senator a few years prior. It includes ponds, woods and beachfront of the Atlantic coastal pine barrens ecoregion. The CCNS includes nearly of seashore along the Atlantic-facing eastern shore of Cape Cod, in the towns of Provincetown, Truro, Wellfleet, Eastham, Orleans and Chatham. It is administered by the National Park Service.\nPlaces of interest.\nNotable sites encompassed by the CCNS include Marconi Station (site of the first two-way transatlantic radio transmission), the Highlands Center for the Arts (formerly the North Truro Air Force Station), the Dune Shacks of Peaked Hill Bars Historic District (a 1,950-acre historic district containing dune shacks and the dune environment), and the glacial erratic known as Doane Rock.\nA former United States Coast Guard station on the ocean in Truro is now operated as a 42-bed youth hostel by Hostelling International USA.\nThere are several paved bike trails:\nThere are several excellent beaches along the coastline with public facilities available seasonally. These include Race Point Beach in Provincetown and Coast Guard Beach in Eastham. Both of these have made \"top beaches in the US\" lists over the years.\nRestoration and conservation efforts.\nAs part of the NPS Centennial Initiative, the Herring River estuary will be restored to its natural state through removal of dikes and drains that date back to 1909.\nIn 2010, the North of Highland Campground was protected with a conservation easement. The Trust for Public Land, the Association to Preserve Cape Cod, the Truro Conservation Trust, and other groups led a grassroots campaign to support the funding for the purchase price of the conservation easement from the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF), secured by U.S. Senator John Kerry, U.S. Representative Bill Delahunt, and former Senator Ted Kennedy.\nThe Biddle Property, home of the late Francis Biddle, who was the U.S. attorney general during World War II and served as the primary American judge during the post-war Nuremberg trials, was added to the Cape Cod National Seashore in 2011. Using funding from the Land and Water Conservation Fund, the Trust for Public Land purchased the property and conveyed it to the National Park Service.\nAs part of the restoration efforts, a number of run-down and unsafe buildings of no historical significance will be removed from areas around CCNS and the affected lands will be restored. The Great American Outdoors Act (GAOA) has provided more than $8 million to oversee this project that is to begin in 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39052", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39052", "title": "Provincetown, Massachusetts", "text": "Provincetown () is a town located at the extreme tip of Cape Cod in Massachusetts. A small coastal resort town with a year-round population of 3,664 as of the 2020 United States census, Provincetown has a summer population as high as 60,000. It contains the census-designated place of the same name. Often called \"P-town\" or \"Ptown\", the locale is known as a vacation destination for its beaches, harbor, artists, and tourist industry, particularly for LGBTQ people.\nHistory.\nAt the time of European encounter, the area was long settled by the historic Nauset tribe, who had a settlement known as \"Meeshawn\". They spoke Massachusett, a Southern New England Algonquian language dialect that they shared in common with their closely related neighbors, the Wampanoag.\nOn May 15, 1602, having made landfall from the west and believing it to be an island, Bartholomew Gosnold initially named this area \"Shoal Hope\". Later that day, after catching a \"great store of codfish\", he chose instead to name this outermost tip of land \"Cape Cod\". Notably, that name referred specifically to the area of modern-day Provincetown; not until much later was that that name reused to designate the entire region now known as Cape Cod.\nThe Pilgrims aboard the \"Mayflower\" sighted Cape Cod on November 9, 1620. After two days of failed attempts to sail south against the strong winter seas, they returned to the safety of the harbor, known today as Provincetown Harbor, and set anchor. It was here that the Mayflower Compact was drawn up and signed. The event is memorialized in a sculpture near the Pilgrim Monument. They agreed to settle and build a self-governing community, and came ashore in the West End.\nThough the Pilgrims chose to settle across the bay in Plymouth, Cape Cod enjoyed an early reputation for its valuable fishing grounds, and for its harbor: a naturally deep, protected basin that was considered the best along the coast. In 1654, the Governor of the Plymouth Colony purchased this land from the Chief of the Nausets, for a selling price of two brass kettles, six coats, 12 hoes, 12 axes, 12 knives and a box.\nThat land, which spanned from East Harbor (now known as Pilgrim Lake)\u2014near the present-day border between Provincetown and Truro\u2014to Long Point, was kept for the benefit of Plymouth Colony, which began leasing fishing rights to roving fishermen. The collected fees were used to defray the costs of schools and other projects throughout the colony. In 1678, the fishing grounds were opened up to allow the inclusion of fishermen from the Massachusetts Bay Colony.\nIn 1692, a new Royal Charter combined the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay colonies into the Province of Massachusetts Bay. \"Cape Cod\" was thus officially renamed the \"Province Lands\".\nThe first record of a municipal government with jurisdiction over the Province Lands was in 1714, with an Act that declared it the \"Precinct of Cape Cod\", annexed under control of Truro.\nOn June 14, 1727, after harboring ships for more than a century, the Precinct of Cape Cod was incorporated as a township. The name chosen by its inhabitants was \"Herringtown\", which was rejected by the Massachusetts General Court in favor of \"Provincetown\". The act of incorporation provided that inhabitants of Provincetown could be landholders, but not landowners. They received a quit claim to their property, but the Province retained the title. The land was to be used as it had been from the beginning of the colony\u2014a place for the making of fish. All resources, including the trees, could be used for that purpose. In 1893 the Massachusetts General Court changed the Town's charter, giving the townspeople deeds to the properties they held, while still reserving unoccupied areas.\nThe population of Provincetown remained small through most of the 18th century.\nThe town was affected by the American Revolution the same way most of Cape Cod was: the effective British blockade shut down most fish production and shipping and the town dwindled. It was, by happenstance, the location of the wreck of British warship at the Peaked Hill Bars off the Atlantic Coast of Provincetown in 1778.\nFollowing the American Revolution, Provincetown grew rapidly as a fishing and whaling center. The population was bolstered by numerous Portuguese sailors, many of whom were from the Azores, and settled in Provincetown after being hired to work on US ships.\nBy the 1890s, Provincetown was booming and began to develop a resident population of writers and artists, as well as a summer tourist industry. After the 1898 Portland Gale severely damaged the town's fishing industry, members of the town's art community took over many of the abandoned buildings. By the early decades of the 20th century, the town had acquired an international reputation for its artistic and literary productions. The Provincetown Players was an important experimental theatre company formed during this period. Many of its members lived during other parts of the year in Greenwich Village in New York, and intellectual and artistic connections were woven between the places. In 1898 Charles Webster Hawthorne opened the Cape Cod School of Art, said to be the first outdoor school for figure painting, in Provincetown. Film of his class from 1916 has been preserved.\nThe town includes eight buildings and two historic districts on the National Register of Historic Places: Provincetown Historic District and Dune Shacks of Peaked Hill Bars Historic District.\nIn the mid-1960s, Provincetown saw population growth. The town's rural character appealed to the hippies of the era; property was relatively cheap and rents were correspondingly low, especially during the winter. Many of those who came stayed and raised families. Commercial Street, where most of the town's businesses are located, gained numerous caf\u00e9s, leather shops, and head shops.\nBy the 1970s, Provincetown had a significant gay population, especially during the summer tourist season, when restaurants, bars and small shops serving the tourist trade were open. There had been a gay presence in Provincetown as early as the start of the 20th century as the artists' colony developed, along with experimental theatre. Drag queens could be seen in performance as early as the 1940s in Provincetown. In 1978 the Provincetown Business Guild (PBG) was formed to promote gay tourism. Today more than 200 businesses belong to the PBG and Provincetown is perhaps the best-known gay summer resort on the East Coast. The 2010 US Census revealed Provincetown to have the highest rate of same-sex couples in the country, at 163.1 per 1,000 households.\nSince the 1990s, property prices have risen significantly, causing some residents economic hardship. The housing bust of 2005\u20132012 caused property values in and around town to fall by 10 percent or more in less than a year. This did not slow down the town's economy, however. Provincetown's tourist season has expanded, and the town has created festivals and week-long events throughout the year. The most established are in the summer: the Portuguese Festival, Bear Week, and PBG's Carnival Week.\nIn 2017, a memorial was dedicated to those who lost their lives to AIDS.\nHistoric transportation.\nFor nearly all of Provincetown's recorded history, life has revolved around the waterfront\u2014especially the waterfront on its southern shore\u2014which offers a naturally deep harbor with easy and safe boat access, plus natural protection from the wind and waves. An additional element of Provincetown's geography tremendously influenced the manner in which the town evolved: the town was physically isolated, being at the hard-to-reach tip of a long, narrow peninsula.\nThe East Harbor, which provided the most protected mooring place in Provincetown, had a inlet from Provincetown Harbor, and effectively blocked off access to Provincetown by land. Until the late 19th century, no road led to Provincetown\u2014the only land route connecting the village to points back toward the mainland was along a thin stretch of beach along the shore to the north (known locally as the \"backshore\"). A wooden bridge was erected over the East Harbor in 1854, only to be destroyed by a winter storm and ice two years later. Although the bridge was replaced the following year, any traveler who crossed it still needed to traverse several miles over sand routes, which, together with the backshore route, was occasionally washed out by storms. This made Provincetown very much like an island. Its residents relied almost entirely upon its harbor for its communication, travel, and commerce needs.\nThat changed in 1868, when the mouth of the East Harbor was diked to enable the laying of track for the arrival of the railroad. The railroad was completed, to great fanfare, in 1873; and the wooden bridge and sand road was finally replaced by a formal roadway in 1877. The railroad terminated at Railroad Wharf, known today as MacMillan Pier. It provided an easy means for fishermen to offload their vessels and ship their catch to the cities by rail.\nThe railroad was not the only late arrival to Provincetown. Even roads \"within\" the town were slow to be constructed: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"There was then no road through the town. With no carts, carriages, wagons, horses or oxen, why a road? ... Here every man had a path from his house to his boat or vessel, and once launched, he was on the broad highway of nations without tax or toll. There were paths to the neighbors, paths to school, paths to church; tortuous paths perhaps, but they were good pilots by night or day, on land or water. Besides, at low water there was a road such as none else could boast, washed completely twice a day from year to year, wide enough and free enough and long enough, if followed, for the armies of the Netherlands.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe town's internal road layout reflects the historic importance of the waterfront, the key to communication and commerce with the outside world. As the town grew, it organically expanded along the harborfront. The main \"thoroughfare\" was the hard-packed beach, where all commerce and socializing took place. Early deeds refer to a \"Town Rode\", which was little more than a footpath that ran behind the houses. In 1835, County Commissioners turned that into \"Front Street\", now known as Commercial Street. \"Back Street\" ran parallel to Front Street, but was set back from the harbor\u2014today it is known as Bradford Street. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The houses faced the water then; since then some of the houses have been turned around; some of them still have the front door on the shore side. One man, a doctor, who had not lived long in town, proposed that the street be made sixty-four feet wide, but they soon voted down such foolishness as that from foreigners. He tried to compromise on thirty-two feet, but twenty-two feet seemed wide enough for all possible purposes, and twenty-two feet wide it is.\"\u2014\u200a\nGeography.\nProvincetown is located at the very tip of Cape Cod, encompassing a total area of \u201455% of that, or , is land area, and the remaining water area. Surrounded by water in every direction except due east, the town has of coastal shoreline. Provincetown is bordered to the east by its only neighbor, the town of Truro, and by Provincetown Harbor to the southeast, Cape Cod Bay to the south and west, Massachusetts Bay to the northwest and north, and the Atlantic Ocean to the northeast.\nThe town is north (by road) from Hyannis, and by road to the Sagamore Bridge, which spans the Cape Cod Canal and connects Cape Cod to the mainland. Provincetown is east by southeast from Boston by air or sea, and by road.\nAbout 4,500 acres, or about 73% of the town's land area, is owned by the National Park Service, which operates the Cape Cod National Seashore, leaving about of land under the town's jurisdiction. To the north lie the \"Province Lands\", the area of dunes and small ponds extending from Mount Ararat in the east to Race Point in the west, along the Massachusetts Bay shore. The Cape Cod Bay shoreline extends from Race Point to the far west, to Wood End in the south, eastward to Long Point, which in turn points inward towards the town, and provides a natural barrier for Provincetown Harbor. All three points are marked by lighthouses. The town's population center extends along the harbor, south of the Seashore's lands.\nMount Ararat was named after Noah's landing place, while Mount Gilboa, and another dune, was named for the mountain described in the book of Samuel.\nClimate.\nThe town of Provincetown has a warm-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"), closely bordering on oceanic climate. The plant hardiness zone is 7a, with an average annual extreme minimum air temperature of . The average seasonal (Nov\u2013Apr) snowfall total is around . The average snowiest month is February, which corresponds to the annual peak in nor'easter activity.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnited States census information.\nAccording to the U.S. census of 2010, there were 2,942 people living in the town (down 14.3% since 2000). The population density was . There were 4,494 housing units (up 15.5%) at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 91.5% White, 4.0% African American, 0.6% Native American, 0.6% Asian, 1.6% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.8% of the population.\nThe top reported ancestries were Irish (26.7%, up 9.3% from 2000), English (17.4%, up 2.6%), Portuguese (14.6%, down 8.2%), Italian (13.5%, up 3.4%), and German (12.5%, up 3.6%).\nThere were 1,765 households (down 3.9%), out of which 416 (23.6%) had families, 115 (6.5%) had children under the age of 18 living within them, and 76.4% were non-families. The average household size was 1.64 persons/household, and the average family size was 2.55.\nThe distribution of the population, broken down by age and gender, is shown in the population pyramid. In 2010, 6.8% of the population was under the age of 18, and the median age was 52.3. There were 1,602 males and 1,340 females.\nFor 2011, the estimated median income for a year-round household in the town was $46,547, with a mean household income of $74,840. For families, the median income was $87,228, and the mean is $84,050. For nonfamily households, the median income was $42,375, and the mean, $71,008. Median earnings for male full-time, year-round workers was $49,688, versus $36,471 for females. The per capita income for the town was $41,488. About 2.1% of families and 15.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.0% of those under age 18 and 7.5% of those age 65 or over.\nProvincetown's ZIP code has the highest concentration of same-sex couple households of any ZIP code in the United States.\nDemographics in a resort town.\nData from traditional demographic sources like the U.S. Census, municipal voting rolls and property records may not accurately portray the demography of resort towns. They often reveal unusual results, as in this case, where the number of housing units far exceeds the Town's total population, where that number of housing units rose 15% while the population dropped 14%, and where nearly 61% of the housing stock is vacant, with 53% designated \"for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use\", according to the census.\nIn the decade spanning the years 2000 through 2010, Provincetown's small year-round population declined 14.3% from 3,431 to 2,942, yet during the summer months, population estimates vary wildly, ranging from 19,000 to 60,000. Census figures are unable to capture these dynamic population fluctuations that are associated with seasonal tourism. Part-time residents, which includes non-resident property owners and seasonal residents, are not counted in the census.\nArts and culture.\nIn 1940, Catharine Sargent Huntington, Edwin Pettit, and Virginia Thoms founded the Provincetown Playhouse on the Wharf. The playhouse replaced an older structure that existed between 1915 and 1924. Huntington served as owner and manager of the playhouse until 1973. During her time as manager, a Eugene O'Neill drama was produced each summer season, and the theater hosted an O'Neill Festival in 1966, during which ten of his plays were produced.\nFrom 1955 to 1959, the Sun Gallery was run by Yvonne Andersen and Dominic Falcone. It was an art exhibition that took place during the summer where young and up and coming artists could show their work.\nThe Fine Arts Work Center is a nonprofit educational enterprise, located in Provincetown since 1968. Its stated mission is to encourage the growth and development of emerging visual artists and writers through residency programs, to propagate aesthetic values and experience, and to restore the year-round vitality of the historic art colony of Provincetown.\nProvincetown Art Association and Museum (PAAM) is a nationally recognized, year-round cultural institution that celebrated its Centennial in 2014. PAAM mounts 35 art exhibitions each year, offers workshops in the fine arts for children, youth, and adults, and hosts an array of programs and events to enrich visitor experience. The PAAM Permanent Collection consists of 3,000 objects, which are displayed throughout the year in the PAAM galleries.\nBetween 2004 and 2007, PAAM received four Rural Development grants and loans totaling $3 million to increase the museum's space, add climate-controlled facilities, renovate a historic sea captain's house (the Hargood House) and cover cost overruns. As the mission of the Rural Development program is \"To increase economic opportunity and improve the quality of life for all rural Americans\", the USDA considered Provincetown's residents in the 2000s to still be rural and to still require such federal assistance\nIn 2003, Provincetown received a $1.95 million low interest loan from the Rural Development program of the U.S. Department of Agriculture to help rebuild the town's MacMillan Pier. It primarily serves the town's active fishing fleet, and also tourists and high-speed ferries.\nThe Atlantic House in Provincetown is considered the oldest gay bar in the US and Frommer's calls it \"the nation's premier gay bar\". Provincetown is the setting for the annual Women's Week festival. Held in mid-October since 1984 and attended by almost 2,000 women, it is the \"longest running lesbian cultural event in the Northeast\". Since 1975, Provincetown has been the host city to Fantasia Fair, the world's first and longest-running annual conference that focuses on gender diversity and transgender issues.\nThe Provincetown International Film Festival, honors the best in independent and avant-garde film. Among the honorees for 2014 were actress Patricia Clarkson and director David Cronenberg. Previous honorees include Matt Dillon, Harmony Korine, Parker Posey, Roger Corman, Vera Farmiga, Darren Aronofsky, Quentin Tarantino, Jane Lynch, Gael Garc\u00eda Bernal, Tilda Swinton, Kathleen Turner, Jim Jarmusch, Todd Haynes, Gus Van Sant, and John Waters. Waters, a summer resident, is a major participant in the festival.\nIn November 2011, the Provincetown Theater Company became the first theater company in New England to stage a live-action dramatic theatrical presentation of horror-fantasy author H.P. Lovecraft. The story was Lovecraft's 1919 classic, \"The Picture in the House,\" and was described as \"the macabre come to life.\" The adaptation was produced for the 22nd Fall Playwright's Festival.\nParks and recreation.\nVeterans Memorial Community Center serves as the area community center. By 2012, Veterans Memorial Elementary School closed and was being refurbished to become a community center. In 2014, the town government considered building a second floor on the facility to add affordable housing.\nGovernment.\nProvincetown is governed, like most New England towns, by the open town meeting form of government. The citizens, gathered in the town meeting, act as the legislative branch and approve the budget and amend the town's bylaws, while the popularly elected Board of Selectmen act as the executive branch and hire and oversee the Town Manager, meet regularly to determine policy, and appoint members of other boards and commissions. The town has its own police and fire departments, both of which are stationed on Shank Painter Road. The town's post office is located on Commercial Street, near the town's Fourth Wharf. The Provincetown Public Library is also located on Commercial Street, occupying the former Center Methodist Episcopal Church building since 2005.\nProvincetown is represented in the Massachusetts House of Representatives as a part of the Fourth Barnstable District, which includes (with the exception of Brewster) all the towns east and north of Harwich on the Cape. The seat is held by Democrat Sarah Peake, a former Provincetown selectman. The town is represented in the Massachusetts Senate as a part of the Cape and Islands District, which includes all of Cape Cod, Martha's Vineyard, and Nantucket except the towns of Bourne, Falmouth, Sandwich and a portion of Barnstable. The Senate seat is held by Democrat Julian Cyr. Provincetown is patrolled by its own Police Department as well as the Second (Yarmouth) Barracks of Troop D of the Massachusetts State Police.\nOn the national level, Provincetown is a part of Massachusetts's 9th congressional district, and is currently represented by Bill Keating. Following the death of Ted Kennedy, the state's senior (Class I) member of the United States Senate was John Kerry (last re-elected in 2008) until he became Secretary of State; that seat has been occupied by Ed Markey since July 16, 2013. The other (Class II) senate seat is held by Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat, elected in the November 2012 elections and sworn in as senator in January 2013.\nIn the 2020 US Presidential Election, Democratic nominee Joe Biden received 91.9 percent of the vote to Republican incumbent Donald Trump's 7 percent. In the 2024 presidential election, Democratic nominee Kamala Harris received 90.9 percent of the vote and Republican nominee Donald Trump received 7.2 percent.\nEducation.\nProvincetown Schools operates the public schools for elementary and middle school levels, with the main facility being the grade 1\u20138 International Baccalaureate World School, verified in 2013 in the Primary Years Program and in 2014 in the Middle Years program. Provincetown Schools educates approximately 120 children in grades Pre-K\u20138. The Veterans Memorial Community Center houses Provincetown Schools Early Learning Center (Wee Care and Preschool ages 3\u20135 and kindergarten).\nIn 2010, the Provincetown school board elected to phase out the high school program of Provincetown High School, at the end of the 2012\u22122013 school year, and send students to nearby Nauset Regional High School (of Nauset Public Schools) in North Eastham, beginning with the 2013\u22122014 academic year. Provincetown students in grades 9 and 10 were already attending Nauset by 2012.\nThere are no private schools in Provincetown; high school students from the town will now attend Cape Cod Regional Technical High School in Harwich or Nauset Regional High School in North Eastham. Prior to its closing, Provincetown High School (PHS) served students from seventh through twelfth grades (and for a time also accepted students from Truro). In 2012, Provincetown High School was recognized as one of the smallest high schools in the country with a student population of 32 students in grades 10\u201312. In 2018 there were about 45\u201350 students at the high school level from Provincetown.\nThere are private scholarships for students from Provincetown and Truro: the John Anderson Francis Family Scholarship Fund and the Captain Joseph F. Oliver Scholarship Fund. Circa 2019 each year the number of applicants ranged from 6\u201310, a figure the organizers consider to be low.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nProvincetown is the eastern terminus of U.S. Route 6, both in the state and in the nation. Although the terminus is directed east officially, geographically speaking, the road, having curved around Cape Cod, is facing west-southwest at the point, and is marked only by its junction with Route 6A. The state-controlled portion ends with a \"State Highway Ends\" sign as the road enters the Cape Cod National Seashore, after which the road is under federal maintenance. Route 6A passes through the town as well, mostly following Bradford Street (whereas US 6 originally followed Commercial Street before the bypass was built and Commercial Street was switched to one-way westbound), and ending just south of the Herring Cove Beach.\nProvincetown is served by two seasonal ferries to Boston and one to Plymouth. They all dock at MacMillan Pier, located just east of the Town Hall in the center of town. When operating at full capacity, the pier accommodates in any given day: 11 ferry trips carrying over 5,000 passengers; five whale watch vessels each running up to three trips a day with a total capacity of 3,600 passengers; the town's commercial fishing fleet of 55 vessels; and many other excursion and visiting vessels. It also plays host several times per year as a destination port-of-call to passengers of organized cruise ship tours, whether themed towards the gay traveller, or towards eco-tourism, arts and other aspects of Provincetown and the outer cape.\nThe town has no rail service; the Provincetown Train Station opened to service by the Old Colony Railroad in 1873. The successor operator of the Old Colony lines, New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad, served the station until 1938. (Service was briefly restored in 1940.) The line was formally abandoned in 1960. A large portion of the \"road\" later converted into three roads (Harry Kemp Way, Railroad Avenue and Rear Howland) plus the \"Old Colony Nature Pathway\", a pedestrian path and greenway.\nThe Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority offers flex route buses between MacMillan Pier and Harwich and a shuttle to Truro. Plymouth &amp; Brockton Street Railway and Peter Pan Bus Lines provide daily bus service to Hyannis Transportation Center with connecting service to Boston, New York, and Providence and the Cape Flyer.\nProvincetown is at one end of the scenic \"Bike Route 1\" from Boston called the Claire Saltonstall Bikeway. The town earned a Silver-level Bicycle Friendly Community Award from the League of American Bicyclists in 2018. Provincetown has the highest rate of year-round bicycle commuters in the state, at 14%, according to the PeopleForBikes City Ratings.\nThe Provincetown Municipal Airport is located just east of Race Point. This airport is surrounded by the Cape Cod National Seashore, and is used for general aviation as well as regular scheduled service to Boston and White Plains, New York. It has a single runway, an ILS approach, and full lighting. The nearest national and international service is from Logan International Airport in Boston.\nProvincetown in popular culture.\nProvincetown features in the following productions:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39053", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39053", "title": "Provincetown", "text": ""}
{"id": "39056", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39056", "title": "Saint Anselm (disambiguation)", "text": "Saint Anselm or Anselm of Canterbury was archbishop of Canterbury in the 11th and 12th centuries.\nSaint Anselm may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39057", "revid": "45320532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39057", "title": "Straw man", "text": "Form of incorrect argument and informal fallacy\nA straw man fallacy (sometimes written as strawman) is the informal fallacy of refuting an argument different from the one actually under discussion, while not recognizing or acknowledging the distinction. One who engages in this fallacy is said to be \"attacking a straw man\".\nThe typical straw man argument creates the illusion of having refuted or defeated an opponent's proposition through the covert replacement of it with a different proposition (i.e., \"stand up a straw man\") and the subsequent refutation of that false argument (\"knock down a straw man\"), instead of the opponent's proposition. Straw man arguments have been used throughout history in polemical debate, particularly regarding highly charged emotional subjects.\nStraw man tactics in the United Kingdom may also be known as an Aunt Sally, after a pub game of the same name, where patrons throw sticks or battens at a post to knock off a skittle balanced on top.\nOverview.\nThe straw man fallacy occurs in the following pattern of argument:\nThis reasoning is a fallacy of relevance: it fails to address the proposition in question by misrepresenting the opposing position.\nFor example:\nContemporary revisions.\nIn 2006, Robert Talisse and Scott Aikin expanded the application and use of the straw man fallacy beyond that of previous rhetorical scholars, arguing that the straw man fallacy can take two forms: the original form that misrepresents the opponent's position, which they call the \"representative form\"; and a new form they call the \"selection form\".\nThe selection form focuses on a partial and weaker (and easier to refute) representation of the opponent's position. Then the easier refutation of this weaker position is claimed to refute the opponent's complete position. They point out the similarity of the selection form to the fallacy of hasty generalization, in which the refutation of an opposing position that is weaker than the opponent's is claimed as a refutation of all opposing arguments. Because they have found significantly increased use of the selection form in modern political argumentation, they view its identification as an important new tool for the improvement of public discourse.\nAikin and Casey expanded on this model in 2010, introducing a third form. Referring to the \"representative form\" as the classic \"straw man\", and the \"selection form\" as the \"weak man\", the third form is called the \"hollow man\". A hollow man argument is one that is a complete fabrication, where both the viewpoint and the opponent expressing it do not in fact exist, or at the very least the arguer has never encountered them. Such arguments frequently take the form of vague phrasing such as \"some say,\" \"someone out there thinks\" or similar weasel words, or it might attribute a non-existent argument to a broad movement in general, rather than an individual or organization.\nNutpicking.\nA variation on the selection form, or \"weak man\" argument, that combines with an ad hominem and fallacy of composition is \"nutpicking\" (or \"nut picking\"), a neologism coined by Kevin Drum. A combination of \"nut\" (i.e., insane person) and \"cherry picking\", as well as a play on the word \"nitpicking\", nut picking refers to intentionally seeking out extremely fringe, non-representative statements from members of an opposing group and parading these as evidence of that entire group's incompetence or irrationality.\nSteelmanning.\nA \"steel man argument\" (or \"steelmanning\") is the opposite of a straw man argument. Steelmanning is the practice of applying the rhetorical principle of charity through addressing the strongest form of the other person's argument, even if it is not the one they explicitly presented. Creating the strongest form of the opponent's argument may involve removing flawed assumptions that could be easily refuted or developing the strongest points which counter one's own position. Developing counters to steel man arguments may produce a stronger argument for one's own position.\nExamples.\nIn a 1977 appeal of a U.S. bank robbery conviction, a prosecuting attorney said in his oral argument: \"I submit to you that if you can't take this evidence and find these defendants guilty on this evidence then we might as well open all the banks and say, 'Come on and get the money, boys,' because we'll never be able to convict them.\" This was a straw man designed to alarm the appellate judges; the chance that the precedent set by one case would literally make it impossible to convict any bank robbers is remote.\nAnother example of a strawman argument is U.S. president Richard Nixon's 1952 \"Checkers speech\". When campaigning for vice president in 1952, Nixon was accused of having appropriated $18,000 in campaign funds for his personal use. In a televised response, based on Franklin D. Roosevelt's Fala speech, he spoke about another gift, a dog he had been given by a supporter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a little cocker spaniel dog, in a crate he had sent all the way from Texas, black and white, spotted, and our little girl Tricia, six years old, named it Checkers. And, you know, the kids, like all kids, loved the dog, and I just want to say this right now, that, regardless of what they say about it, we are going to keep it.\nThis was a straw man response; his critics had never criticized the dog as a gift or suggested he return it. This argument was successful at distracting a number of people from the funds and portraying his critics as nitpicking and heartless. Nixon received an outpouring of public support and remained on the ticket. He and Eisenhower were later elected.\nChristopher Tindale presents, as an example, the following passage from a draft of a bill (HCR 74) considered by the Louisiana State Legislature in 2001:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas, the writings of Charles Darwin, the father of evolution, promoted the justification of racism, and his books \"On the Origin of Species\" and \"The Descent of Man\" postulate a hierarchy of superior and inferior races. ... Therefore, be it resolved that the legislature of Louisiana does hereby deplore all instances and all ideologies of racism, does hereby reject the core concepts of Darwinist ideology that certain races and classes of humans are inherently superior to others, and does hereby condemn the extent to which these philosophies have been used to justify and approve racist practices.\nTindale comments that \"the portrait painted of Darwinian ideology is a caricature, one not borne out by any objective survey of the works cited.\" The fact that similar misrepresentations of Darwinian thinking have been used to justify and approve racist practices is beside the point: the position that the legislation is attacking and dismissing is a straw man. In subsequent debate, this error was recognized, and the eventual bill omitted all mention of Darwin and Darwinist ideology. Darwin passionately opposed slavery and worked to intellectually confront the notions of \"scientific racism\" that were used to justify it.\nThroughout the 20th century, and also in the 21st century thus far, there have been innumerable instances when right-wing political leaders and commentators used communism as a straw man while denouncing the proposals of centrists, moderate liberals, or even moderate conservatives. They sought to portray valid criticism of their own right-wing policies as expressions of communist ideology when in reality, most of the critics in question were not even socialists, much less communists. The use of communism as a straw man was a common and effective (though fallacious) talking point by conservative leaders in multiple western countries such as the United Kingdom, Germany, and most especially the United States.\nEtymology.\nAs a fallacy, the identification and name of straw man arguments are of relatively recent date, although Aristotle makes remarks that suggest a similar concern. Isaac Watts writes in his \"Logick\" (1724): \"They dress up the opinion of their adversary as they please, and ascribe sentiments to him which he doth not acknowledge; and when they have with a great deal of pomp attacked and confounded these images of straw of their own making, they triumph over their adversary as though they had utterly confuted his opinion.\"\nDouglas N. Walton identified \"the first inclusion of it we can find in a textbook as an informal fallacy\" in Stuart Chase's \"Guides to Straight Thinking\" from 1956 (p.\u00a040). By contrast, Hamblin's classic text \"Fallacies\" (1970) neither mentions it as a distinct type, nor even as a historical term.\nThe term's origins are a matter of debate, though the usage of the term in rhetoric suggests a human figure made of straw that is easy to knock down or destroy\u2014such as a military training dummy, scarecrow, or effigy. A common but false etymology is that it refers to men who stood outside courthouses with a straw in their shoe to signal their willingness to be a false witness. The \"Online Etymology Dictionary\" states that the term \"man of straw\" can be traced back to 1620 as \"an easily refuted imaginary opponent in an argument\".\nRelated usage.\nReverend William Harrison, in \"A Description of England\" (1577), complained that when men lived in houses of willow they were men of oak, but now they lived in houses of oak and had become men of willow and \"a great manie altogither of straw, which is a sore alteration [i.e. a sad change]\". The phrase 'men of straw' appears to refer to pampered softness and a lack of character, rather than the modern meaning.\nMartin Luther blames his opponents for misrepresenting his arguments in his work \"On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\" (1520):\nIn the quote, he responds to arguments of the Roman Catholic Church and clergy attempting to delegitimize his criticisms, specifically on the correct way to serve the Eucharist. The church claimed Martin Luther is arguing against serving the Eucharist according to one type of serving practice; Martin Luther states he never asserted that in his criticisms towards them and in fact they themselves are making this argument. Luther's Latin text does not use the phrase \"man of straw\", but it is used in a widespread early 20th century English translation of his work, the Philadelphia Edition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39058", "revid": "50615620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39058", "title": "Wellfleet, Massachusetts", "text": "Town in Massachusetts, United States\nWellfleet is a town on Cape Cod in Massachusetts. The town had a population of 3,566 at the 2020 United States census, which swells nearly sixfold during the summer. A total of 70% of the town's land area is under protection, and nearly half of it is part of the Cape Cod National Seashore. Wellfleet is famous for its oysters, which are celebrated in the annual October Wellfleet OysterFest.\nHistory.\nThe area was originally settled by Europeans in the 1650s as Billingsgate (after the famous fish market in East London). In 1717, the pirate Samuel Bellamy was sailing nearby when his ship, the \"Whydah\", sank offshore, together with over of gold and silver and all but two of its 145 men. The wreck was discovered in 1984, the first of only two confirmed pirate shipwrecks ever to have been discovered.\nWellfleet was part of neighboring Eastham until 1763 when it achieved town status after nearly 30 years of petitioning. Wellfleet's oyster beds drove the early economy, as did whaling and fishing. The town was home to 30 whaling ships at the time of the American Revolution.\nBecause of the decline of whaling and the mackerel catch in the late 19th century, the fleet declined, being completely free of schooners by 1900. The oyster fleet continued, however, and many types of shellfish continue to be harvested. Despite this decline, a church near the town center continues to operate a clock that chimes ship\u2019s time.\nGuglielmo Marconi built the USA's first transatlantic radio transmitter station on a coastal bluff in South Wellfleet in 1901\u20131902. The first radio telegraph transmission from the United States to England was sent from this station on January 18, 1903, a ceremonial telegram from President Theodore Roosevelt to King Edward VII. Most of the transmitter site is gone, however, as three quarters of the land it originally encompassed has been eroded into the sea. The South Wellfleet station's first call sign was \"CC\" for Cape Cod.\nIn 1961, President John F. Kennedy created the Cape Cod National Seashore, which encompasses most of the Atlantic shoreline of Cape Cod. In Wellfleet, the territory circles the town, from Jeremy Point through the marshes and \"islands\" along the Herring River, includes Cahoon Hollow Beach, and extends the length of the Atlantic shore of the town.\nConstruction of the Chequessett Inn in the late 19th century contributed to the development of a tourist economy in Wellfleet. The town has the second greatest concentration of art galleries on Cape Cod, right after Provincetown. It is also a popular retirement spot.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 44.11%, is water. Wellfleet is bordered by Truro to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the east, Eastham to the south, and Cape Cod Bay to the west. Wellfleet is approximately south of Provincetown, (by road) northeast of Barnstable, from the Sagamore Bridge, and (by road) southeast of Boston.\nThe lands of Wellfleet wrap around Wellfleet Harbor, extending from the main portion of the Cape around the harbor to Jeremy Point. At one time, Wellfleet Harbor included an island known as Billingsgate Island, which sat at the harbor's mouth, to the south of the point. Once a flourishing small community with a lighthouse, the island was destroyed by coastal erosion and now exists as a shoal that is exposed at low tide. The Billingsgate shoals are split between Wellfleet and neighboring Eastham. Several other inlets extend inland from the harbor, at the mouth of the Herring River (also called \"The Gut\"), Duck Creek, Blackfish Creek and Fresh Brook (commonly known as \"The Run\") which leads to several brooks.\nIn addition to the Seashore, Wellfleet Bay Wildlife Sanctuary, run by Massachusetts Audubon, surrounds much of The Run, including part of Small Island (between The Run and Blackfish Creek). Between the sanctuary, seashore and other small parks and beaches, seventy percent of the town's area is protected.\nA small whaling community was founded on the land that is now Wellfleet Bay Wildlife Sanctuary, and was originally known as Silver Spring, after Silver Spring Brook. What remains of it is a marsh that was once its harbor, known as the Silver Spring Brook Marshes. This land is now protected by the Massachusetts Audubon Society in its Wellfleet Bay Sanctuary.\nClimate.\nThe town of Wellfleet has a mild summer humid continental climate (Dfb). The plant hardiness zone is 7a, with an average annual extreme minimum air temperature of 3.6\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221215.7\u00a0\u00b0C). The average seasonal (Nov\u2013Apr) snowfall total is around 30 in (76\u00a0cm). The average snowiest month is February, which corresponds to the annual peak in nor'easter activity.\nTransportation.\nU.S. Route 6 passes from north to south through the town. The town's commercial center lies west of the route, along the shores of the harbor. The route was straightened in the mid-20th century, and some maps still consider the \"old\" Route 6 to be a portion of Route 6A. The town has no rail or air service. The last train left the area in the 1930s, the train station was razed and the tracks were torn up through Provincetown. The old rail line was turned into a bicycle trail, named the Cod Rail Trail, which ends in South Wellfleet. The nearest municipal airports are in Chatham and Provincetown, both about from town; the nearest national and international service can be found at Logan International Airport in Boston.\nThere is currently limited bus service between Wellfleet and Hyannis, and from there on to Boston and Logan Airport, on the Plymouth &amp; Brockton Street Railway Company, a Plymouth-based bus service. The CCRTA, which runs between Hyannis and Provincetown, also makes stops in Wellfleet.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 2,749 people, 1,301 households, and 724 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 3,998 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.58% White, 0.95% African American, 0.29% Native American, 0.36% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.58% from other races, and 1.20% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.69% of the population.\nThere were 1,301 households, out of which 20.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.8% were married couples living together, 8.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.3% were non-families. Of all households, 34.8% were made up of individuals, and 13.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.11 and the average family size was 2.75.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 17.8% under the age of 18, 4.9% from 18 to 24, 23.3% from 25 to 44, 32.2% from 45 to 64, and 21.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 47 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $43,558, and the median income for a family was $50,990. Males had a median income of $38,100 versus $35,964 for females. The per capita income for the town was $25,712. About 5.7% of families and 7.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.7% of those under age 18 and 6.0% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nWellfleet is represented in the Massachusetts House of Representatives as a part of the Fourth Barnstable district, which includes (with the exception of Brewster) all the towns east and north of Harwich on the Cape. The town is represented in the Massachusetts Senate as a part of the Cape and Islands District, which includes all of Cape Cod, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket except the towns of Bourne, Falmouth, Sandwich and a portion of Barnstable. Wellfleet is patrolled by the Second (Yarmouth) Barracks of Troop D of the Massachusetts State Police.\nOn the national level, Wellfleet is a part of the 9th congressional district, currently represented by Bill Keating. The state's senior (Class I) member of the United States Senate, elected in 2012, is Elizabeth Warren. The junior (Class II) senator, elected on April 30, 2013, is Ed Markey.\nWellfleet is governed by the open town meeting form of government and a board of selectmen, who employ a town administrator to oversee day-to-day business. The town has its own police and fire departments, headquartered on Route 6 near the town center. There are two post offices, and both are also located along Route 6. The Wellfleet Public Library is located in the town center, in a former curtain and candle factory converted in 1989.\nEducation.\nWellfleet, Brewster, Truro, Provincetown, Eastham and Orleans make up the Nauset Regional School District. Each town operates its own elementary schools, with a regional middle school and high school accepting the students of all four towns. Wellfleet Elementary School is located just off Route 6 near the town center, and serves students from kindergarten to fifth grade. The Nauset Regional Middle School is located in Orleans, and the Nauset Regional High School is located in neighboring Eastham. There are no private schools in Wellfleet; high school students may, however, choose to attend Cape Cod Regional Technical High School in Harwich free of charge.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39059", "revid": "50732767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39059", "title": "European bison", "text": "Eurasian species of mammal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe European bison (pl.: bison) (Bison bonasus) or the European wood bison, also known as the wisent ( or ), the zubr (), or sometimes colloquially as the European buffalo, is a European species of bison. It is one of two extant species of bison, alongside the American bison. The European bison is the heaviest wild land animal in Europe, and individuals in the past may have been even larger than their modern-day descendants. During late antiquity and the Middle Ages, bison became extinct in much of Europe and Asia, surviving into the 20th century only in northern-central Europe and the northern Caucasus Mountains. During the early years of the 20th century, bison were hunted to extinction in the wild.\nBy the late 2010s, the species numbered several thousand and had been returned to the wild by captive breeding programmes. It is no longer in immediate danger of extinction, but remains absent from most of its historical range. It is not to be confused with the aurochs (\"Bos primigenius\"), the extinct ancestor of domestic cattle, with which it once co-existed. Besides humans, bison have few predators. In the 19th century, there were scattered reports of wolves, lions, tigers, and bears hunting bison. In the past, especially during the Middle Ages, humans commonly killed bison for their hide and meat. They used their horns to make drinking horns.\nEuropean bison were hunted to extinction in the wild in the early 20th century, with the last wild animals of the \"B. b. bonasus\" subspecies being shot in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest (on today's Belarus\u2013Poland border) in 1921. The last of the Caucasian wisent subspecies (\"B. b. caucasicus\") was shot in the northwestern Caucasus in 1927. The Carpathian wisent (\"B. b. hungarorum\") had been hunted to extinction by 1852. The Bia\u0142owie\u017ca or lowland European bison was kept alive in captivity, and has since been reintroduced into several countries in Europe. In 1996, the International Union for Conservation of Nature classified the European bison as an endangered species, no longer extinct in the wild. Its status has improved since then, changing to vulnerable and later to near-threatened.\nEuropean bison were first scientifically described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758. Some later descriptions treat the European bison as conspecific with the American bison. Three subspecies of the European bison existed in the recent past, but only one, the nominate subspecies (\"B. b. bonasus\"), survives today. The ancestry and relationships of the wisent to fossil bison species remain controversial and disputed. The European bison is one of the national animals of Poland and Belarus.\nEtymology.\nThe ancient Greeks and ancient Romans were the first to name bison as such; the 2nd-century AD authors Pausanias and Oppian referred to them as . Earlier, in the 4th century BC, during the Hellenistic period, Aristotle referred to bison as . He also noted that the Paeonians called it \u03bc\u03cc\u03bd\u03b1\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 (\"monapos\"). Claudius Aelianus, writing in the late 2nd or early 3rd centuries AD, also referred to the species as , and both Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History\" and Gaius Julius Solinus used and . Both Martial and Seneca the Younger mention (pl. ). Later Latin spellings of the term included , , and .\nJohn Trevisa is the earliest author cited by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" as using, in his 1398 translation of Bartholomeus Anglicus's \"De proprietatibus rerum\", the Latin plural in English, as \"bysontes\" ( and ). Philemon Holland's 1601 translation of Pliny's \"Natural History\", referred to \"bisontes\". The marginalia of the King James Version gives \"bison\" as a gloss for the Biblical animal called the \"pygarg\" mentioned in the \"Book of Deuteronomy\". Randle Cotgrave's 1611 French\u2013English dictionary notes that was already in use in French, and it may have influenced the adoption of the word into English; alternatively, it may have been borrowed directly from Latin. John Minsheu's 1617 lexicon, \"Ductor in linguas\", gives a definition for \"B\u00edson\" in .\nIn the 18th century the name of the European animal was applied to the closely related American bison (initially in Latin in 1693, by John Ray) and the Indian bison (the gaur, \"Bos gaurus\"). Historically, the word was also applied to Indian domestic cattle, the zebu (\"B. indicus\" or \"B. primigenius indicus\"). Because of the scarcity of the European bison, the word 'bison' was most familiar in relation to the American species.\nBy the time of the adoption of 'bison' into Early Modern English, the early medieval English name for the species had long been obsolete: the had descended from , and was related to . The word 'wisent' was then borrowed in the 19th century from modern [], itself related to , , , and to , , , and ultimately, like the Old English name, from Proto-Germanic.\nThe word 'zubr' in English is a borrowing from , previously also used to denote one race of the European bison. The Polish \"\u017cubr\" is similar to the word for the European bison in other modern Slavic languages, such as in Upper Sorbian; or in Ukrainian; (or ) or in Belarusian; and in Russian. The noun for the European bison in all living Slavonic tongues is thought to be derived from Proto-Slavic: \"*z\u01ebbr\u044a\" ~ \"*iz\u01ebbr\u044a\", which itself possibly comes from Proto-Indo-European: \"*\u01f5\u00f3mb\u02b0-\" for tooth, horn or peg. In the Baltic countries of Lithuania and Latvia, where some bison populations persist as well, the animal is known as (plural: \"stumbrai\") in Lithuanian and (plural: \"stumbri\") in Latvian, respectively.\nDescription.\nThe European bison is the heaviest surviving wild land animal in Europe. Similar to their American cousins, European bison were potentially larger historically than remnant descendants; modern animals are about in length, not counting a tail of , in height, and in weight for males, and about in body length without tails, in height, and in weight for females. At birth, calves are quite small, weighing between . In the free-ranging population of the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest of Belarus and Poland, body masses among adults (aged 6 and over) are on average in the cases of males, and among females. An occasional big bull European bison can weigh up to or more with old bull records of for lowland wisent and for Caucasian wisent.\nOn average, it is lighter in body mass, and yet slightly taller at the shoulder, than its American relatives, the wood bison (\"Bison bison athabascae\") and the plains bison (\"Bison bison bison\"). Compared to the American species, the wisent has shorter hair on the neck, head, and forequarters, but longer tail and horns. See differences from American bison.\nThe European bison makes a variety of vocalisations depending on its mood and behaviour, but when anxious, it emits a growl-like sound, known in Polish as \"chruczenie\" (). This sound can also be heard from wisent males during the mating season.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe similar skeletal morphology of the wisent with the steppe bison (\"Bison priscus\") which also formerly inhabited Europe complicates the understanding of the early evolution of the European bison. It is thought that European bison genetically diverged from steppe bison (as well as modern American bison, which are descended from steppe bison) at least 100,000 years ago. While nuclear DNA indicates that the two living bison species are each other's closest living relatives, the mitochondrial DNA of European bison is more closely related to that of aurochs and their domestic cattle descendants, which is suggested to be the result of either incomplete lineage sorting or ancient introgression.\nGenetic evidence indicates that European bison were present across Europe, from Spain (where a sedimentary ancient DNA record is known from El Miron Cave in Cantabriasupplemental material) to the Caucasus during the Last Glacial Period, where they co-existed alongside steppe bison. Cave paintings appear to distinguish between \"B. bonasus\" and \"B. priscus\". Late Pleistocene European bison belong to two mitochondrial genome lineages, which one study estimated to have split around 400,000 years ago, Bb1 (also known as Bison X, and sometimes controversially attributed to the species \"Bison schoetensacki,\" which is otherwise known from remains hundreds of thousands of years older) and Bb2. Bb1 has been found across Europe spanning from France to the Caucasus, while Bb2 was originally only found in the Caucasus before expanding westwards from around 14,000 years ago. Bb1 became extinct at the end of the Late Pleistocene, with all modern European bison belonging to the Bb2 lineage. At the end of the Last Glacial Period steppe bison became extinct in Europe, leaving European bison as the only bison species in the region.\nWhile some studies have estimated that modern European bison derive 10% of their ancestry from aurochs via interspecies gene flow, other authors have considered this a gross overestimate and based on flawed data, and not supported by the data from the full nuclear genome of the wisent, and that the actual contribution from aurochs/cattle around 2.4-3.2%, which is suggested to have occurred in the last 70,000 years.\nHistorically, the lowland European bison's range encompassed most of the lowlands of northern Europe, extending from the Massif Central to the Volga River and the Caucasus. It may have once lived in the Asiatic part of what is now the Russian Federation, reaching to Lake Baikal and Altai Mountains in east. The European bison is known in southern Sweden only between 9500 and 8700 BP, and in Denmark similarly is documented only from the Pre-Boreal. It is not recorded from the British Isles, nor from Italy or the Iberian Peninsula during the Holocene.\nAntiquity and Middle Ages.\nWithin mainland Europe, its range decreased as human populations expanded and cut down forests. They seemed to be common in Aristotle's period on Mount Mesapion (possibly the modern Ograzhden). In the same wider area Pausanias calling them \"Paeonian bulls\" and \"bison\", gives details on how they were captured alive; adding also the fact that a golden Paeonian bull head was offered to Delphi by the Paeonian king Dropion (3rd century BC) who lived in what is today Tikve\u0161. The last references (Oppian, Claudius Aelianus) to the animal in the transitional Mediterranean/Continental biogeographical region in the Balkans in the area of modern borderline between Greece, North Macedonia and Bulgaria date to the 3rd century AD. In northern Bulgaria, the wisent was thought to have survived until the 9th or 10th century AD, but more recent data summary shows that the species survived up to 13th - 14th century AD in eastern Bulgaria and up to 16th - 17th century AD in the northern part of the country. There is a possibility that the species' range extended to East Thrace during the 7th\u20138th century AD. Its population in Gaul was extinct in the 8th century AD. The species survived in the Ardennes and the Vosges Mountains until the 15th century. In the Early Middle Ages, the wisent apparently still occurred in the forest steppes east of the Urals, in the Altai Mountains, and seems to have reached Lake Baikal in the east. The northern boundary in the Holocene was probably around 60\u00b0N in Finland. European bison survived in a few natural forests in Europe, but their numbers dwindled.\nEarly Modern period.\nIn 1513 the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest, at this point one of the last areas on Earth where the European bison still roamed free, was transferred from the Troki Voivodeship of Lithuania to the Podlaskie Voivodeship, which after the Union of Lublin became part of the Polish Crown. In the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, at first European bison in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest were legally the property of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania and later belonged to the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. Polish-Lithuanian rulers took measures to protect the European bison, such as King Sigismund II Augustus who instituted the death penalty for poaching bison in Bia\u0142owie\u017ca in the mid-16th century. Wild European bison herds existed in the forest until the mid-17th century. In 1701, King Augustus II the Strong greatly increased protection over the forest; the first written sources mentioning the use of some forest meadows for the production of winter fodder for the bison come from this period. In the early 19th century, after the partitions of the Polish Commonwealth, the Russian tsars retained old Polish-Lithuanian laws protecting the European bison herd in Bia\u0142owie\u017ca. Despite these measures and others, the European bison population continued to decline over the following century, with only Bia\u0142owie\u017ca and Northern Caucasus populations surviving into the 20th century. The last European bison in Transylvania died in 1790.\nEarly 20th century.\nDuring World War I, occupying German troops killed 600 of the European bison in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest for sport, meat, hides and horns. A German scientist informed army officers that the European bison were facing imminent extinction, but at the very end of the war, retreating German soldiers shot all but nine animals. The last wild European bison in Poland was killed in 1921. The last wild European bison in the world was killed by poachers in 1927 in the western Caucasus. By that year, 48 remained, all held by zoos. The International Society for the Preservation of the Wisent was founded on 25 and 26 August 1923 in Berlin, following the example of the American Bison Society. The first chairman was Kurt Priemel, director of the Frankfurt Zoo, and among the members were experts like Hermann Pohle, Max Hilzheimer and Julius Riemer. The first goal of the society was to take stock of all living bison, in preparation for a breeding programme. Important members were the Polish Hunting Association and the Pozna\u0144 zoological gardens, as well as a number of Polish private individuals, who provided funds to acquire the first bison cows and bulls. The breeding book was published in the company's annual report from 1932. While Priemel aimed to grow the population slowly with pure conservation of the breeding line, Lutz Heck planned to grow the population faster by cross-breeding with American bison in a separate breeding project in Munich, in 1934.\nWorld War II.\nHeck gained the support of then \"Reichsj\u00e4germeister\" Hermann G\u00f6ring, who hoped for huntable big game. Heck promised his powerful supporter in writing: \"Since surplus bulls will soon be set, the hunting of the Wisent will be possible again in the foreseeable future\". G\u00f6ring himself took over the patronage of the German Professional Association of Wisent Breeders and Hegers, founded at Heck's suggestion. Kurt Priemel, who had since resigned as president of the International Society for the Preservation of the Wisent, warned in vain against \"manification\". Heck answered by announcing that G\u00f6ring would take action against Priemel if he continued to oppose his crossing plans. Priemel was then banned from publishing in relation to bison breeding, and the regular bookkeeper of the International Society, Erna Mohr, was forced to hand over the official register in 1937. Thus, the older society was effectively incorporated into the newly created Professional Association. After the Second World War, therefore, only the pure-blooded bison in the game park Springe near Hanover were recognised as part of the international herd book.\n1950s onwards.\nThe first two bison were released into the wild in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest in 1929. By 1964 more than 100 existed. Over the following decades, thanks to Polish and international efforts, the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest regained its position as the location with the world's largest population of European bison, including those in the wild. In 2005\u20132007, a wild bison nicknamed Pubal became renowned in southeast Poland due to his friendly interactions with humans and unwillingness to reintegrate into the wild. As of 2014 there were 1,434 wisents in Poland, out of which 1,212 were in free-range herds and 522 belonged to the wild population in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest. Compared to 2013, the total population in 2014 increased by 4.1%, while the free-ranging population increased by 6.5%. Bison from Poland have also been transported beyond the country's borders to boost the local populations of other countries, among them Bulgaria, Spain, Romania, Czechia and others. Poland has been described as the world's breeding centre of the European bison, where the bison population doubled between 1995 and 2017, reaching 2,269 by the end of 2019 \u2013 the total population has been increasing by around 15% to 18% yearly. In July 2022 a small population was released into woodland by Canterbury in Kent to trial their reintroduction into the UK. In May 2024, a small population was released in central Portugal. In 2012 and 2019 bisons were released in protected areas on Bornholm and Northern Jutland, Denmark.\nBehaviour and biology.\nSocial structure and territorial behaviours.\nThe European bison is a herd animal, which lives in both mixed and solely male groups. Mixed groups consist of adult females, calves, young aged 2\u20133 years, and young adult bulls. The average herd size is dependent on environmental factors, though on average, they number eight to 13 animals per herd. Herds consisting solely of bulls are smaller than mixed ones, containing two individuals on average. European bison herds are not family units. Different herds frequently interact, combine, and quickly split after exchanging individuals.\nBison social structure has been described by specialists as a matriarchy, as it is the cows of the herd that lead it, and decide where the entire group moves to graze. Although larger and heavier than the females, the oldest and most powerful male bulls are usually satellites that hang around the edges of the herd to protect the group. Bulls begin to serve a more active role in the herd when a danger to the group's safety appears, as well as during the mating season \u2013 when they compete with each other.\nTerritory held by bulls is correlated by age, with young bulls aged between five and six tending to form larger home ranges than older males. The European bison does not defend territory, and herd ranges tend to greatly overlap. Core areas of territory are usually sited near meadows and water sources.\nReproduction.\nThe rutting season occurs from August through to October. Bulls aged 4\u20136 years, though sexually mature, are prevented from mating by older bulls. Cows usually have a gestation period of 264 days, and typically give birth to one calf at a time.\nOn average, male calves weigh at birth, and females . Body size in males increases proportionately to the age of 6 years. While females have a higher increase in body mass in their first year, their growth rate is comparatively slower than that of males by the age of 3\u20135. Bulls reach sexual maturity at the age of two, while cows do so in their third year.\nEuropean bison have lived as long as 30 years in captivity, but in the wild their lifespan is usually between 18 and 24 years, with females living longer than males. Productive breeding years are between four and 20 years of age in females, and only between six and 12 years of age in males.\nDiet.\nEuropean bison feed predominantly on grasses, sedges, and herbs, although they also browse on shoots, twigs, bark, and leaves from trees and shrubs; in summer, an adult male can consume 32\u00a0kg of food in a day. Mosses, horsetails, fens, and fungi combined account for 0.1 to 0.7% of the rumen capacity, depending on the season. European bison in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest in Poland have traditionally been fed hay in the winter for centuries, and large herds may gather around this diet supplement. European bison need to drink every day, and in winter can be seen breaking ice with their heavy hooves.\nDifferences from American bison.\nAlthough superficially similar, a number of physical and behavioural differences are seen between the European bison and the American bison. The bison has 14 pairs of ribs, while the American bison has 15. \nAdult European bison are (on average) taller than American bison, and have longer legs. European bison tend to browse more, and graze less than their American relatives; to accommodate this their necks are set differently. Compared to the American bison, the nose of the European bison is set further forward than the forehead when the neck is in a neutral position.\nThe body of the wisent is less hairy, though its tail is hairier than that of the American species. The horns of the European bison point forward through the plane of their faces, making them more adept at fighting through the interlocking of horns in the same manner as domestic cattle, unlike the American bison, which favours charging. European bison are less tameable than the American ones, and breed with domestic cattle less readily.\nThe European bison is less shaggy, with a more lanky body shape.\nIn terms of behavioural capability, European bison runs slower and with less stamina yet jumps higher and longer than American bisons, showing signs of more developed adaptations into mountainous habitats.\nConservation.\nThe protection of the European bison has a long history; between the 15th and 18th centuries, those in the forest of Bia\u0142owie\u017ca were protected and their diet supplemented. Efforts to restore this species to the wild began in 1929, with the establishment of the Bison Restitution Centre at Bia\u0142owie\u017ca, Poland. Subsequently, in 1948, the Bison Breeding Centre was established within the Prioksko-Terrasny Biosphere Reserve.\nThe modern herds are managed as two separate lines \u2013 one consisting of only \"Bison bonasus bonasus\" (all descended from only seven animals) and one consisting of all 12 ancestors, including the one \"B. b. caucasicus\" bull. The latter is generally not considered a separate subspecies because they contain DNA from both \"B. b. bonasus\" and \"B. b. caucasicius\", although some scientists classify them as a new subspecies, \"B. b. montanus\". Only a limited amount of inbreeding depression from the population bottleneck has been found, having a small effect on skeletal growth in cows and a small rise in calf mortality. Genetic variability continues to shrink. From five initial bulls, all current European bison bulls have one of only two remaining Y chromosomes.\nReintroduction.\nBeginning in 1951, European bison have been reintroduced into the wild, including some areas where they were never found wild. Free-ranging herds are currently found in Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Bulgaria, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Latvia, Switzerland, Kyrgyzstan, Germany, and in forest preserves in the Western Caucasus. The Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Primeval Forest, an ancient woodland that straddles the border between Poland and Belarus, continues to have the largest free-living European bison population in the world with around 1000 wild bison counted in 2014. Herds have also been introduced in Moldova (2005), Spain (2010), Denmark (2012), the Czech Republic (2014), and Portugal (2024).\nReintroduction of bison to a 52 square km grasslands area in the \u021aarcu Mountains of Romania in 2014 was found to have resulted in an additional 54,000 tons of carbon draw-down annually.\nThe Wilder Blean project, headed up by the Wildwood Trust and Kent Wildlife Trust, introduced European bison to the UK for the first time in 6000 years (although there was an unsuccessful attempt in Scotland in 2011, and the European bison is not confirmed to be native to England while the British Isles once used to be inhabited by now-extinct Steppe bison and Pleistocene woodland bison). The herd of 3 females, with plans to also release a male in the following months, was set free in July 2022 within a 2,500-acre (10 square km) conservation area in West Blean and Thornden Woods, near Canterbury. Unknown to the rangers, one of the females was pregnant and gave birth to a calf in October 2022, marking the first wild bison born in the UK for the first time in millennia. In winter 2023, the matriarch of the herd gave birth to a male calf. A further two female calves were born at the site in October 2024. In January 2025, the project was recognised as one of The Big Issue's top Changemakers of 2025.\nAs below-mentioned, there are established herds in Spain, Portugal and Italy, however European bison has not been recorded naturally from the Italian Peninsulas, while these regions were once inhabited by Pleistocene woodland bison and Steppe bison.\nNumbers and distribution.\nNumbers by country.\nThe total worldwide population recorded in 2019 was around 7,500 \u2013 about half of this number being in Poland and Belarus, with over 25% of the global population located in Poland alone. For 2016, the number was 6,573 (including 4,472 free-ranging) and has been increasing. Some local populations are estimated as:\nDistribution.\nThe largest European bison herds \u2014 of both captive and wild populations \u2014 are still located in Poland and Belarus, the majority of which can be found in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest including the most numerous population of free-living European bison in the world with most of the animals living on the Polish side of the border. Poland remains the world's breeding centre for the wisent. In the years 1945 to 2014, from the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca National Park alone, 553 specimens were sent to most captive populations of the bison in Europe as well as all breeding sanctuaries for the species in Poland.\nSince 1983, a small reintroduced population lives in the Altai Mountains. This population suffers from inbreeding depression and needs the introduction of unrelated animals for \"blood refreshment\". In the long term, authorities hope to establish a population of about 1,000 animals in the area. One of the northernmost current populations of the European bison lives in Vologodskaya Oblast in the Northern Dvina valley at about 60\u00b0N. It survives without supplementary winter feeding. Another Russian population lives in the forests around the Desna River on the border between Russia and Ukraine. The north-easternmost population lives in Pleistocene Park south of Chersky in Siberia, a project to recreate the mammoth steppe ecosystem which began to be altered 10,000 years ago. Five wisents were introduced on 24 April 2011. The wisents were brought to the park from the Prioksko-Terrasny Nature Reserve near Moscow. The bison originated from a population in Denmark. Winter temperatures often drop below \u221250\u00a0\u00b0C. Four of the five bison have subsequently died due to problems acclimatizing to the low winter temperature.\nPlans are being made to reintroduce two herds in Germany and in the Netherlands in Oostvaardersplassen Nature Reserve in Flevoland as well as the Veluwe. In 2007, a bison pilot project in a fenced area was begun in Zuid-Kennemerland National Park in the Netherlands. Because of their limited genetic pool, they are considered highly vulnerable to illnesses such as foot-and-mouth disease. In March 2016, a herd was released in the Maashorst Nature Reserve in North Brabant. Zoos in 30 countries also have quite a few bison involved in captive-breeding programs.\nCultural significance.\nRepresentations of the European bison from different ages, across millennia of human society's existence, can be found throughout Eurasia in the form of drawings and rock carvings; one of the oldest and most famous instances of the latter can be found in the Cave of Altamira, present-day Spain, where cave art featuring the wisent from the Upper Paleolithic was discovered. The bison has also been represented in a wide range of art in human history, such as sculptures, paintings, photographs, glass art, and more. Sculptures of the wisent constructed in the 19th and 20th centuries continue to stand in a number of European cities; arguably the most notable of these are the designed by Mih\u00e1ly Zichy and the two bison sculptures in Kiel sculpted by August Gaul in 1910\u20131913. However, a number of other monuments to the animal also exist, such as those in Hajn\u00f3wka and Pszczyna or at the Kyiv Zoo entrance. Miko\u0142aj Hussowczyk, a poet writing in Latin about the Grand Duchy of Lithuania during the early 16th century, described the bison in a historically significant fictional work from 1523.\nThe European bison is considered one of the national animals of Poland and Belarus. Due to this and the fact that half of the worldwide European bison population can be found spread across these two countries, the wisent is still featured prominently in the heraldry of these neighbouring states (especially in the overlapping region of Eastern Poland and Western Belarus). Examples in Poland include the coats of arms of: the counties of Hajn\u00f3wka and Zambr\u00f3w, the towns Sok\u00f3\u0142ka and \u017bywiec, the villages Bia\u0142owie\u017ca and Narewka, as well as the coats of arms of the Pomian and Wieniawa families. Examples in Belarus include the Grodno and Brest voblasts, the town of Svislach, and others. The European bison can also be found on the coats of arms of places in neighbouring countries: Perloja in southern Lithuania, Lypovets and Zubrytsia in west-central Ukraine, and Zub\u0159\u00ed in east Czechia \u2013 as well as further outside the region, such as Kortezubi in the Basque Country, and Jabel in Germany.\nA flavoured vodka called \u017bubr\u00f3wka (), originating as a recipe of the szlachta of the Kingdom of Poland in the 14th century, has since 1928 been industrially produced as a brand in Poland. In the decades that followed, it became known as the \"world's best known Polish vodka\" and sparked the creation of a number of copy brands inspired by the original in Belarus, Russia, Germany, as well as other brands in Poland. The original Polish brand is known for placing a decorative blade of bison grass from the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest in each bottle of their product; both the plant's name in Polish and the vodka are named after \"\u017cubr\", the Polish name for the European bison. The bison also appears commercially as a symbol of a number of other Polish brands, such as the popular beer brand \u017bubr and on the logo of Poland's second largest bank, Bank Pekao S.A.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article incorporates text from the ARKive fact-file \"\" under the and the ."}
{"id": "39060", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39060", "title": "Wellfleet oyster", "text": ""}
{"id": "39061", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39061", "title": "Argumentum ad baculum", "text": "Threat of force to make a conclusion accepted\nArgumentum ad baculum (Latin for \"argument to the cudgel\" or \"appeal to the stick\") is a type of argument made when one attempts to appeal to force to bring about the acceptance of a conclusion. One participates in \"argumentum ad baculum\" when one emphasizes the negative consequences of holding the contrary position, regardless of the contrary position's truth value\u2014particularly when the argument-maker himself causes (or threatens to cause) those negative consequences. It is a special case of the appeal to consequences. Argumentation scholar Douglas Walton states that many texts on the matter \"take it for granted that ad baculum arguments are inherently fallacious\" and continued that \"some of the textbooks, especially some of the more interesting accounts, suggest that this type of argument may not always be fallacious, and cite instances where appealing to force or threat or fear could be reasonable in a given context. The issue raised by these provocative accounts is how one should distinguish between the fallacious and the nonfallacious use of the argumentum ad baculum\".\nExamples.\nThe \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" gives this example of \"argumentum ad baculum\":\n If you don't join our demonstration against the expansion of the park, we will evict you from your apartment;\n So, you should join our demonstration against the expansion of the park.\nThe phrase has also been used to describe the 1856 caning of Charles Sumner, an abolitionist Senator, by one of his pro-slavery opponents, Preston Brooks, on the floor of the United States Senate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39062", "revid": "271115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39062", "title": "French and Indian War", "text": "North American theater of the Seven Years' War\nThe French and Indian War, 1754 to 1763, was a conflict in North America between Great Britain and France, along with their respective Native American allies. Historians generally consider it part of the global conflict 1756 to 1763 Seven Years' War, although in the United States it is often viewed as a distinct conflict unassociated with any larger European war.\nAlthough Britain and France were officially at peace following the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, tensions over trade continued in North America, which culminated in a dispute over the Forks of the Ohio, and the related French Fort Duquesne which controlled them. In May 1754, this led to the Battle of Jumonville Glen, when Virginia militia led by George Washington ambushed a French patrol.\nIn 1755, Edward Braddock, the new Commander-in-Chief, North America, planned a four-way attack on the French. None succeeded, while the Braddock Expedition ended in disaster at the Battle of the Monongahela on July 9, 1755, with Braddock himself dying of his wounds a few days later. From 1755 to 1757, further British operations in Pennsylvania and New York failed, but were offset by the British capture of Fort Beaus\u00e9jour on the border between British Nova Scotia and French Acadia. Over the next nine years, French settlers were expelled and replaced by those from New England.\nThe Seven Years' War began in 1756, and a number of disastrous campaigns in 1757, including the Louisbourg Expedition (1757) and Siege of Fort William Henry led to the fall of the British government. The new Prime Minister, William Pitt significantly increased British military resources in the colonies when France was struggling to support their limited forces in New France, preferring to concentrate their forces in Europe. Between 1758 and 1760, the British launched a campaign to capture French Canada, taking Quebec in 1759, then Montreal the following year. This largely ended fighting in North America. \nIn accordance with the Treaty of Paris (1763), France ceded its Canadian possessions to Britain, along with its claim to territories east of the Mississippi River. France also gave Spain French Louisiana west of the Mississippi River in compensation for their loss of Spanish Florida to Britain. The French presence in North America was reduced to the islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, confirming Britain's position as the dominant colonial power.\nNomenclature.\nIn British America, wars were often named after the sitting British monarch, such as King William's War or Queen Anne's War. There had already been a King George's War in the 1740s during the reign of King George II, so British colonists named this conflict after their opponents, and it became known as the \"French and Indian War\". This continues as the standard name for the war in the United States, although indigenous peoples fought on both sides of the conflict. It also led into the Seven Years' War overseas, a much larger conflict between France and Great Britain that did not involve the American colonies; some historians make a connection between the French and Indian War and the Seven Years' War overseas, but most residents of the United States consider them as two separate conflicts\u2014only one of which involved the American colonies, and American historians generally use the traditional name. Less frequently used names for the war include the \"Fourth Intercolonial War\" and the \"Great War for the Empire\".\nIn Europe, the French and Indian War is conflated into the Seven Years' War and not given a separate name. \"Seven Years\" refers to events in Europe, from the official declaration of war in 1756\u2014two years after the French and Indian War had started\u2014to the signing of the peace treaty in 1763. The French and Indian War in America, by contrast, was largely concluded in six years from the Battle of Jumonville Glen in 1754 to the capture of Montreal in 1760. Canadians conflate both the European and American conflicts into the Seven Years' War (). French Canadians also use the term \"War of Conquest\" (), since it is the war in which New France was conquered by the British and became part of the British Empire. In Quebec, this term was promoted by popular historians Jacques Lacoursi\u00e8re and Denis Vaugeois, who borrowed from the ideas of Maurice S\u00e9guin in considering this war as a dramatic tipping point of French Canadian identity and nationhood.\nBackground.\nAt this time, North America east of the Mississippi River was largely claimed by either Great Britain or France. Large areas had no colonial settlements. The French population numbered about 75,000 and was heavily concentrated along the St. Lawrence River valley, with some also in Acadia (present-day New Brunswick and parts of Nova Scotia), including \u00cele Royale (Cape Breton Island). Fewer lived in New Orleans; Biloxi, Mississippi; Mobile, Alabama; and small settlements in the Illinois Country, hugging the east side of the Mississippi River and its tributaries. French fur traders and trappers traveled throughout the St. Lawrence and Mississippi watersheds, did business with local Indian tribes, and often married Indian women. Traders married daughters of chiefs, creating high-ranking unions.\nBritish settlers outnumbered the French 20 to 1 with a population of about 1.5\u00a0million ranged along the Atlantic coast of the continent from Nova Scotia and the Colony of Newfoundland in the north to the Province of Georgia in the south. Many of the older colonies' land claims extended arbitrarily far to the west, as the extent of the continent was unknown at the time when their provincial charters were granted. Their population centers were along the coast, but the settlements were growing into the interior. The British captured Nova Scotia from France in 1713, which still had a significant French-speaking population. Britain also claimed Rupert's Land where the Hudson's Bay Company traded for furs with local Indian tribes.\nBetween the French and British colonists, large areas were dominated by Indian tribes. To the north, the Mi'kmaq and the Abenakis were engaged in Father Le Loutre's War and still held sway in parts of Nova Scotia, Acadia, and the eastern portions of the province of Canada, as well as much of Maine. The Iroquois Confederation dominated much of upstate New York and the Ohio Country, although Ohio also included Algonquian-speaking populations of Delaware and Shawnee, as well as Iroquoian-speaking Mingos. These tribes were formally under Iroquois rule and were limited by them in their authority to make agreements. The Iroquois Confederation initially held a stance of neutrality to ensure continued trade with both French and British. Though maintaining this stance proved difficult as the Iroquois Confederation tribes sided and supported French or British causes depending on which side provided the most beneficial trade.\nThe Southeast interior was dominated by Siouan-speaking Catawbas, Muskogee-speaking Creeks and Choctaw, and the Iroquoian-speaking Cherokee tribes. When war broke out, the French colonists used their trading connections to recruit fighters from tribes in western portions of the Great Lakes region, which was not directly subject to the conflict between the French and British; these included the Hurons, Mississaugas, Ojibwas, Winnebagos, and Potawatomi.\nThe British colonists were supported in the war by the Iroquois Six Nations and also by the Cherokees, until differences sparked the Anglo-Cherokee War in 1758. In 1758, the Province of Pennsylvania successfully negotiated the Treaty of Easton in which a number of tribes in the Ohio Country promised neutrality in exchange for land concessions and other considerations. Most of the other northern tribes sided with the French, their primary trading partner and supplier of arms. The Creeks and Cherokees were subject to diplomatic efforts by both the French and British to gain either their support or neutrality in the conflict.\nAt this time, Spain claimed only the province of Florida in eastern America. It controlled Cuba and other territories in the West Indies that became military objectives in the Seven Years' War. Florida's European population was a few hundred, concentrated in St. Augustine.\nThere were no French regular army troops stationed in America at the onset of war. New France was defended by about 3,000 troupes de la marine, companies of colonial regulars (some of whom had significant woodland combat experience). The colonial government recruited militia support when needed. The British had few troops. Most of the British colonies mustered local militia companies to deal with Indian threats, generally ill trained and available only for short periods, but they did not have any standing forces. Virginia, by contrast, had a large frontier with several companies of British regulars.\nWhen hostilities began, the British colonial governments preferred operating independently of one another and of the government in London. This situation complicated negotiations with Indian tribes, whose territories often encompassed land claimed by multiple colonies. As the war progressed, the leaders of the British Army establishment tried to impose constraints and demands on the colonial administrations.\nC\u00e9loron's expedition.\nNew France's Governor-General Roland-Michel Barrin de La Galissoni\u00e8re was concerned about the incursion and expanding influence in the Ohio Country of British colonial traders such as George Croghan. In June 1747, he ordered Pierre-Joseph C\u00e9loron to lead a military expedition through the area. Its objectives were:\nC\u00e9loron's expedition force consisted of about 200 Troupes de la marine and 30 Indians, and they covered about between June and November 1749. They went up the St. Lawrence, continued along the northern shore of Lake Ontario, crossed the portage at Niagara, and followed the southern shore of Lake Erie. At the Chautauqua Portage near Barcelona, New York, the expedition moved inland to the Allegheny River, which it followed to the site of Pittsburgh. There C\u00e9loron buried lead plates engraved with the French claim to the Ohio Country. Whenever he encountered British colonial merchants or fur-traders, he informed them of the French claims on the territory and told them to leave.\nC\u00e9loron's expedition arrived at Logstown where the Indians in the area informed him that they owned the Ohio Country and that they would trade with the British colonists regardless of the French. He continued south until his expedition reached the confluence of the Ohio and the Miami rivers, which lay just south of the village of Pickawillany, the home of the Miami chief known as \"Old Briton\". C\u00e9loron threatened Old Briton with severe consequences if he continued to trade with British colonists, but Old Briton ignored the warning. C\u00e9loron returned disappointedly to Montreal in November 1749.\nC\u00e9loron wrote an extensively detailed report. \"All I can say is that the Natives of these localities are very badly disposed towards the French,\" he wrote, \"and are entirely devoted to the English. I don't know in what way they could be brought back.\" Even before his return to Montreal, reports on the situation in the Ohio Country were making their way to London and Paris, each side proposing that action be taken. Massachusetts governor William Shirley was particularly forceful, stating that British colonists would not be safe as long as the French were present.\nNegotiations.\nThe War of the Austrian Succession ended in 1748 with the signing of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, which was primarily focused on resolving issues in Europe. The issues of conflicting territorial claims between British and French colonies were turned over to a commission, but it reached no decision. Frontier areas were claimed by both sides, from Nova Scotia and Acadia in the north to the Ohio Country in the south. The disputes also extended into the Atlantic Ocean, where both powers wanted access to the rich fisheries of the Grand Banks off Newfoundland.\nIn 1749, the British government gave land to the Ohio Company of Virginia for the purpose of developing trade and settlements in the Ohio Country. The grant required that it settle 100 families in the territory and construct a fort for their protection. But the territory was also claimed by Pennsylvania, and both colonies began pushing for action to improve their respective claims. In 1750, Christopher Gist explored the Ohio territory, acting on behalf of both Virginia and the company, and he opened negotiations with the Indian tribes at Logstown. He completed the 1752 Treaty of Logstown in which the local Indians agreed to terms through their \"Half-King\" Tanacharison and an Iroquois representative. These terms included permission to build a strong house at the mouth of the Monongahela River on the modern site of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.\nEscalation in Ohio Country.\nGovernor-General of New France Marquis de la Jonqui\u00e8re died on March 17, 1752, and he was temporarily replaced by Charles le Moyne de Longueuil. His permanent replacement was to be the Marquis Duquesne, but he did not arrive in New France until 1752 to take over the post. The continuing British activity in the Ohio territories prompted Longueuil to dispatch another expedition to the area under the command of Charles Michel de Langlade, an officer in the Troupes de la Marine. Langlade was given 300 men, including French-Canadians and warriors of the Ottawa tribe. His objective was to punish the Miami people of Pickawillany for not following C\u00e9loron's orders to cease trading with the British. On June 21, the French war party attacked the trading center at Pickawillany, capturing three traders and killing 14 Miami Indians, including Old Briton. He was reportedly ritually cannibalized by some Indians in the expedition party.\nConstruction of French fortifications.\nIn the spring of 1753, Paul Marin de la Malgue was given command of a 2,000-man force of Troupes de la Marine and Indians. His orders were to protect the King's land in the Ohio Valley from the British. Marin followed the route that C\u00e9loron had mapped out four years earlier. C\u00e9loron, however, had limited the record of French claims to the burial of lead plates, whereas Marin constructed and garrisoned forts. He first constructed Fort Presque Isle on Lake Erie's south shore near Erie, Pennsylvania, and he had a road built to the headwaters of LeBoeuf Creek. He then constructed a second fort at Fort Le Boeuf in Waterford, Pennsylvania, designed to guard the headwaters of LeBoeuf Creek. As he moved south, he drove off or captured British traders, alarming both the British and the Iroquois. Tanaghrisson was a chief of the Mingo Indians, who were remnants of Iroquois and other tribes who had been driven west by colonial expansion. He intensely disliked the French whom he accused of killing and eating his father. He traveled to Fort Le Boeuf and threatened the French with military action, which Marin contemptuously dismissed.\nThe Iroquois sent runners to the manor of William Johnson in upstate New York, who was the British Superintendent for Indian Affairs in the New York region and beyond. Johnson was known to the Iroquois as \"Warraghiggey\", meaning \"he who does great things.\" He spoke their languages and had become a respected honorary member of the Iroquois Confederacy in the area, and he was made a colonel of the Iroquois in 1746; he was later commissioned as a colonel of the Western New York Militia.\nThe Indian representatives and Johnson met with Governor George Clinton and officials from some of the other American colonies at Albany, New York. Mohawk Chief Hendrick was the speaker of their tribal council, and he insisted that the British abide by their obligations and block French expansion. Clinton did not respond to his satisfaction, and Hendrick said that the \"Covenant Chain\" was broken, a long-standing friendly relationship between the Iroquois Confederacy and the British Crown.\nVirginia's response.\nGovernor Robert Dinwiddie of Virginia was an investor in the Ohio Company, which stood to lose money if the French held their claim. He ordered 21-year-old Major George Washington (whose brother was another Ohio Company investor) of the Virginia Regiment to warn the French to leave Virginia territory in October 1753. Washington left with a small party, including Jacob Van Braam as an interpreter, Christopher Gist (a company surveyor working in the area), Guyasuta (a Mingo warrior), Jeskakake (a Cayuga chief), Kaghswaghtaniunt (a Seneca leader), and Tanaghrisson. On December 12, Washington and his men reached Fort Le Boeuf.\nJacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre succeeded Marin as commander of the French forces after Marin died on October 29, and he invited Washington to dine with him. Over dinner, Washington presented Saint-Pierre with the letter from Dinwiddie demanding an immediate French withdrawal from the Ohio Country. Saint-Pierre said, \"As to the Summons you send me to retire, I do not think myself obliged to obey it.\" He told Washington that France's claim to the region was superior to that of the British, since Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle had explored the Ohio Country nearly a century earlier.\nWashington's party left Fort Le Boeuf early on December 16 and arrived in Williamsburg on January 16, 1754. He stated in his report, \"The French had swept south\", detailing the steps which they had taken to fortify the area, and their intention to fortify the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers.\nCourse of war.\nEven before Washington returned, Dinwiddie had sent a company of 40 men under William Trent to that point where they began construction of a small stockaded fort in the early months of 1754. Governor Duquesne sent additional French forces under Claude-Pierre P\u00e9caudy de Contrec\u0153ur to relieve Saint-Pierre during the same period, and Contrec\u0153ur led 500 men south from Fort Venango on April 5, 1754. These forces arrived at the fort on April 16, but Contrec\u0153ur generously allowed Trent's small company to withdraw. He purchased their construction tools to continue building what became Fort Duquesne.\nEarly engagements.\nDinwiddie had ordered Washington to lead a larger force to assist Trent in his work, and Washington learned of Trent's retreat while he was en route. Mingo sachem Tanaghrisson had promised support to the British, so Washington continued toward Fort Duquesne and met with him. He then learned of a French scouting party in the area from a warrior sent by Tanaghrisson, so he added Tanaghrisson's dozen Mingo warriors to his own party. Washington's combined force of 52 ambushed 40 \"Canadiens\" (French colonists of New France) on the morning of May 28 in what became known as the Battle of Jumonville Glen. They killed many of the Canadians, including their commanding officer Joseph Coulon de Jumonville, whose head was reportedly split open by Tanaghrisson with a tomahawk. Historian Fred Anderson suggests that Tanaghrisson was acting to gain the support of the British and to regain authority over his own people. They had been inclined to support the French, with whom they had long trading relationships. One of Tanaghrisson's men told Contrecoeur that Jumonville had been killed by British musket fire. Historians generally consider the Battle of Jumonville Glen as the opening battle of the French and Indian War in North America, and the start of hostilities in the Ohio valley.\nFollowing the battle, Washington pulled back several miles and established Fort Necessity, which the Canadians attacked under the command of Jumonville's brother at the Battle of Fort Necessity on July 3. Washington surrendered and negotiated a withdrawal under arms. One of his men reported that the Canadian force was accompanied by Shawnee, Delaware, and Mingo warriors\u2014just those whom Tanaghrisson was seeking to influence.\nNews of the two battles reached England in August. After several months of negotiations, the government of the Duke of Newcastle decided to send an army expedition the following year to dislodge the French. They chose Major General Edward Braddock to lead the expedition. Word of the British military plans leaked to France well before Braddock's departure for North America. In response, King Louis XV dispatched six regiments to New France under the command of Baron Dieskau in 1755. The British sent out their fleet in February 1755, intending to blockade French ports, but the French fleet had already sailed. Admiral Edward Hawke detached a fast squadron to North America in an attempt to intercept them.\nIn a second British action, Admiral Edward Boscawen fired on the French ship \"Alcide\" on June 8, 1755, capturing her and two troop ships. The British harassed French shipping throughout 1755, seizing ships and capturing seamen. These actions contributed to the eventual formal declarations of war in spring 1756.\nAn early important political response to the opening of hostilities was the convening of the Albany Congress in June and July, 1754. The goal of the congress was to formalize a unified front in trade and negotiations with the Indians, since the allegiance of the various tribes and nations was seen to be pivotal in the war that was unfolding. The plan that the delegates agreed to was neither ratified by the colonial legislatures nor approved by the Crown. Nevertheless, the format of the congress and many specifics of the plan became the prototype for confederation during the War of Independence.\nBritish campaigns, 1755.\nThe British formed an aggressive plan of operations for 1755. General Braddock was to lead the expedition to Fort Duquesne, while Massachusetts governor William Shirley was given the task of fortifying Fort Oswego and attacking Fort Niagara. Sir William Johnson was to capture Fort St. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric at Crown Point, New York, and Lieutenant Colonel Robert Monckton was to capture Fort Beaus\u00e9jour to the east on the frontier between Nova Scotia and Acadia.\nBraddock led about 1,500 army troops and provincial militia on the Braddock expedition in June 1755 to take Fort Duquesne, with George Washington as one of his aides. The expedition was a disaster. It was attacked by French regulars, Canadian Militiamen, and Indian warriors ambushing them from hiding places up in trees and behind logs, and Braddock called for a retreat. He was killed and approximately 1,000 British soldiers were killed or injured. The remaining 500 British troops retreated to Virginia, led by Washington. Washington and Thomas Gage played key roles in organizing the retreat\u2014two future opponents in the American Revolutionary War.\nThe British government initiated a plan to increase their military capability in preparation for war following news of Braddock's defeat and the start of parliament's session in November 1755. Among the early legislative measures were the Recruiting Act 1756, the Commissions to Foreign Protestants Act 1756 for the Royal American Regiment, the Navigation Act 1756, and the Continuance of Laws Act 1756. England passed the Naval Prize Act 1756 following the proclamation of war on May 17 to allow the capture of ships and establish privateering.\nThe French acquired a copy of the British war plans, including the activities of Shirley and Johnson. Shirley's efforts to fortify Oswego were bogged down in logistical difficulties, exacerbated by his inexperience in managing large expeditions. In conjunction, he was made aware that the French were massing for an attack on Fort Oswego in his absence when he planned to attack Fort Niagara. As a response, he left garrisons at Oswego, Fort Bull, and Fort Williams, the last two located on the Oneida Carry between the Mohawk River and Wood Creek at Rome, New York. Supplies were cached at Fort Bull for use in the projected attack on Niagara.\nJohnson's expedition was better organized than Shirley's, which was noticed by New France's governor the Marquis de Vaudreuil. Vaudreuil had been concerned about the extended supply line to the forts on the Ohio, and he had sent Baron Dieskau to lead the defenses at Frontenac against Shirley's expected attack. Vaudreuil saw Johnson as the larger threat and sent Dieskau to Fort St. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric to meet that threat. Dieskau planned to attack the British encampment at Fort Edward at the upper end of navigation on the Hudson River, but Johnson had strongly fortified it, and Dieskau's Indian support was reluctant to attack. The two forces finally met in the bloody Battle of Lake George between Fort Edward and Fort William Henry. The battle ended inconclusively, with both sides withdrawing from the field. Johnson's advance stopped at Fort William Henry, and the French withdrew to Ticonderoga Point, where they began the construction of Fort Carillon (later renamed Fort Ticonderoga after the British captured it in 1759).\nColonel Monckton captured Fort Beaus\u00e9jour in June 1755 in the sole British success that year, cutting off the French Fortress Louisbourg from land-based reinforcements. To cut vital supplies to Louisbourg, Nova Scotia's Governor Charles Lawrence ordered the deportation of the French-speaking Acadian population from the area. Monckton's forces, including companies of Rogers' Rangers, forcibly removed thousands of Acadians, chasing down many who resisted and sometimes committing atrocities. Cutting off supplies to Louisbourg led to its demise. The Acadian resistance was sometimes quite stiff, in concert with Indian allies including the Mi'kmaq, with ongoing frontier raids against Dartmouth and Lunenburg, among others. The only clashes of any size were at Petitcodiac in 1755 and at Bloody Creek near Annapolis Royal in 1757, other than the campaigns to expel the Acadians ranging around the Bay of Fundy, on the Petitcodiac and St. John rivers, and \u00cele Saint-Jean.\nFrench victories, 1756\u20131757.\nFollowing the death of Braddock, William Shirley assumed command of British forces in North America, and he laid out his plans for 1756 at a meeting in Albany in December 1755. He proposed renewing the efforts to capture Niagara, Crown Point, and Duquesne, with attacks on Fort Frontenac on the north shore of Lake Ontario and an expedition through the wilderness of the Maine district and down the Chaudi\u00e8re River to attack the city of Quebec. His plan, however, got bogged down by disagreements and disputes with others, including William Johnson and New York's Governor Sir Charles Hardy, and consequently gained little support.\nNewcastle replaced him in January 1756 with Lord Loudoun, with Major General James Abercrombie as his second in command. Neither of these men had as much campaign experience as the trio of officers whom France sent to North America. French regular army reinforcements arrived in New France in May 1756, led by Major General Louis-Joseph de Montcalm and seconded by the Chevalier de L\u00e9vis and Colonel Fran\u00e7ois-Charles de Bourlamaque, all experienced veterans from the War of the Austrian Succession. On May 17, 1756, Britain formally declared war on France, which expanded the war into Europe and came to be known as the Seven Years' War.\nGovernor Vaudreuil had ambitions to become the French commander in chief, in addition to his role as governor, and he acted during the winter of 1756 before those reinforcements arrived. Scouts had reported the weakness of the British supply chain, so he ordered an attack against the forts which Shirley had erected at the Oneida Carry. In the Battle of Fort Bull, French forces destroyed the fort and large quantities of supplies, including 45,000 pounds of gunpowder. They set back any British hopes for campaigns on Lake Ontario and endangered the Oswego garrison, already short on supplies. French forces in the Ohio valley also continued to intrigue with Indians throughout the area, encouraging them to raid frontier settlements. This led to ongoing alarms along the western frontiers, with streams of refugees returning east to get away from the action.\nThe new British command was not in place until July. Abercrombie arrived in Albany but refused to take any significant actions until Loudoun approved them, and Montcalm took bold action against his inertia. He built on Vaudreuil's work harassing the Oswego garrison and executed a strategic feint by moving his headquarters to Ticonderoga, as if to presage another attack along Lake George. With Abercrombie pinned down at Albany, Montcalm slipped away and led the successful attack on Oswego in August. In the aftermath, Montcalm and the Indians under his command disagreed about the disposition of prisoners' personal effects. The Europeans did not consider them prizes and prevented the Indians from stripping the prisoners of their valuables, which angered the Indians.\nLoudoun was a capable administrator but a cautious field commander, and he planned one major operation for 1757: an attack on New France's capital of Quebec. He left a sizable force at Fort William Henry to distract Montcalm and began organizing for the expedition to Quebec. He was then ordered to attack Louisbourg first by William Pitt, the Secretary of State responsible for the colonies. The expedition was beset by delays of all kinds but was finally ready to sail from Halifax, Nova Scotia, in early August. In the meantime, French ships had escaped the British blockade of the French coast, and a fleet awaited Loudoun at Louisbourg which outnumbered the British fleet. Faced with this strength, Loudoun returned to New York amid news that a massacre had occurred at Fort William Henry.\nFrench irregular forces (Canadian scouts and Indians) harassed Fort William Henry throughout the first half of 1757. In January, they ambushed British rangers near Ticonderoga. In February, they launched a raid against the position across the frozen Lake George, destroying storehouses and buildings outside the main fortification. In early August, Montcalm and 7,000 troops besieged the fort, which capitulated with an agreement to withdraw under parole. When the withdrawal began, some of Montcalm's Indian allies attacked the British column because they were angry about the lost opportunity for loot, killing and capturing several hundred men, women, children, and slaves. The aftermath of the siege may have contributed to the transmission of smallpox into remote Indian populations, as some Indians were reported to have traveled from beyond the Mississippi to participate in the campaign and returned afterward. Modern writer William Nester believes that the Indians might have been exposed to European carriers, although no proof exists.\nBritish conquest, 1758\u20131760.\nVaudreuil and Montcalm were minimally resupplied in 1758, as the British blockade of the French coastline limited French shipping. The situation in New France was further exacerbated by a poor harvest in 1757, a difficult winter, and the allegedly corrupt machinations of Fran\u00e7ois Bigot, the intendant of the territory. His schemes to supply the colony inflated prices and were believed by Montcalm to line his pockets and those of his associates. A massive outbreak of smallpox among western Indian tribes led many of them to stay away from trading in 1758. The disease probably spread through the crowded conditions at William Henry after the battle; yet the Indians blamed the French for bringing \"bad medicine\" as well as denying them prizes at Fort William Henry.\nMontcalm focused his meager resources on the defense of the St. Lawrence, with primary defenses at Carillon, Quebec, and Louisbourg, while Vaudreuil argued unsuccessfully for a continuation of the raiding tactics that had worked quite effectively in previous years. The British failures in North America combined with other failures in the European theater and led to Newcastle's fall from power along with the Duke of Cumberland, his principal military advisor.\nNewcastle and Pitt joined in an uneasy coalition in which Pitt dominated the military planning. He embarked on a plan for the 1758 campaign that was largely developed by Loudoun. He had been replaced by Abercrombie as commander in chief after the failures of 1757. Pitt's plan called for three major offensive actions involving large numbers of regular troops supported by the provincial militias, aimed at capturing the heartlands of New France. Two of the expeditions were successful, with Fort Duquesne and Louisbourg falling to sizable British forces.\n1758.\nThe Forbes Expedition was a British campaign in September\u2013October 1758, with 6,000 troops led by General John Forbes sent to drive out the French from the contested Ohio Country. The French withdrew from Fort Duquesne and left the British in control of the Ohio River Valley. The great French fortress at Louisbourg in Nova Scotia was captured after a siege.\nThe third invasion was stopped with the improbable French victory in the Battle of Carillon, in which 3,600 Frenchmen defeated Abercrombie's force of 18,000 regulars, militia, and Indian allies outside the fort which the French called Carillon and the British called Ticonderoga. Abercrombie saved something from the disaster when he sent John Bradstreet on an expedition that successfully destroyed Fort Frontenac, including caches of supplies destined for New France's western forts and furs destined for Europe. Abercrombie was recalled and replaced by Jeffery Amherst, victor at Louisbourg.\nThe French had generally poor results in 1758 in most theaters of the war. The new foreign minister was the duc de Choiseul, and he decided to focus on an invasion of Britain to draw British resources away from North America and the European mainland. The invasion failed both militarily and politically, as Pitt again planned significant campaigns against New France and sent funds to Britain's mainland ally of Prussia, while the French Navy failed in the 1759 naval battles at Lagos and Quiberon Bay. In one piece of good fortune, some French supply ships did manage to depart France and elude the British blockade of the French coast.\n1759\u20131760.\nThe British proceeded to wage a campaign in the northwest frontier of Canada in an effort to cut off the French frontier forts to the west and south. They captured Ticonderoga and Fort Niagara, and they defeated the French at the Thousand Islands in the summer of 1759. In September 1759, James Wolfe defeated Montcalm in the Battle of the Plains of Abraham which claimed the lives of both commanders. After the battle, the French capitulated the city to the British.\nIn April 1760, Fran\u00e7ois Gaston de L\u00e9vis led French forces to launch an attack to retake Quebec. Although he won the Battle of Sainte-Foy, L\u00e9vis' subsequent siege of Quebec ended in defeat when British ships arrived to relieve the garrison. After L\u00e9vis had retreated he was given another blow when a British naval victory at Restigouche brought the loss of French ships meant to resupply his army. In July Jeffrey Amherst then led British forces numbering around 18,000 men in a three pronged attack on Montreal. After eliminating French positions along the way all three forces met up and surrounded Montreal in September. Many Canadians deserted or surrendered their arms to British forces while the Native allies of the French sought peace and neutrality. De L\u00e9vis and the Marquis de Vaudreuil reluctantly signed the Articles of Capitulation of Montreal on September 8 which effectively completed the British conquest of New France.\nSporadic engagements, 1760\u20131763.\nMost of the fighting ended in America in 1760, although it continued in Europe between France and Britain. The notable exception was the French seizure of St. John's, Newfoundland. General Amherst heard of this surprise action and immediately dispatched troops under his nephew William Amherst, who regained control of Newfoundland after the Battle of Signal Hill in September 1762. Many of the British troops who were stationed in America were reassigned to participate in further British actions in the West Indies, including the capture of Spanish Havana when Spain belatedly entered the conflict on the side of France, and a British expedition against French Martinique in 1762 led by Major General Robert Monckton.\nPeace.\nGovernor Vaudreuil in Montreal negotiated a capitulation with General Amherst in September 1760. Amherst granted his requests that any French residents who chose to remain in the colony would be given freedom to continue worshiping in their Roman Catholic tradition, to own property, and to remain undisturbed in their homes. The British provided medical treatment for the sick and wounded French soldiers, and French regular troops were returned to France aboard British ships with an agreement that they were not to serve again in the present war.\nGeneral Amherst also oversaw the transfer of French fortifications to British control on the western frontier. The policies which he introduced in those lands disturbed large numbers of Natives and contributed to the outbreak of Pontiac's War in 1763, in which a series of Native attacks on frontier forts occurred, such as that on Fort Miami which effectively brought a nearly half-century long period of European garrisoning at Kekionga to an end. The frontier settlements required the continued deployment of British forces, and the conflict was not fully concluded until 1766.\nBeginning from the 1750s and lasting until the 1760s, a smallpox outbreak devastated several Native communities throughout the American Midwest. The outbreak was brought on in part by victorious Native warriors who had fought on the side of the French bringing home prizes of war which had been infected with the disease; the Ojibwe, Odawa and Potawatomi peoples were most affected by the outbreak. An oral account from Odawa tribal leader and historian Andrew Blackbird claimed that the outbreak had \"entirely depopulated and laid waste\" to Waganagisi, a large Odawa settlement.\nThe war in North America, along with the global Seven Years' War, officially ended with the signing of the Treaty of Paris on 10 February 1763, by the kingdoms of Great Britain, France and Spain, with Portugal in agreement. The British offered France the choice of surrendering either its continental North American possessions east of the Mississippi or the Caribbean islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique, which had been occupied by the British. France chose to cede the former but was able to negotiate the retention of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, two small islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, along with fishing rights in the area. They viewed the economic value of the Caribbean islands' sugar cane to be greater and easier to defend than the furs from the continent. French philosopher Voltaire referred to Canada disparagingly as nothing more than a few acres of snow. The British, however, were happy to take New France, as defence of their North American colonies would no longer be an issue (though the absence of that threat caused many colonists to conclude they no longer needed British protection). Britain also had ample places from which to obtain sugar. Spain traded Florida to Britain in order to regain Cuba, but they also gained Louisiana from France, including New Orleans, in compensation for their losses. Great Britain and Spain also agreed that navigation on the Mississippi River was to be open to vessels of all nations.\nConsequences.\nThe war changed economic, political, governmental, and social relations among the three European powers, their colonies, and the people who inhabited those territories. France and Britain both suffered financially because of the war, with significant long-term consequences.\nBritain gained control of French Canada and Acadia, colonies containing approximately 80,000 primarily French-speaking Roman Catholic residents. The deportation of Acadians beginning in 1755 made land available to immigrants from Europe and migrants from the colonies to the south. The British resettled many Acadians throughout its American provinces, but many went to France and some went to New Orleans, which they expected to remain French. Some were sent to colonize places as diverse as French Guiana and the Falkland Islands, but these efforts were unsuccessful. The Louisiana population contributed to founding the Cajun population. (The French word \"Acadien\" changed to \"Cadien\" then to \"Cajun\".)\nKing George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 on October 7, 1763, which outlined the division and administration of the newly conquered territory, and it continues to govern relations to some extent between the government of Canada and the First Nations. Included in its provisions was the reservation of lands west of the Appalachian Mountains to its Indian population, a demarcation that was only a temporary impediment to a rising tide of westward-bound settlers. The proclamation also contained provisions that prevented civic participation by the Roman Catholic Canadians.\nThe Quebec Act 1774 addressed issues brought forth by Roman Catholic French Canadians from the 1763 proclamation, and it transferred the Indian Reserve into the Province of Quebec. The Act maintained French Civil law, including the seigneurial system, a medieval code removed from France within a generation by the French Revolution. The Quebec Act was a major concern for the largely Protestant Thirteen Colonies over the advance of \"popery\". It is typically associated with other Intolerable Acts, legislation that eventually led to the American Revolutionary War. The Quebec Act served as the constitutional document for the province of Quebec until it was superseded by the Constitutional Act 1791.\nThe Seven Years' War nearly doubled Great Britain's national debt. The Crown sought sources of revenue to pay it off and attempted to impose new taxes on its colonies. These attempts were met with increasingly stiff resistance, until troops were called in to enforce the Crown's authority, and they ultimately led to the start of the American Revolutionary War. France attached comparatively little value to its American possessions, apart from the highly profitable sugar-producing Antilles islands which it retained. Minister Choiseul considered that he had made a good deal at the Treaty of Paris, and Voltaire wrote that Louis XV had lost a few acres of snow. However, the military defeat and the financial burden of the war weakened the French monarchy and contributed to the advent of the French Revolution in 1789.\nThe elimination of French power in America meant the disappearance of a strong ally for some Indian tribes. The Ohio Country was now more available to colonial settlement due to the construction of military roads by Braddock and Forbes. The Spanish takeover of the Louisiana territory was not completed until 1769, and it had modest repercussions. The British takeover of Spanish Florida resulted in the westward migration of Indian tribes who did not want to do business with them. This migration also caused a rise in tensions between the Choctaw and the Creek, historic enemies who were competing for land. The change of control in Florida also prompted its Catholic population to leave. Most went to Cuba, although some Christianized Yamasee were resettled to the coast of Mexico.\nFrance returned to America in 1778 with the establishment of a Franco-American alliance against Great Britain in the American Revolutionary War, in what historian Alfred A. Cave describes as French \"revenge for Montcalm's death\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39064", "revid": "48403000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39064", "title": "Casimir IV Jagiellon", "text": "King of Poland (1447\u20131492) and Grand Duke of Lithuania (1440\u20131492)\nCasimir IV (Casimir Andrew Jagiellon; ; Lithuanian: ; 30 November 1427 \u2013 7 June 1492) was Grand Duke of Lithuania from 1440 and King of Poland from 1447 until his death in 1492. He was one of the most active Polish-Lithuanian rulers; under him, Poland defeated the Teutonic Knights in the Thirteen Years' War and recovered Pomerania.\nThe Jagiellonian dynasty became one of the leading royal houses in Europe. The great triumph of his reign was bringing Prussia under Polish rule. The rule of Casimir corresponded to the age of \"new monarchies\" in western Europe. By the 15th century, Poland had narrowed the distance separating it from Western Europe and became a significant power in international relations. The demand for raw materials and semi-finished goods stimulated trade, producing a positive balance, and contributed to the growth of crafts and mining in the entire country. He was a recipient of the English Order of the Garter (KG), the highest order of chivalry and the most prestigious honour in England.\nFollowing Casimir's death in 1492, John I Albert succeeded him as King of Poland, and Alexander Jagiellon was proclaimed Grand Duke of Lithuania.\nYouth.\nCasimir Jagiellon was the third and youngest son of King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o (known as Jogaila) and his fourth wife, Sophia of Halshany. Casimir's mother was 40 to 50 years younger than his father, which caused widespread speculations that the children were the product of adultery. A scandal erupted when Sophia was accused of marital infidelity and two of her ladies-in-waiting were subsequently arrested and tortured for disseminating the rumours. To eliminate hearsay, W\u0142adys\u0142aw placed Sophia before a court. It is likely that the Teutonic Order and Grand Master Paul von Rusdorf were implicated. Following Casimir's birth, Sophia pledged an oath of innocence (\"iuramentum purgatorium\") and the charges were dismissed. The question of paternity did not persist as many of the children, including Casimir, closely resembled their elderly father.\nHe was baptised on 21 December 1427 and was named after his deceased brother. Stanis\u0142aw Cio\u0142ek, Bishop of Pozna\u0144, or Nicholas of Radom composed a panegyric contrafactum titled \"Hystorigraphi aciem\" in honour of his birth which was sung at the christening ceremony. In his early years, Casimir was nursed by his mother and supervised by vice-chancellor Wincenty Kot, the future Archbishop of Gniezno and Primate of Poland, as well as by a knight named Piotr of Rytro. Casimir often relied on his instinct and feelings and had little political knowledge, but shared a great interest in the diplomacy and economic affairs of the country. After the accession of his brother, W\u0142adys\u0142aw III, to the throne of Poland, the tutelage was assigned to Cardinal Zbigniew Ole\u015bnicki, however, the cleric neglected his duties as he felt a strong reluctance towards Casimir, believing that he would be an unsuccessful monarch following W\u0142adys\u0142aw's death.\nGrand Duke of Lithuania.\nThe sudden death of Sigismund K\u0119stutaitis left the Grand Duchy of Lithuania without a monarch, thus increasing its vulnerability. His assassination, reportedly orchestrated by political opponents associated with \u0160vitrigaila, created a power vacuum that intensified the ongoing rivalry between factions in the Grand Duchy. The Voivode of Trakai, Jonas Go\u0161tautas, and other magnates of Lithuania, supported Casimir as a candidate to the Lithuanian throne. However, many Polish nobles hoped that the thirteen-year-old boy would become a vice-regent for Poland in Lithuania to secure Polish interests there. Casimir was invited by the Lithuanian magnates to Lithuania, and when he arrived in Vilnius in 1440, he was proclaimed as the Grand Duke of Lithuania on 29 June 1440 by the Council of Lords, contrary to the wishes of the Polish noble lords \u2014 an act supported and coordinated by Go\u0161tautas.\nWhen the news arrived in the Kingdom of Poland concerning the proclamation of Casimir as the Grand Duke of Lithuania, it was met with hostility, even to the point of military threats against Lithuania. The Polish side had expected to oversee the transition of power in Lithuania and feared the loss of leverage over its eastern partner. Throughout the early 1440s, there were repeated efforts by Polish envoys to reassert influence over Lithuania or to compel Casimir to recognize Poland\u2019s suzerainty. These efforts were rebuffed by the Lithuanians, who used Casimir\u2019s youth and local presence as a political tool. Despite the fraternal relationship between Casimir and W\u0142adys\u0142aw III, no formal reconciliation occurred during this time. Tensions remained unresolved, partly because W\u0142adys\u0142aw, after assuming the Hungarian crown in 1440, became increasingly entangled in affairs beyond the Carpathians, including preparations for a crusade against the Ottoman Empire. His focus on Hungary and the Balkan frontier diverted attention from Lithuanian affairs, allowing Casimir to solidify independent rule.\nSince the young Grand Duke was underage, the supreme control over the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was in the hands of the Council, personally presided by Go\u0161tautas. Furthermore, Casimir was taught the Lithuanian language and the customs of Lithuania by appointed court officials. During Casimir's rule the rights of the Lithuanian nobility \u2014 dukes, magnates, and boyars (lesser nobles), irrespective of their religion and ethnicity \u2014 were put on an equal footing to those of the Polish szlachta. Additionally, Casimir promised to protect the Grand Duchy's borders and not to appoint persons from the Polish Kingdom to the offices of the Grand Duchy. He accepted that decisions on matters concerning the Grand Duchy would not be made without the Council of Lords' consent. He also granted the subject region of Samogitia the right to elect its own elder. Casimir was the first ruler of Lithuania baptized at birth, becoming the first native Roman Catholic Grand Duke.\nKing of Poland.\nDynastic struggle.\nIn 1427, the Polish nobility initiated an anti-Jagiellonian opposition and attempted to have W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o's sons W\u0142adys\u0142aw III and Casimir IV Jagiellon declared illegitimate to the Polish throne as they, being sons of a Lithuanian noblewoman Sophia of Halshany, had no blood link to the previous ruling Polish dynasty, the Piasts, however Casimir's father ensured the succession for his sons. Moreover, the death of Casimir's elder brother, W\u0142adys\u0142aw III, at the Battle of Varna (1444) during a crusade against the Ottoman Empire, created a potentially dangerous leadership vacuum. W\u0142adys\u0142aw's death left Poland without a clear successor and Casimir was fraught with political maneuvering and rivalries within the Polish nobile class.\nAfter a three-year interregnum marred by political contestation and negotiations, Casimir was elected King of Poland in 1447. His ascension was supported by key factions, but not without opposition. The Prussian Confederation, composed of the cities in the region of Prussia, as well as some nobles viewed his reign as a shift towards centralisation. Casimir's acceptance of the Polish crown was contingent upon his willingness to adopt a dual role as both King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania, thereby maintaining the balance of power between the two realms. At his coronation on June 25, 1447, Casimir became both the King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania, a position he would hold until his death.\nRoyal authority.\nThe question of the political relationship between Poland and Lithuania was an ongoing handicap throughout Casimir\u2019s reign. While the two states had been bound together in personal union since the Union of Krewo (1385), they were politically distinct entities, each with its own laws and institutions. Poland then was more of a homogenous and Catholic society whereas Lithuania remained multicultural and a predominantly Eastern Orthodox dominion that expanded across vast regions once part of the Kievan Rus. It was also highly decentralised.\nCasimir worked to harmonize the interests of the Polish and Lithuanian nobility while also maintaining his position as the supreme ruler of both states. The T\u0119czy\u0144ski family often mediated between the crown and the upper class. Their influence ensured that Casimir had strong support within the domestic sphere while advancing his diplomatic agenda abroad. In Lithuania, the Grand Chancellor of Lithuania, Miko\u0142aj II Radziwi\u0142\u0142, was instrumental in strengthening ties with the Polish Crown while safeguarding Lithuanian autonomy. He was nicknamed \"Amor Poloniae\" by contemporaries due to his pro-Polish stance and sentiment. Casimir's reign was marked by efforts to enhance cooperation, and also strived to secure southern and eastern frontiers which were constantly threatened by the Crimean Tatars and the Grand Duchy of Moscow.\nThirteen Years' War.\nIn 1454, Casimir was approached by the Prussian Confederation for aid against the Teutonic Order, which he promised, by making the separatist Prussian regions a protectorate of the Polish Kingdom. However, when the insurgent cities rebelled against the Order, it resisted and the Thirteen Years' War (1454\u20131466) ensued. Beginning in 1457, the Teutonic army from K\u00f6nigsberg unsuccessfully besieged their former seat at Marienburg and lost the nearby town of Marienburg (Malbork) in effect. At the Battle of \u015awiecino (\"Schlacht bei Schwetzin\") in September 1462, the Polish army and hired mercenaries decimated the Teutonic force, simultaneously cutting their future supply routes from Western Europe. A year later, the Teutonic rescue fleet was sunk at the Battle of Vistula Lagoon, resulting in the decisive end of Teutonic Order's navy. In the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), the declining Order recognized Polish sovereignty over the seceded western Prussian regions, Royal Prussia, and the Polish crown's overlordship over the remaining Teutonic Monastic State. It was transformed following Casimir's death into a duchy, which became known as Ducal Prussia (1525).\nForeign relations and diplomacy.\nCasimir sought to maintain influential relations with the Habsburgs and the Holy Roman Empire. In 1454, he married Elisabeth of Austria, daughter of King Albert II of Germany and Elizabeth of Luxembourg, a descendant of King Casimir III of Poland. Her distant relative was Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor. The marriage strengthened the ties between the house of Jagiellon and the sovereigns of Hungary-Bohemia and put Casimir at odds with the emperor through internal Habsburg rivalry. Elisabeth's only brother Ladislaus, king of Bohemia and Hungary, died in 1457, and after that Casimir and Elisabeth's dynastic interests were directed also towards her brother's kingdoms.\nThe threat from the Ottoman Empire, which was expanding rapidly in the Balkans and along the Black Sea, loomed over Eastern Europe during Casimir\u2019s reign. While Poland-Lithuania did not engage directly in military conflict with the Turks, Casimir faced increasing pressure from the Ottomans\u2019 allies, including the Crimean Tatars, whose raids intensified. He was, nonetheless, able to maintain a semblance of stability on the eastern border, skillfully negotiating with the Muscovites and the Crimean Khanate to avoid full-scale war. His diplomacy helped prevent the dissolution of the Polish-Lithuanian alliance, and ensuring territorial integrity. In around 1480 Casimir was allied with the Great Horde against Muscovy and Crimea, however, his failure to support Khan Akhmed at the Great stand on the Ugra River contributed to Russia in gaining its independence from the steppe nomads.\nThe intervention of the Roman curia, which hitherto had been hostile to Casimir, was due to the permutations of European politics. The pope was anxious to get rid of the Hussite King of Bohemia, George Podebrad, as the first step towards the formation of a league against the Ottoman Turks. Casimir was to be a leading factor in this combination, and he took advantage of it to procure the election of his son Vladislaus II as the King of Bohemia. But he would not commit himself too far, and his ulterior plans were frustrated by the rivalry of Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, who even went so far as to stimulate the Teutonic Order to rise against Casimir. The death of Matthias in 1490 was a great relief to Poland, and Casimir employed the two remaining years of his reign in consolidating his position still further.\nIn 1490, Casimir's son John Albert was elected the King of Hungary by a party among the Hungarian nobles. He was, however, defeated by his older brother, King Vladislaus II of Bohemia. Casimir, who wanted to secure a separate realm for his sons, proposed John Albert. Most Hungarian barons and prelates preferred Vladislaus because his rule in Bohemia had indicated that he would respect their liberties. Vladislaus was crowned King of Hungary on 18 September 1490 in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r.\nPersonal life and appearance.\nAccording to the \"Chronica Polonorum\" by Maciej Miechowita, Casimir was of tall stature and completely bald at the mid-frontal point (advanced receding hairline); his face was oval and lean. Miechowita also writes that the king spoke with a speech impairment (lisp) and was an avid huntsman from his youth. He often hunted in the primeval tranquil woodlands extending over the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, which were abundant in game. Casimir appeared modest and did not exude a sense of pride, but is said to have enjoyed occasional opulence and splendor for significant conventions. At times, his lack of frugality and preference for field sports over the affairs of state were met with staunch disapproval. Records show that the king was fond of birthday celebrations for his children and watched tournaments. He was also known to be a teetotaller, and abstained from drinking wine, mead or beer at banquets. Historian Julian Bartoszewicz described the king as \"wise [in thought], driven by reason and characterised by longaminity and forbearance\". Casimir cared deeply for his children's education and employed the finest tutors, chiefly Jan D\u0142ugosz, to supervise his sons John Albert and Alexander. It is likely that Casimir was Poland's last illiterate monarch as there are no surviving signatures, initials or monograms present on official edicts, though this claim is disputed.\nTomb.\nCasimir was interred at Wawel Cathedral in Krak\u00f3w, in a red marble tomb sculpted by Veit Stoss. In 1973 a research team of 12 experts opened the tomb. Shortly afterward, 10 of the team died prematurely. It was subsequently found that the deaths were caused by toxins originating from fungus present in the tomb.\nChildren.\nCasimir and Elizabeth had:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39066", "revid": "38664462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39066", "title": "List of religions and spiritual traditions", "text": "While the word religion is difficult to define and understand, one standard model of religion that is used in religious studies courses defines it as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[a] system of symbols which acts to establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations in men by formulating conceptions of a general order of existence and clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality that the moods and motivations seem uniquely realistic.\nMany religions have their own narratives, symbols, traditions and sacred histories that are intended to give meaning to life or to explain the origin of life or the universe. They tend to derive morality, ethics, religious laws, or a preferred lifestyle from their ideas about the cosmos and human nature. According to some estimates, there are roughly 4,200 religions, churches, denominations, religious bodies, faith groups, tribes, cultures, movements, or ultimate concerns.\nThe word \"religion\" is sometimes used interchangeably with the words \"faith\" or \"belief system\", but religion differs from private belief in that it has a public aspect. Most religions have organized behaviours, including clerical hierarchies, a definition of what constitutes adherence or membership, congregations of laity, regular meetings or services for the purposes of veneration of a deity or for prayer, holy places (either natural or architectural) or religious texts. Certain religions also have a sacred language often used in liturgical services. The practice of a religion may also include sermons, commemoration of the activities of a God or gods, sacrifices, festivals, feasts, trance, rituals, liturgies, ceremonies, worship, initiations, funerals, marriages, meditation, invocation, mediumship, music, art, dance, public service, or other aspects of human culture. Religious beliefs have also been used to explain parapsychological phenomena such as out-of-body experiences, near-death experiences, and reincarnation, along with many other paranormal and supernatural experiences.\nSome academics studying the subject have divided religions into three broad categories: world religions, a term which refers to transcultural, international faiths; Indigenous religions, which refers to smaller, culture-specific or nation-specific religious groups; and new religious movements, which refers to recently developed faiths. One modern academic theory of religion, social constructionism, says that religion is a modern concept that suggests all spiritual practice and worship follows a model similar to the Abrahamic religions as an orientation system that helps to interpret reality and define human beings, and thus believes that religion, as a concept, has been applied inappropriately to non-Western cultures that are not based upon such systems, or in which these systems are a substantially simpler construct.\nEastern religions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEastern religions are the religions which originated in East, South and Southeast Asia encompassing a diverse range of eastern and spiritual traditions.\nEast Asian religions.\nWorld religions that originated in East Asia, also known as Taoic religions; namely Taoism and Confucianism and religions and traditions descended from them.\nTaoism.\nSyncretic Taoism\nIndian religions.\nThe four world religions that originated in the Indian subcontinent, also known as Dharmic religions; namely Hinduism, Jainism, Sikhism and Buddhism and religions and traditions descended from them.\nHinduism.\nSyncretic Hinduism\nSikhism.\nSects such as the Nirankari, Ramraiya and Namdhari are not accepted within the Sikh Rehat Maryada (Sikh Code of Conduct) as they believe in a current human guru.\nAbrahamic religions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristianity.\nEarly Christianity\nEastern Christianity\nWestern Christianity\nSyncretic\nOther\nIslam.\nKhawarij\nShia Islam\nSufism\nSunni Islam\nSyncretic\nOther\nJudaism.\nHistorical Judaism\nKabbalah\nNon-Rabbinic Judaism\nRabbinic Judaism\nIranian religions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndigenous (ethnic, folk) religions.\nReligions that consist of the traditional customs and beliefs of particular ethnic groups, refined and expanded upon for thousands of years, and often lacking formal doctrine. Some adherents do not consider their ways \"religion\", preferring other cultural terms. Many indigenous religions incorporate forms of animism, totemism, and shamanism alongside nature, ancestor, and animal worship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew religious movements.\nReligions that cannot be classed as either world religions or traditional folk religions, and are usually recent in their inception. Non-cargo cults are generally excluded from this list, see list of cults for groups considered cults.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModern paganism.\nSyncretic neopaganism.\nGoddess religions\nNew ethnic religions.\nBlack.\nBlack Hebrew Israelites\nRastafari\nHistorical religions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39067", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39067", "title": "Coherent", "text": ""}
{"id": "39068", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39068", "title": "Digital electronics", "text": "Electronic circuits that utilize digital signals\nDigital electronics is a field of electronics involving the study of digital signals and the engineering of devices that use or produce them. It deals with the relationship between binary inputs and outputs by passing electrical signals through logical gates, resistors, capacitors, amplifiers, and other electronic components. The field of digital electronics is in contrast to analog electronics, which work primarily with analog signals (signals with varying degrees of intensity as opposed to on/off two-state binary signals). Despite the name, digital electronics designs include important analog design considerations.\nLarge assemblies of logic gates, used to represent more complex ideas, are often packaged into integrated circuits. Complex devices may have simple electronic representations of Boolean logic functions.\nHistory.\nThe binary number system was refined by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (published in 1705) and he also established that by using the binary system, the principles of arithmetic and logic could be joined. Digital logic as we know it was the invention of George Boole in the mid-19th century. In an 1886 letter, Charles Sanders Peirce described how logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits. Eventually, vacuum tubes replaced relays for logic operations. Lee De Forest's modification of the Fleming valve in 1907 could be used as an AND gate. Ludwig Wittgenstein introduced a version of the 16-row truth table as proposition 5.101 of \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" (1921). Walther Bothe, inventor of the coincidence circuit, shared the 1954 Nobel Prize in physics, for creating the first modern electronic AND gate in 1924.\nMechanical analog computers started appearing in the first century and were later used in the medieval era for astronomical calculations. In World War II, mechanical analog computers were used for specialized military applications such as calculating torpedo aiming. During this time the first electronic digital computers were developed, with the term \"digital\" being proposed by George Stibitz in 1942. Originally they were the size of a large room, consuming as much power as several hundred modern PCs.\nClaude Shannon, demonstrating that electrical applications of Boolean algebra could construct any logical numerical relationship, ultimately laid the foundations of digital computing and digital circuits in his master's thesis of 1937, which is considered to be arguably the most important master's thesis ever written, winning the 1939 Alfred Noble Prize.\nThe Z3 was an electromechanical computer designed by Konrad Zuse. Finished in 1941, it was the world's first working programmable, fully automatic digital computer. Its operation was facilitated by the invention of the vacuum tube in 1904 by John Ambrose Fleming.\nAt the same time that digital calculation replaced analog, purely electronic circuit elements soon replaced their mechanical and electromechanical equivalents. John Bardeen and Walter Brattain invented the point-contact transistor at Bell Labs in 1947, followed by William Shockley inventing the bipolar junction transistor at Bell Labs in 1948.\nAt the University of Manchester, a team under the leadership of Tom Kilburn designed and built a machine using the newly developed transistors instead of vacuum tubes. Their \"transistorised computer\", and the first in the world, was operational by 1953, and a second version was completed there in April 1955. From 1955 and onwards, transistors replaced vacuum tubes in computer designs, giving rise to the \"second generation\" of computers. Compared to vacuum tubes, transistors were smaller, more reliable, had indefinite lifespans, and required less power than vacuum tubes - thereby giving off less heat, and allowing much denser concentrations of circuits, up to tens of thousands in a relatively compact space.\nIn 1955, Carl Frosch and Lincoln Derick discovered silicon dioxide surface passivation effects. In 1957 Frosch and Derick, using masking and predeposition, were able to manufacture silicon dioxide field effect transistors; the first planar transistors, in which drain and source were adjacent at the same surface. At Bell Labs, the importance of Frosch and Derick technique and transistors was immediately realized. Results of their work circulated around Bell Labs in the form of BTL memos before being published in 1957. At Shockley Semiconductor, Shockley had circulated the preprint of their article in December 1956 to all his senior staff, including Jean Hoerni, who would later invent the planar process in 1959 while at Fairchild Semiconductor. At Bell Labs, J.R. Ligenza and W.G. Spitzer studied the mechanism of thermally grown oxides, fabricated a high quality Si/SiO2 stack and published their results in 1960. Following this research at Bell Labs, Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng proposed a silicon MOS transistor in 1959 and successfully demonstrated a working MOS device with their Bell Labs team in 1960. The team included E. E. LaBate and E. I. Povilonis who fabricated the device; M. O. Thurston, L. A. D\u2019Asaro, and J. R. Ligenza who developed the diffusion processes, and H. K. Gummel and R. Lindner who characterized the device.\nWhile working at Texas Instruments in July 1958, Jack Kilby recorded his initial ideas concerning the integrated circuit (IC), then successfully demonstrated the first working integrated circuit on 12 September 1958. Kilby's chip was made of germanium. The following year, Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor invented the silicon integrated circuit. The basis for Noyce's silicon IC was Hoerni's planar process.\nThe MOSFET's advantages include high scalability, affordability, low power consumption, and high transistor density. Its rapid on\u2013off electronic switching speed also makes it ideal for generating pulse trains, the basis for electronic digital signals, in contrast to BJTs which, more slowly, generate analog signals resembling sine waves. Along with MOS large-scale integration (LSI), these factors make the MOSFET an important switching device for digital circuits. The MOSFET revolutionized the electronics industry, and is the most common semiconductor device.\nIn the early days of integrated circuits, each chip was limited to only a few transistors, and the low degree of integration meant the design process was relatively simple. Manufacturing yields were also quite low by today's standards. The wide adoption of the MOSFET transistor by the early 1970s led to the first large-scale integration (LSI) chips with more than 10,000 transistors on a single chip. Following the wide adoption of CMOS, a type of MOSFET logic, by the 1980s, millions and then billions of MOSFETs could be placed on one chip as the technology progressed, and good designs required thorough planning, giving rise to new design methods. The transistor count of devices and total production rose to unprecedented heights. The total amount of transistors produced until 2018 has been estimated to be (13sextillion).\nThe wireless revolution (the introduction and proliferation of wireless networks) began in the 1990s and was enabled by the wide adoption of MOSFET-based RF power amplifiers (power MOSFET and LDMOS) and RF circuits (RF CMOS). Wireless networks allowed for public digital transmission without the need for cables, leading to digital television, satellite and digital radio, GPS, wireless Internet and mobile phones through the 1990s\u20132000s.\nProperties.\nAn advantage of digital circuits when compared to analog circuits is that signals represented digitally can be transmitted without degradation caused by noise. For example, a continuous audio signal transmitted as a sequence of 1s and 0s, can be reconstructed without error, provided the noise picked up in transmission is not enough to prevent identification of the 1s and 0s.\nIn a digital system, a more precise representation of a signal can be obtained by using more binary digits to represent it. While this requires more digital circuits to process the signals, each digit is handled by the same kind of hardware, resulting in an easily scalable system. In an analog system, additional resolution requires fundamental improvements in the linearity and noise characteristics of each step of the signal chain.\nWith computer-controlled digital systems, new functions can be added through software revision and no hardware changes are needed. Often this can be done outside of the factory by updating the product's software. This way, the product's design errors can be corrected even after the product is in a customer's hands.\nInformation storage can be easier in digital systems than in analog ones. The noise immunity of digital systems permits data to be stored and retrieved without degradation. In an analog system, noise from aging and wear degrade the information stored. In a digital system, as long as the total noise is below a certain level, the information can be recovered perfectly. Even when more significant noise is present, the use of redundancy permits the recovery of the original data provided too many errors do not occur.\nIn some cases, digital circuits use more energy than analog circuits to accomplish the same tasks, thus producing more heat which increases the complexity of the circuits such as the inclusion of heat sinks. In portable or battery-powered systems this can limit the use of digital systems. For example, battery-powered cellular phones often use a low-power analog front-end to amplify and tune the radio signals from the base station. However, a base station has grid power and can use power-hungry, but very flexible software radios. Such base stations can easily be reprogrammed to process the signals used in new cellular standards.\nMany useful digital systems must translate from continuous analog signals to discrete digital signals. This causes quantization errors. Quantization error can be reduced if the system stores enough digital data to represent the signal to the desired degree of fidelity. The Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem provides an important guideline as to how much digital data is needed to accurately portray a given analog signal.\nIf a single piece of digital data is lost or misinterpreted, in some systems only a small error may result, while in other systems the meaning of large blocks of related data can completely change. For example, a single-bit error in audio data stored directly as linear pulse-code modulation causes, at worst, a single audible click. But when using audio compression to save storage space and transmission time, a single bit error may cause a much larger disruption.\nBecause of the cliff effect, it can be difficult for users to tell if a particular system is right on the edge of failure, or if it can tolerate much more noise before failing. Digital fragility can be reduced by designing a digital system for robustness. For example, a parity bit or other error management method can be inserted into the signal path. These schemes help the system detect errors, and then either correct the errors, or request retransmission of the data.\nConstruction.\nA digital circuit is typically constructed from small electronic circuits called logic gates that can be used to create combinational logic and sequential logic. Each logic gate is designed to perform a function of Boolean logic when acting on logic signals. A logic gate is generally created from one or more electrically controlled switches, usually transistors but thermionic valves have seen historic use. The output of a logic gate can, in turn, control or feed into more logic gates.\nAnother form of digital circuit is constructed from lookup tables, (many sold as \"programmable logic devices\", though other kinds of PLDs exist). Lookup tables can perform the same functions as machines based on logic gates, but can be easily reprogrammed without changing the wiring. This means that a designer can often repair design errors without changing the arrangement of wires. Therefore, in small-volume products, programmable logic devices are often the preferred solution. They are usually designed by engineers using electronic design automation software.\nIntegrated circuits consist of multiple transistors on one silicon chip and are the least expensive way to make a large number of interconnected logic gates. Integrated circuits are usually interconnected on a printed circuit board which is a board that holds electrical components, and connects them together with copper traces.\nDesign.\nEngineers use many methods to minimize logic redundancy in order to reduce the circuit complexity. Reduced complexity reduces component count and potential errors and therefore typically reduces cost. Logic redundancy can be removed by several well-known techniques, such as binary decision diagrams, Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps, the Quine\u2013McCluskey algorithm, and the heuristic computer method. These operations are typically performed within a computer-aided design system.\nEmbedded systems with microcontrollers and programmable logic controllers are often used to implement digital logic for complex systems that do not require optimal performance. These systems are usually programmed by software engineers or by electricians, using ladder logic.\nRepresentation.\nA digital circuit's input-output relationship can be represented as a truth table. An equivalent high-level circuit uses logic gates, each represented by a different shape (standardized by IEEE/ANSI 91\u20131984). A low-level representation uses an equivalent circuit of electronic switches (usually transistors).\nMost digital systems divide into combinational and sequential systems. The output of a combinational system depends only on the present inputs. However, a sequential system has some of its outputs fed back as inputs, so its output may depend on past inputs in addition to present inputs, to produce a \"sequence\" of operations. Simplified representations of their behavior called state machines facilitate design and test.\nSequential systems divide into two further subcategories. \"Synchronous\" sequential systems change state all at once when a clock signal changes state. \"Asynchronous\" sequential systems propagate changes whenever inputs change. Synchronous sequential systems are made using flip flops that store inputted voltages as a bit only when the clock changes.\nSynchronous systems.\nThe usual way to implement a synchronous sequential state machine is to divide it into a piece of combinational logic and a set of flip flops called a \"state register\". The state register represents the state as a binary number. The combinational logic produces the binary representation for the next state. On each clock cycle, the state register captures the feedback generated from the previous state of the combinational logic and feeds it back as an unchanging input to the combinational part of the state machine. The clock rate is limited by the most time-consuming logic calculation in the combinational logic.\nAsynchronous systems.\nMost digital logic is synchronous because it is easier to create and verify a synchronous design. However, asynchronous logic has the advantage of its speed not being constrained by an arbitrary clock; instead, it runs at the maximum speed of its logic gates.\nNevertheless, most systems need to accept external unsynchronized signals into their synchronous logic circuits. This interface is inherently asynchronous and must be analyzed as such. Examples of widely used asynchronous circuits include synchronizer flip-flops, switch debouncers and arbiters.\nAsynchronous logic components can be hard to design because all possible states, in all possible timings must be considered. The usual method is to construct a table of the minimum and maximum time that each such state can exist and then adjust the circuit to minimize the number of such states. The designer must force the circuit to periodically wait for all of its parts to enter a compatible state (this is called \"self-resynchronization\"). Without careful design, it is easy to accidentally produce asynchronous logic that is unstable\u2014that is\u2014real electronics will have unpredictable results because of the cumulative delays caused by small variations in the values of the electronic components.\nRegister transfer systems.\nMany digital systems are data flow machines. These are usually designed using synchronous register transfer logic and written with hardware description languages such as VHDL or Verilog.\nIn register transfer logic, binary numbers are stored in groups of flip flops called registers. A sequential state machine controls when each register accepts new data from its input. The outputs of each register are a bundle of wires called a \"bus\" that carries that number to other calculations. A calculation is simply a piece of combinational logic. Each calculation also has an output bus, and these may be connected to the inputs of several registers. Sometimes a register will have a multiplexer on its input so that it can store a number from any one of several buses.\nAsynchronous register-transfer systems (such as computers) have a general solution. In the 1980s, some researchers discovered that almost all synchronous register-transfer machines could be converted to asynchronous designs by using first-in-first-out synchronization logic. In this scheme, the digital machine is characterized as a set of data flows. In each step of the flow, a synchronization circuit determines when the outputs of that step are valid and instructs the next stage when to use these outputs.\nComputer design.\nThe most general-purpose register-transfer logic machine is a computer. This is basically an automatic binary abacus. The control unit of a computer is usually designed as a microprogram run by a microsequencer. A microprogram is much like a player-piano roll. Each table entry of the microprogram commands the state of every bit that controls the computer. The sequencer then counts, and the count addresses the memory or combinational logic machine that contains the microprogram. The bits from the microprogram control the arithmetic logic unit, memory and other parts of the computer, including the microsequencer itself. In this way, the complex task of designing the controls of a computer is reduced to the simpler task of programming a collection of much simpler logic machines.\nAlmost all computers are synchronous. However, asynchronous computers have also been built. One example is the ASPIDA DLX core. Another was offered by ARM Holdings. They do not, however, have any speed advantages because modern computer designs already run at the speed of their slowest component, usually memory. They do use somewhat less power because a clock distribution network is not needed. An unexpected advantage is that asynchronous computers do not produce spectrally-pure radio noise. They are used in some radio-sensitive mobile-phone base-station controllers. They may be more secure in cryptographic applications because their electrical and radio emissions can be more difficult to decode.\nComputer architecture.\nComputer architecture is a specialized engineering activity that tries to arrange the registers, calculation logic, buses and other parts of the computer in the best way possible for a specific purpose. Computer architects have put a lot of work into reducing the cost and increasing the speed of computers in addition to boosting their immunity to programming errors. An increasingly common goal of computer architects is to reduce the power used in battery-powered computer systems, such as smartphones.\nDesign issues in digital circuits.\nDigital circuits are made from analog components. The design must assure that the analog nature of the components does not dominate the desired digital behavior. Digital systems must manage noise and timing margins, parasitic inductances and capacitances.\nBad designs have intermittent problems such as glitches, vanishingly fast pulses that may trigger some logic but not others, runt pulses that do not reach valid threshold voltages.\nAdditionally, where clocked digital systems interface to analog systems or systems that are driven from a different clock, the digital system can be subject to metastability where a change to the input violates the setup time for a digital input latch.\nSince digital circuits are made from analog components, digital circuits calculate more slowly than low-precision analog circuits that use a similar amount of space and power. However, the digital circuit will calculate more repeatably, because of its high noise immunity.\nAutomated design tools.\nMuch of the effort of designing large logic machines has been automated through the application of electronic design automation (EDA).\nSimple truth table-style descriptions of logic are often optimized with EDA that automatically produce reduced systems of logic gates or smaller lookup tables that still produce the desired outputs. The most common example of this kind of software is the Espresso heuristic logic minimizer. Optimizing large logic systems may be done using the Quine\u2013McCluskey algorithm or binary decision diagrams. There are promising experiments with genetic algorithms and annealing optimizations.\nTo automate costly engineering processes, some EDA can take state tables that describe state machines and automatically produce a truth table or a function table for the combinational logic of a state machine. The state table is a piece of text that lists each state, together with the conditions controlling the transitions between them and their associated output signals.\nOften, real logic systems are designed as a series of sub-projects, which are combined using a \"tool flow\". The tool flow is usually controlled with the help of a scripting language, a simplified computer language that can invoke the software design tools in the right order. Tool flows for large logic systems such as microprocessors can be thousands of commands long, and combine the work of hundreds of engineers. Writing and debugging tool flows is an established engineering specialty in companies that produce digital designs. The tool flow usually terminates in a detailed computer file or set of files that describe how to physically construct the logic. Often it consists of instructions on how to draw the transistors and wires on an integrated circuit or a printed circuit board.\nParts of tool flows are debugged by verifying the outputs of simulated logic against expected inputs. The test tools take computer files with sets of inputs and outputs and highlight discrepancies between the simulated behavior and the expected behavior. Once the input data is believed to be correct, the design itself must still be verified for correctness. Some tool flows verify designs by first producing a design, then scanning the design to produce compatible input data for the tool flow. If the scanned data matches the input data, then the tool flow has probably not introduced errors.\nThe functional verification data are usually called \"test vectors\". The functional test vectors may be preserved and used in the factory to test whether newly constructed logic works correctly. However, functional test patterns do not discover all fabrication faults. Production tests are often designed by automatic test pattern generation software tools. These generate test vectors by examining the structure of the logic and systematically generating tests targeting particular potential faults. This way the fault coverage can closely approach 100%, provided the design is properly made testable (see next section).\nOnce a design exists, and is verified and testable, it often needs to be processed to be manufacturable as well. Modern integrated circuits have features smaller than the wavelength of the light used to expose the photoresist. Software that are designed for manufacturability add interference patterns to the exposure masks to eliminate open-circuits and enhance the masks' contrast.\nDesign for testability.\nThere are several reasons for testing a logic circuit. When the circuit is first developed, it is necessary to verify that the design circuit meets the required functional, and timing specifications. When multiple copies of a correctly designed circuit are being manufactured, it is essential to test each copy to ensure that the manufacturing process has not introduced any flaws.\nA large logic machine (say, with more than a hundred logical variables) can have an astronomical number of possible states. Obviously, factory testing every state of such a machine is unfeasible, for even if testing each state only took a microsecond, there are more possible states than there are microseconds since the universe began!\nLarge logic machines are almost always designed as assemblies of smaller logic machines. To save time, the smaller sub-machines are isolated by permanently installed \"design for test\" circuitry and are tested independently. One common testing scheme provides a test mode that forces some part of the logic machine to enter a \"test cycle\". The test cycle usually exercises large independent parts of the machine.\nBoundary scan is a common test scheme that uses serial communication with external test equipment through one or more shift registers known as \"scan chains\". Serial scans have only one or two wires to carry the data, and minimize the physical size and expense of the infrequently used test logic. After all the test data bits are in place, the design is reconfigured to be in \"normal mode\" and one or more clock pulses are applied, to test for faults (e.g. stuck-at low or stuck-at high) and capture the test result into flip-flops or latches in the scan shift register(s). Finally, the result of the test is shifted out to the block boundary and compared against the predicted \"good machine\" result.\nIn a board-test environment, serial-to-parallel testing has been formalized as the JTAG standard.\nTrade-offs.\nCost.\nSince a digital system may use many logic gates, the overall cost of building a computer correlates strongly with the cost of a logic gate. In the 1930s, the earliest digital logic systems were constructed from telephone relays because these were inexpensive and relatively reliable.\nThe earliest integrated circuits were constructed to save weight and permit the Apollo Guidance Computer to control an inertial guidance system for a spacecraft. The first integrated circuit logic gates cost nearly US$50, which in 2024 would be equivalent to $. Mass-produced gates on integrated circuits became the least-expensive method to construct digital logic.\nWith the rise of integrated circuits, reducing the absolute number of chips used represented another way to save costs. The goal of a designer is not just to make the simplest circuit, but to keep the component count down. Sometimes this results in more complicated designs with respect to the underlying digital logic but nevertheless reduces the number of components, board size, and even power consumption.\nReliability.\nAnother major motive for reducing component count on printed circuit boards is to reduce the manufacturing defect rate due to failed soldered connections and increase reliability. Defect and failure rates tend to increase along with the total number of component pins.\nThe failure of a single logic gate may cause a digital machine to fail. Where additional reliability is required, redundant logic can be provided. Redundancy adds cost and power consumption over a non-redundant system.\nThe \"reliability\" of a logic gate can be described by its mean time between failure (MTBF). Digital machines first became useful when the MTBF for a switch increased above a few hundred hours. Even so, many of these machines had complex, well-rehearsed repair procedures, and would be nonfunctional for hours because a tube burned-out, or a moth got stuck in a relay. Modern transistorized integrated circuit logic gates have MTBFs greater than 82 billion hours (). This level of reliability is required because integrated circuits have so many logic gates.\nFan-out.\nFan-out describes how many logic inputs can be controlled by a single logic output without exceeding the electrical current ratings of the gate outputs. The minimum practical fan-out is about five. Modern electronic logic gates using CMOS transistors for switches have higher fan-outs.\nSpeed.\nThe \"switching speed\" describes how long it takes a logic output to change from true to false or vice versa. Faster logic can accomplish more operations in less time. Modern electronic digital logic routinely switches at , and some laboratory systems switch at more than ..\nLogic families.\nDigital design started with relay logic which is slow. Occasionally a mechanical failure would occur. Fan-outs were typically about 10, limited by the resistance of the coils and arcing on the contacts from high voltages.\nLater, vacuum tubes were used. These were very fast, but generated heat, and were unreliable because the filaments would burn out. Fan-outs were typically 5 to 7, limited by the heating from the tubes' current. In the 1950s, special computer tubes were developed with filaments that omitted volatile elements like silicon. These ran for hundreds of thousands of hours.\nThe first semiconductor logic family was resistor\u2013transistor logic. This was a thousand times more reliable than tubes, ran cooler, and used less power, but had a very low fan-out of 3. Diode\u2013transistor logic improved the fan-out up to about 7, and reduced the power. Some DTL designs used two power supplies with alternating layers of NPN and PNP transistors to increase the fan-out.\nTransistor\u2013transistor logic (TTL) was a great improvement over these. In early devices, fan-out improved to 10, and later variations reliably achieved 20. TTL was also fast, with some variations achieving switching times as low as 20\u00a0ns. TTL is still used in some designs.\nEmitter coupled logic is very fast but uses a lot of power. It was extensively used for high-performance computers, such as the Illiac IV, made up of many medium-scale components.\nBy far, the most common digital integrated circuits built today use CMOS logic, which is fast, offers high circuit density and low power per gate. This is used even in large, fast computers, such as the IBM System z.\nRecent developments.\nIn 2009, researchers discovered that memristors can implement a Boolean state storage and provides a complete logic family with very small amounts of space and power, using familiar CMOS semiconductor processes.\nThe discovery of superconductivity has enabled the development of rapid single flux quantum (RSFQ) circuit technology, which uses Josephson junctions instead of transistors. Most recently, attempts are being made to construct purely optical computing systems capable of processing digital information using nonlinear optical elements.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39070", "revid": "50534610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39070", "title": "Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1508 to 1519\nMaximilian I (22 March 1459 \u2013 12 January 1519) was King of the Romans from 1486 and Holy Roman Emperor from 1508 until his death in 1519. He was never crowned by the Pope, as the journey to Rome was blocked by the Venetians. He proclaimed himself elected emperor in 1508 at Trent, with Pope Julius II later recognizing it. This broke the tradition of requiring a papal coronation for the adoption of the Imperial title. Maximilian was the only surviving son of Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor, and Eleanor of Portugal. From his coronation as King of the Romans in 1486, he ran a double government, or \"Doppelregierung\" with his father until Frederick's death in 1493.\nMaximilian expanded the influence of the House of Habsburg through war and his marriage in 1477 to Mary, Duchess of Burgundy. However, he also lost his family's lands in Switzerland to the Swiss Confederacy. Through the marriage of his son Philip the Handsome to eventual queen Joanna of Castile in 1496, Maximilian helped to establish the Habsburg dynasty in Spain, which allowed his grandson Charles to hold the thrones of both Castile and Aragon. Historian Thomas A. Brady Jr. describes him as \"the first Holy Roman Emperor in 250 years who ruled as well as reigned\" and the \"ablest royal warlord of his generation\".\nNicknamed \"Coeur d'acier\" (\"Heart of steel\") by Olivier de la Marche and later historians (either as praise for his courage and soldierly qualities or reproach for his ruthlessness as a warlike ruler), Maximilian has entered the public consciousness, at least in the German-speaking world, as \"the last knight\" (\"der letzte Ritter\"), especially since the eponymous poem by Anastasius Gr\u00fcn was published (although the nickname likely existed even in Maximilian's lifetime). Scholarly debates still discuss whether he was truly the last knight (either as an idealized medieval ruler leading people on horseback, or a Don Quixote-type dreamer and misadventurer), or the first Renaissance prince\u2014an amoral Machiavellian politician who carried his family \"to the European pinnacle of dynastic power\" largely on the back of loans.\nHistorians of the late nineteenth century like Leopold von Ranke often criticized Maximilian for putting the interest of his dynasty above that of Germany, hampering the nation's unification process. Since 's \"Kaiser Maximilian I. Das Reich, \u00d6sterreich und Europa an der Wende zur Neuzeit\" (1971\u20131986) became the standard work, a more positive image of the emperor has emerged. He is seen as a modern, innovative ruler who carried out important reforms and promoted significant cultural achievements, even if the financial costs weighed down the Austrians and his military expansion and caused the deaths and sufferings of many people.\nThrough an \"unprecedented\" image-building program, with the help of many notable scholars and artists, in his lifetime, the emperor\u2014\"the promoter, coordinator, and prime mover, an artistic impresario and entrepreneur with seemingly limitless energy and enthusiasm and an unfailing eye for detail\"\u2014had built for himself \"a virtual royal self\" of a quality that historians call \"unmatched\" or \"hitherto unimagined\". To this image, new layers have been added by the works of later artists in the centuries following his death, both as continuation of deliberately crafted images developed by his program as well as development of spontaneous sources and exploration of actual historical events, creating what Elaine Tennant dubs the \"Maximilian industry\".\nBackground and childhood.\nMaximilian was born at Wiener Neustadt on 22 March 1459. His father, Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor, named him after Maximilian of Tebessa, who Frederick believed had once warned him of imminent peril in a dream. In his infancy, he and his parents were besieged in Vienna by Albert of Austria. One source relates that, during the siege's worst days, he wandered around the castle garrison, begging the servants and men-at-arms for bread. He was the favourite child of his mother, whose personality contrasted his father's. Reportedly she told Maximilian that, \"If I had known, my son, that you would become like your father, I would have regretted having born you for the throne.\" Her early death pushed him even more towards a man's world, where one grew up first as a warrior rather than a politician.\nDespite the efforts of his father Frederick and his tutor Peter Engelbrecht, whom Maximilian held in contempt, he became an indifferent and belligerent student, who preferred physical activities over his studies. Although the two remained on good terms overall, Frederick was horrified by his only surviving son and heir's overzealousness in chivalric contests, extravagance, and heavy tendencies towards wine, feasts and young women, which became evident during their trips in 1473 and 1474. Even though he was very young, the prince's skills and physical attractiveness often made him the center of attention. Although Frederick had forbidden the princes of the Empire from fighting with Maximilian in tournaments, Maximilian gave himself the necessary permission at the first chance he got. Frederick did not allow him to participate in the 1474 war against Burgundy though and placed him under the care of the Bishop of Augsburg instead.\nThe powerful Duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold, who also held various fiefs within the Empire, was one of the chief political opponents of Maximilian's father Frederick III. Frederick was concerned about expansionist tendencies of the House of Valois-Burgundy towards the western regions of his Holy Roman Empire, and, to forestall military conflict, he attempted to secure the marriage of Charles's daughter, Mary of Burgundy, to Maximilian. After the Siege of Neuss (1474\u201375), he was successful and the marriage was agreed, but concluded later, in 1477.\nPerhaps as preparation for his task in the Netherlands, in 1476 at the age of 17, Maximilian commanded a military campaign against Hungary. This was the first actual battlefield experience in his life, even though the responsibility was likely shared with more experienced generals.\nMaximilian and Mary's wedding took place on 19 August 1477.\nCo-ruler in the Netherlands and Burgundy.\nUpon her father's death in the Battle of Nancy on 5 January 1477, Mary of Burgundy claimed the inheritance of all of her father's domains, both in the Holy Roman Empire, and the Kingdom of France. In the same time, king Louis XI of France asserted his claims through military force, capturing the Duchy of Burgundy and other Valois-Burgundian fiefs that belonged to the French realm, citing the Salic law that favored male succession. Faced with those challenges, Mary agreed to marry Maximilian (19 August 1477), who undertook the defence of his wife's dominions. Without support from the Empire and with an empty treasury left by Charles the Bold's campaigns, he carried out a campaign against the French during 1478\u20131479 and reconquered Le Quesnoy, Conde and Antoing. He defeated the French forces at the Battle of Guinegate, in modern Enguinegatte, on 7 August 1479.\nDespite winning, Maximilian had to abandon the siege of Th\u00e9rouanne and disband his army, either because the Netherlanders did not want him to become too strong or because his treasury was empty. The battle was an important landmark in military history though: the Burgundian pikemen were the precursors of the Landsknechte, while the French side derived the momentum for military reform from their loss.\nAccording to some, Maximilian and Mary's wedding contract stipulated that their children would succeed them but that the couple could not be each other's heirs. Mary tried to bypass this rule with a promise to transfer territories as a gift in case of her death, but her plans were confounded. After Mary's death in a riding accident on 27 March 1482 near the Wijnendale Castle, Maximilian's aim was now to secure the inheritance to his and Mary's son, Philip the Handsome. According to Haemers and Sutch, the original marriage contract stipulated that Maximilian could not inherit her Burgundian lands if they had children.\nThe Guinegate victory made Maximilian popular, but as an inexperienced ruler, he hurt himself politically by trying to centralize authority without respecting traditional rights and consulting relevant political bodies. The Belgian historian Eug\u00e8ne Duchesne comments that these years were among the saddest and most turbulent in the history of the country, and despite his later great imperial career, Maximilian unfortunately could never compensate for the mistakes he made as regent in this period. Some of the Netherlander provinces were hostile to Maximilian. In 1482, the Treaty of Arras was signed between Maximilian and Louis XI, leaving the Duchy of Burgundy in the French hands, and also designating the County of Artois and the Free County of Burgundy (region of Franche-Comt\u00e9) as a dowry for Maximilian\u2032s daughter Margaret, who was engaged to the French prince.\nVarious regions in the Low Countries openly rebelled twice in the period 1482\u20131492, attempting to regain the autonomy they had enjoyed under Mary. Flemish rebels managed to capture Philip and even Maximilian himself, but they released Maximilian when Frederick III intervened. In 1489, as he turned his attention to his hereditary lands, he left the Low Countries in the hands of Albert of Saxony, who proved to be an excellent choice, as he was less emotionally committed to the Low Countries and more flexible as a politician than Maximilian, while also being a capable general. By 1492, rebellions were completely suppressed. Maximilian revoked the Great Privilege and established a strong ducal monarchy undisturbed by particularism. But he would not reintroduce Charles the Bold's centralizing ordinances. Since 1489 (after his departure), the government under Albert of Saxony had made more efforts in consulting representative institutions and showed more restraint in subjugating recalcitrant territories. Notables who had previously supported rebellions returned to city administrations. The Estates General continued to develop as a regular meeting place of the central government.\nThe harsh suppression of the rebellions did have an unifying effect, in that provinces stopped behaving like separate entities each supporting a different lord. Helmut Koenigsberger opines that it was not the erratic leadership of Maximilian, who was brave but hardly understood the Netherlands, but the Estates' desire for the survival of the country that made the Burgundian monarchy survive. Jean Berenger and C.A. Simpson argue that Maximilian, as a gifted military champion and organizer, did save the Netherlands from France, although the conflict between the Estates and his personal ambitions caused a catastrophic situation in the short term. Peter Spufford opines that the invasion was prevented by a combination of the Estates and Maximilian, although the cost of war, Maximilian's spendthrift liberality and the interests enforced by his German bankers did cause huge expenditure while income was falling. Jelle Haemers comments that the Estates stopped their support towards the young and ambitious \"impresario\" (director) of war because they knew that after Guinegate, the nature of the war was not defensive anymore.\nMaximilian and his followers had managed to achieve remarkable success in stabilizing the situation though, and a stalemate was kept in Ghent as well as in Bruges, before the tragic death of Mary in 1482 completely turned the political landscape in the whole country upside down. According to Haemers, while Willem Zoete's indictment of Maximilian's government was a one-sided picture that exaggerated the negative points and the Regency Council displayed many of the same problems, Maximilian and his followers could have been more prudent when dealing with the complaints of their opponents before matters became bigger.\nDuring his time in the Low Countries, he had experimented with all kinds of military models available, first urban militia and vassalic troops, then French-style companies that were too rigid and costly, and finally Germanic mercenaries. The brutal efficiency of Germanic mercenaries, together with the financial support of cities outside Flanders like Antwerp, Amsterdam, Mechelen and Brussels as well as a small group of loyal landed nobles proved decisive in the Burgundian-Habsburg regime's final triumph. Reviewing the French historian Amable Sablon du Corail's \"La Guerre, le prince et ses sujets. Les finances des Pays-Bas bourguignons sous Marie de Bourgogne et Maximilien d'Autriche (1477\u20131493)\", Marc Boone comments that the brutality described shows Maximilian and the Habsburg dynasty's insatiable greed of expansion and inability to adapt to local traditions, while Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Lassalmonie opines that the nation building process (successful, with the establishment of a common tax) was remarkably similar to the same process in France, including the hesitation in working with local levels of the political society, except that the struggle was shorter and after 1494 a peaceful dialogue between the prince and the estates was reached. Jelle Haemers suggests that the level of violence associated with the suppression of the revolts as traditionally imagined has been exaggerated and that most of the violence happened in a symbolical manner, but also cautions against the tendency to consider the \"central state\" in the sense of a modern state.\nWhile it has been suggested that Maximilian displayed a class-based mentality that favoured the aristocrats, recent studies suggest that, as evidenced by the court ordinance of 1482 among others, he sought to promote \"parvenus\" who were beholden to himself, and at an alarming speed for the traditional elites. After the rebellions, concerning the aristocracy, although Maximilian punished few with death, their properties were largely confiscated and they were replaced with a new elite class loyal to the Habsburgs\u2014among whom, there were noblemen who had been part of traditional high nobility but elevated to supranational importance only in this period. The most important of these were John III and Frederik of Egmont, Engelbrecht II of Nassau, and the brothers of Glymes\u2013Bergen.\nIn early 1486, he retook Mortaigne, l'Ecluse, Honnecourt and even Th\u00e9rouanne, but the same thing like in 1479 happened\u2014he lacked financial resources to exploit and keep his gains. Only in 1492, with a stable internal situation, he was able to reconquer various regions that were defined in 1482 as his daughter's dowry, on the pretext that the French had canceled her engagement with the French prince, now king Charles VIII. In 1493, Maximilian and Charles VIII of France signed the Treaty of Senlis, by which the County of Artois and the Free County of Burgundy were officially returned to Habsburg rule, while Picardy was confirmed as French possession. The French also continued to keep the Duchy of Burgundy. Thus a large part of the Netherlands (known as the Seventeen Provinces) stayed in the Habsburg patrimony.\nOn 8 January 1488, using a similar 1373 French ordinance as the model, together with Philip, he issued the Ordinance of Admiralty, that organized the Admiralty as a state institution and strove to centralize maritime authority (this was a departure from the policy of Philip the Good, whose 1458 ordinance tried to restore maritime order by decentralizing power). This was the beginning of the Dutch navy, although initially the policy faced opposition and unfavourable political climate, which only improved with the appointment of Philip of Burgundy-Beveren in 1491. A permanent navy only took shape after 1555 under the governorship of his granddaughter Mary of Hungary.\nIn 1493, Frederick III died, thus Maximilian I became de facto leader of the Holy Roman Empire. He decided to transfer power to the 15-year-old Philip. During the time in the Low Countries, he contracted such emotional problems that except for rare, necessary occasions, he would never return to the land again after gaining control. When the Estates sent a delegation to offer him the regency after Philip's death in 1506, he evaded them for months.\nAs suzerain, Maximilian continued to involve himself with the Low Countries from afar. His son's and daughter's governments tried to maintain a compromise between the states and the Empire. Philip, in particular, sought to maintain an independent Burgundian policy, which sometimes caused disagreements with his father. As Philip preferred to maintain peace and economic development for his land, Maximilian was left fighting Charles of Egmond over Guelders on his own resources. At one point, Philip let French troops supporting Guelders's resistance to his rule pass through his own land. Only at the end of his reign, Philip decided to deal with this threat together with his father.\nBy this time, Guelders had been affected by the continuous state of war and other problems. The duke of Cleves and the bishop of Utrecht, hoping to share spoils, gave Philip aid. Maximilian invested his own son with Guelders and Zutphen. Within months and with his father's skilled use of field artillery, Philip conquered the whole land and Charles of Egmond was forced to prostrate himself in front of Philip. Maximilian would have liked to see the Guelders matter to be dealt with once and for all, but as Charles later escaped and Philip was at haste to make his 1506 fatal journey to Spain, troubles would soon arise again, leaving Margaret to deal with the problems. Maximilian was exasperated by the attitude of Philip (who, in Maximilian's imagination, was probably influenced by insidious French agency) and the Estates, whom he considered to be unbelievably nonchalant and tightfisted about a threat to their own country's security. Philip's death in Burgos was a heavy blow personally (Maximilian's entourage seem to have concealed it from him for more than ten days) and also politically, as by this time, he had become his father's most important international ally, although he retained his independent judgement. All their joint ventures fell apart, including the planned Italian expedition in 1508.\nThe Estates preferred to maintain peace with France and Guelders. But Charles of Egmont, the de facto lord of Guelders continued to cause trouble. In 1511, Margaret made an alliance with England and besieged Venlo, but Charles of Egmont invaded Holland so the siege had to be lifted. James D. Tracy opines that Maximilian and Margaret were reasonable in demanding more stern measures against Guelders, but their critics in the Estates General (that had continuously voted against providing funds for wars against Guelders) and among the nobles naively thought that Charles of Egmont could be controlled by maintaining the peaceful relationship with the King of France, his patron. Leading Renaissance humanists in the Netherlands like Erasmus and Hadrianus Barlandus displayed a distrust towards the government and especially the person of Maximilian, whom they believed to be a warlike and greedy prince. After the brutal 1517 campaign of Charles of Egmont in Friesland and Holland, these humanists, in their mistaken belief, spread the stories that the emperor and other princes were concocting clever schemes and creating wars just to expand the Habsburg dominion and extracting money.\nBy the time Margaret became Regent, Maximilian was less inclined to help regarding the Guelders matter. He suggested to her that the Estates in the Low Countries should defend themselves, forcing her to sign the 1513 treaty with Charles. Habsburg Netherlands would only be able to incorporate Guelders and Zutphen under Charles V.\nFollowing Margaret's strategy of defending the Low Countries with foreign armies, in 1513, at the head of Henry VIII's army, Maximilian gained a victory against the French at the Battle of the Spurs, at little cost to himself or his daughter (in fact according to Margaret, the Low Countries got a profit of one million of gold from supplying the English army). For the sake of his grandson Charles's Burgundian lands, he ordered Th\u00e9rouanne's walls to be demolished (the stronghold had often served as a backdoor for French interference in the Low Countries).\nReign in the Holy Roman Empire.\nRecapture of Austria.\nMaximilian was elected King of the Romans on 16 February 1486 in Frankfurt-am-Main and was crowned on 9 April 1486 in Aachen. Much of the Austrian territories and Vienna were under the rule of King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary, as a result of the Austrian\u2013Hungarian War (1477\u20131488). Maximilian was now a king without lands. Matthias Corvinus offered Emperor Frederick and his son Maximilian, the return of Austrian provinces and Vienna, if they would renounce the treaty of 1463 and accept Matthias as Frederick's designated heir and favoured successor as Holy Roman Emperor. Before this was settled, Matthias died in Vienna in 1490. However, after Matthias Corvinus's death, civil war broke out in Hungary between the supporters of John Corvinus and the supporters of Vladislaus of Bohemia. Due to the Hungarian civil war and interregnum, new possibilities were opened for Maximilian.\nIn July 1490, Maximilian began a series of short sieges that reconquered cities and fortresses that his father had lost in Austria. Maximilian entered Vienna, already evacuated by the Hungarians, in August 1490. He was injured while attacking the citadel guarded by a garrison of 400 Hungarians troops who repelled his forces twice, but after a few days they surrendered.\nIn addition, the County of Tyrol and Duchy of Bavaria went to war in the late 15th century. Bavaria demanded money from Tyrol that had been loaned on the collateral of Tyrolean lands. In 1490, the two states demanded that Maximilian I step in to mediate the dispute. His Habsburg cousin, the childless Archduke Sigismund, was negotiating to sell Tyrol to their Wittelsbach rivals rather than let Emperor Frederick inherit it. Maximilian's mediation led to a reconciliation and a reunited dynastic rule in the 1490. Because Tyrol had no law code at this time, the nobility freely expropriated money from the populace, which caused the court in Innsbruck to fester with corruption. After taking control, Maximilian instituted immediate financial reform. Gaining control of Tyrol for the Habsburgs was of strategic importance because it linked the Swiss Confederacy to the Habsburg-controlled Austrian lands, which facilitated some imperial geographic continuity.\nFrom 1497 to 1498, Maximilian negotiated an inheritance contract with the last Meinhardin prince, Count Leonhard of Gorizia, which was intended to bring the County of Gorizia to the Habsburgs. However, it was only after a dispute with the Republic of Venice that the Gorizia stadtholder, Virgil von Graben, finally succeeded in realizing this contract.\nExpedition in Hungary.\nBeatrice of Naples, Matthias Corvinus's widow, initially supported Maximilian out of hope that he would marry her, but Maximilian did not want this. The Hungarian magnates found Maximilian impressive, but they wanted a king they could dominate. The crown of Hungary thus fell to King Vladislaus II, who was deemed weaker in personality and also agreed to marry Beatrice. Tam\u00e1s Bak\u00f3cz, the Hungarian chancellor, allied himself with Maximilian and helped him to circumvent the 1505 Diet which declared that no foreigner could be elected as King of Hungary.\nWith money from Innsbruck and southern German towns, he raised enough cavalry and Landsknechte to campaign into Hungary. Despite Hungary's gentry's hostility to the Habsburg, he managed to gain many supporters from higher aristocracy, including several of Corvinus's supporters. One of them, Jakob Sz\u00e9kely, handed over Styrian castles to him. He claimed his status as King of Hungary. In the meantime, Vladislaus was proclaimed King of Hungary on 15 July 1490, and was crowned at Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r in September. Maximilian responded with great force, using a massive grant of funds from the Tyrolean Estates to invade Hungary with an army of around 17,000 men. Crossing the Raab River in late October, Maximilian encountered little resistance in Hungary, as the unprepared Vladislaus was not inclined towards action. Maximilian was joined by numerous Hungarian nobles and even magnates. Despite stiff resistance, the city was bombarded, and eventually captured. This resulted in looting and slaughter that Maximilian and his officers were unable to prevent. The next day became a turning point in the campaign, as his mercenaries mutinied due to the prohibition of looting.\nFaced with a severe winter, his troops refused to continue fighting, requesting Maximilian to double their pay, which he could not afford. The revolt turned the situation in favour of the Jagiellonian forces and Maximilian was forced to return. He depended on his father and the territorial estates for financial support. Soon he reconquered Lower and Inner Austria for his father, who returned and settled at Linz. Worrying about his son's adventurous tendencies, Frederick decided to starve him financially.\nIn 1491, they signed the Peace of Pressburg, which provided that Maximilian recognized Vladislaus as King of Hungary, but the Habsburgs would inherit the throne on the extinction of Vladislaus's male line and the Austrians also received 100,000 golden florins as war reparations. It was Maximilian that the Croatians began to harbour a connection with. However, the Croatian nobility wanted him as King. Worrying that a multi-fronted war would leave him overextended, Maximilian evacuated from Croatia and accepted the treaty with the Jagiellons.\nItalian and Swiss wars.\nAs the Treaty of Senlis had resolved French differences with the Holy Roman Empire, King Louis XII of France had secured borders in the north and turned his attention to Italy, where he made claims to the Duchy of Milan. In 1499 and 1500 he conquered it and drove Lodovico il Moro into exile. This brought him into a potential conflict with Maximilian, who on 16 March 1494 had married Bianca Maria Sforza, a daughter of Galeazzo Maria Sforza, duke of Milan. However, Maximilian was unable to prevent Louis from capturing Milan. The Italian Wars resulted in Maximilian joining the Holy League to counter the French. His campaigns in Italy generally went poorly, and his progress was quickly stopped. Maximilian's campaigns tend to be criticized for being wasteful and gaining him little. Despite his work in enhancing his army, due to financial difficulties, the forces he could muster were too small to make a difference. In Italy, he gained the nickname of \"Massimiliano di pochi denari\" (Maximilian the Moneyless). One particularly humiliating campaign occurred in 1508, with a force mustered from hereditary lands and with limited resources, he decided to attack Venice. The force under Sixt Trautson were routed by Bartolomeo d'Alviano, while Maximilian's advance was blocked by the Venetian force under Niccol\u00f2 di Pitigliano and a French army under . Bartolomeo d'Alviano then pushed into the Imperial territory, seizing Gorizia and Trieste, and forcing Maximilian to sign a very unfavourable truce.\nAfterwards, he formed the League of Cambrai with Spain, France and Pope Julius II and won back territories he had conceded and some Venetian land. Most of the Slovenian areas were transferred to the Habsburgs. But atrocities and expenses for war devastated Austria and Carniola. Lack of financial means meant that he depended on allies' resources. When Schiner suggested they should let war feed war, he did not agree and was not brutal enough to do that. He acknowledged French control of Milan in 1515.\nThe situation in Italy wasn't the only problem Maximilian had then. The Swiss won a decisive victory against the Empire at Dornach on 22 July 1499. Maximilian had no choice but to agree to a peace treaty signed on 22 September 1499 in Basel that granted the Swiss Confederacy independence.\nJewish and Romani policies.\nJewish policy under Maximilian fluctuated greatly, usually influenced by financial considerations and the emperor's vacillating attitude when facing opposing views. In 1496, Maximilian issued a decree which expelled all Jews from Styria and Wiener Neustadt. Between 1494 and 1510, he authorized thirteen expulsions of Jews in return for fiscal compensations from local government.\nAfter 1510, this happened only once, and he showed resistance in a campaign to expel Jews from Regensburg. David Price comments that during the first seventeen years of his reign, he was a great threat to the Jews, but after 1510, even if his attitude was still exploitative, his policy gradually changed. A factor that probably played a role in the change was Maximilian's success in expanding imperial taxing over German Jewry, at this point, he likely considered the possibility of generating taxes from stable Jewish communities, instead of temporary compensations from local jurisdictions. Noflatscher and P\u00e9terfi note that Maximilian had a deep dislike for Jews since childhood, the reason of which is unknown, since both of his parents greatly favoured the Jews.\nIn 1509, relying on the influence of Kunigunde, Maximilian's pious sister and the Cologne Dominicans, the anti-Jewish agitator Johannes Pfefferkorn was authorized by Maximilian to confiscate all offending Jewish books, except the Bible. The confiscations happened in Frankfurt, Bingen, Mainz and other German cities. Responding to the order, the archbishop of Mainz, the city council of Frankfurt and various German princes tried to intervene in defense of the Jews. Maximilian consequently ordered the confiscated books to be returned. On 23 May 1510 though, influenced by a supposed \"host desecration\" and blood libel in Brandenburg, as well as pressure from Kunigunde, he ordered the creation of an investigating commission and asked for expert opinions from German universities and scholars. The prominent humanist Johann Reuchlin argued strongly in defense of the Jewish books, especially the Talmud. Reuchlin's arguments seemed to leave an impression on the emperor, who gradually developed an intellectual interest in the Talmud and other Jewish books. Maximilian later urged the Hebraist Petrus Galatinus to defend Reuchlin's position. Galatinus dedicated his work \"De Arcanis Catholicae Veritatis\", which provided 'a literary \"threshold\" where Jews and gentiles might meet', to the emperor.\nIt was Maximilian's support that enabled Reuchlin to fully devote himself to Jewish literature. Like his father Frederick III and his grandson Ferdinand I, he held Jewish physicians and teachers in high esteem. In 1514, he appointed Paulus Ricius, a Jew who converted to Christianity, as his personal physician. He was more interested in Ricius's Hebrew skills than in his medical abilities though. In 1515, he reminded his treasurer Jakob Villinger that Ricius was admitted for the purpose of translating the Talmud into Latin, and urged Villinger to keep an eye on him. Perhaps overwhelmed by the emperor's request, Ricius only managed to translate two out of sixty-three Mishna tractates before the emperor's death. Ricius managed to publish a translation of Joseph Gikatilla's Kabbalistic work \"The Gates of Light\", which was dedicated to Maximilian, though. It was under Frederick and Maximilian that the foundation of Modern Judaism arose, steeped in Humanism.\nIt was under Maximilian that policies concerning the Romani became harsher. In 1500, a notice was given to the Romani that they had to leave Germany by the next Easter, or become outlaws (the Romani had to evade the law by following a constant circuit from an area to another, and at times, obtain patronage from aristocrats). The Reformation beginning in 1517 did not consider them foreigners anymore, but as local beggars, they also faced discrimination. The change in policy was seemingly linked to the fear of the Turks (the Romani were accused of being spies for the Turks). Kenrich and Puxon explains that connect the situation with the consolidation of European nation-states, that also stimulated similar policies elsewhere.\nReforms.\nWithin the Holy Roman Empire, there was consensus that reforms were needed to preserve the unity of the Empire. For most of his reign, Frederick III had considered reform as a threat to his imperial prerogatives and wanted to avoid confrontations on the matter. However, in his last years, mainly to secure election for Maximilian, he presided over the initial phase of reform. Maximilian was more open to reform. From 1488 through his reign as sole ruler, he practiced a policy of brokerage, acting as the impartial judge between options suggested by the princes. Many measures were launched in the 1495 Reichstag at Worms. A new court was introduced, the \"Reichskammergericht\", that was largely independent from the Emperor. A new tax was launched to finance the Empire's affairs, the \"Gemeine Pfennig\". It was levied for the first time between 1495 and 1499, raising 136,000 florins, and another five times during the 1512\u20131551 period, before being supplanted by the matricular system which allowed common burdens to be assessed at imperial as well as Kreis level.\nTo create a rival for the \"Reichskammergericht\", Maximilian established the \"Reichshofrat\", which had its seat in Vienna. Unlike the \"Reichskammergericht\", the \"Reichshofrat\" looked into criminal matters and even allowed the emperors the means to depose rulers who did not live up to expectations. Pavlac and Lott note that, during Maximilian's reign, this council was not popular though. According to Barbara Stollberg-Rilinger though, throughout the early modern period, the \"Reichshofrat\" remained the faster and more efficient among the two Courts. The \"Reichskammergericht\" on the other hand was often torn by matters related to confessional alliance. Around 1497\u20131498, as part of his administrative reforms, he restructured his Privy Council (\"Geheimer Rat\"), a decision which today induces much scholarly discussion. Apart from balancing the \"Reichskammergericht\" with the \"Reichshofrat\", this act of restructuring seemed to suggest that, as Westphal quoting Ortlieb, the \"imperial ruler\u2014independent of the existence of a supreme court\u2014remained the contact person for hard pressed subjects in legal disputes as well, so that a special agency to deal with these matters could appear sensible\".\nIn 1500, as Maximilian urgently needed assistance for his military plans, he agreed to establish an organ called the \"Reichsregiment\" (central imperial government, consisting of twenty members including the Electors, with the Emperor or his representative as its chairman), first organized in 1501 in Nuremberg and consisted of the deputies of the Emperor, local rulers, commoners, and the prince-electors of the Holy Roman Empire. Maximilian resented the new organization as it weakened his powers, and the Estates failed to support it. The new organ proved politically weak, and its power returned to Maximilian in 1502.\nAccording to Thomas Brady Jr. and Jan-Dirk M\u00fcller, the most important governmental changes targeted the chancery. Early in Maximilian's reign, the Court Chancery at Innsbruck competed with the Imperial Chancery. By referring the political matters in Tyrol as well as Imperial problems to the Court Chancery, Maximilian gradually centralized its authority. The two chanceries became combined in 1502. Jan-Dirk M\u00fcller opines that this chancery became the decisive government institution since 1502. In 1496, the emperor created a general treasury (\"Hofkammer\") in Innsbruck, which became responsible for all the hereditary lands. The chamber of accounts (\"Raitkammer\") at Vienna was made subordinate to this body. Under , the \"Hofkammer\" was entrusted with not only hereditary lands' affairs, but Maximilian's affairs as the German king too.\nHistorian Joachim Whaley points out that there are usually two opposite views on Maximilian's rulership: one side is represented by the works of nineteenth century historians like Heinrich Ullmann or Leopold von Ranke, which criticize him for selfishly exploiting the German nation and putting the interest of his dynasty over his Germanic nation, thus impeding the unification process; the more recent side is represented by Hermann Wiesflecker's biography of 1971\u201386, which praises him for being \"a talented and successful ruler, notable not only for his Realpolitik but also for his cultural activities generally and for his literary and artistic patronage in particular\".\nAccording to Brady Jr., Ranke is right regarding the fact Berthold von Henneberg and other princes did play the leading role in presenting the proposals for creating institutions (that would also place the power in the hands of the princes) in 1495. However, what Maximilian opposed was not reform per se. He generally shared their sentiments regarding ending feuds, sounder administrative procedures, better record-keeping, qualifications for offices etc. Responding to the proposal that an Imperial Council (the later \"Reichsregiment\") should be created, he agreed and welcomed the participation of the Estates, but he alone should be the one who appointed members and the council should function only during his campaigns. He supported modernizing reforms (which he himself pioneered in his Austrian lands), but also wanted to tie it to his personal control, above all by permanent taxation, which the Estates consistently opposed. In 1504, when he was strong enough to propose his own ideas of such a Council, the cowered Estates tried to resist. At his strongest point though, he still failed to find a solution for the common tax matter, which led to disasters in Italy later. Stollberg-Rilinger notes that had the Common Penny been successful, modern governmental structures would likely emerge on the Empire's level, but that was why it failed as it was not in the interest of territorial lords. Meanwhile, he explored Austria's potential as a base for Imperial power and built his government largely with officials drawn from the lower aristocracy and burghers in Southern Germany.\nWhaley notes that the real foundation of his Imperial power lay with his networks of allies and clients, especially the less powerful Estates, who helped him to recover his strength in 1502\u2014his first reform proposals as King of the Romans in 1486 were about the creation of a network of regional unions. According to Whaley, \"More systematically than any predecessor, Maximilian exploited the potential of regional leagues and unions to extend imperial influence and to create the possibility of imperial government in the Reich.\" To the Empire, the mechanisms involving such regional institutions bolstered the Land Peace (\"Ewiger Landfriede\") declared in 1495 as well as the creation of the \"Reichskreise\" (\"Imperial Circles\", which would serve the purpose of organize imperial armies, collect taxes and enforce orders of the imperial institutions: there were six at first; in 1512, the number increased to ten), between 1500 and 1512, although they were only fully functional some decades later. While Brady describes Maximilian's thinking as \"dynastic and early modern\", Heinz Angermeier (also focusing on his intentions at the 1495 Diet) writes that for Maximilian, \"the first politician on the German throne\", dynastic interests and imperial politics had no contradiction. Rather, the alliance with Spain, imperial prerogatives, anti-Ottoman agenda, European leadership and inner politics were all tied together. In Austria, Maximilian defined two administrative units: Lower Austria and Upper Austria (Further Austria was included in Upper Austria).\nAnother development arising from the reform was that, amidst the prolonged struggles between the monarchical-centralism of the emperor and the estates-based federalism of the princes, the Reichstag (Imperial Diet) became the all-important political forum and the supreme legal and constitutional institution (without any declared legal basis or inaugural act), which would act as a guarantee for the preservation of the Empire in the long run.\nUltimately, the results of the reform movement presided over by Maximilian, as presented in the shape of newly formed structures as well as the general framework (functioning as a constitutional framework), were a compromise between emperor and estates, who more or less shared common cause but separate interests. Although the system of institutions that arose from this was not complete, a flexible, adaptive problem-solving mechanism for the Empire was formed. Stollberg also links the development of the reform to the concentration of supranational power in the Habsburgs' hand, which manifested in the successful dynastic marriages of Maximilian and his descendants (and the successful defense of those lands, notably the rich Low Countries) as well as Maximilian's development of a revolutionary post system that helped the Habsburgs to maintain control of their territories. Additionally, the communication revolution created by the combination of the postal system with printing would boost the empire's capability of disseminating orders and policies as well as its coherence in general, elevating cultural life, and also help reformers like Luther to broadcast their views effectively.\nRecent German research explores the importance of the Reichstags that followed the 1495 one in Worms. The 1512 Reichstag in Trier that Maximilian assembled, for example, was decisive for the development of the \"Reichskammergericht\", the Land Peace and the \"Gemeine Pfennig\", although by this point it was clear that Maximilian was already past his best years (the early signs of crisis seemed to have shown already in Cologne, 1505)\u2014which, according to Dietmar Heil, resulted in the fact that the \"Gemeine Pfennig\" was only partially approved and then partially implemented. Seyboth notes that, in his later years, he became more irritable, obstinate and closed, which led to growing alienation with the Estates. He recognized the trend of the Reichstag to become a more modern institution, the concern of the Estates with internal problems, and contributed to the solutions, but only so that his own interests will not be ignored.\nAccording to Whaley, if Maximilian ever saw Germany as a source of income and soldiers only, he failed miserably in extracting both. His hereditary lands and other sources always contributed much more (the Estates gave him the equivalent of 50,000 gulden per year, a lower than even the taxes paid by Jews in both the Reich and hereditary lands, while Austria contributed 500,000 to 1 million gulden per year). On the other hand, the attempts he demonstrated in building the imperial system alone shows that he did consider the German lands \"a real sphere of government in which aspirations to royal rule were actively and purposefully pursued.\" Whaley notes that, despite struggles, what emerged at the end of Maximilian's rule was a strengthened monarchy and not an oligarchy of princes. If he was usually weak when trying to act as a monarch and using imperial instituations like the Reichstag, Maximilian's position was often strong when acting as a neutral overlord and relying on regional leagues of weaker principalities such as the Swabian league, as shown in his ability to call on money and soldiers to mediate the Bavaria dispute in 1504, after which he gained significant territories in Alsace, Swabia and Tyrol. His fiscal reform in his hereditary lands provided a model for other German princes.\nBenjamin Curtis suggests that while Maximilian was not able to fully create a common government for his lands (although the chancellery and court council were able to coordinate affairs across the realms), he strengthened key administrative functions in Austria and created central offices to deal with financial, political and judicial matters\u2014these offices replaced the feudal system and became representative of a more modern system that was administered by professionalized officials. After two decades of reforms, the emperor retained his position as first among equals, while the empire gained common institutions through which the emperor shared power with the estates. Dietmar Heil argues that the Estates actually offered Maximilian considerable financial help, in consideration of their financial capacity. According to Heil, historians have traditionally been too receptive to the statements of the deceptive emperor (who tried to create such an impression in order to generate motivation).\nIn 1508, Maximilian, with the assent of Pope Julius II, took the title \"Erw\u00e4hlter R\u00f6mischer Kaiser\" (\"Elected Roman Emperor\"), thus ending the centuries-old custom that the Holy Roman Emperor had to be crowned by the Pope.\nAt the 1495 Diet of Worms, the Reception of Roman Law was accelerated and formalized. The Roman Law was made binding in German courts, except in the case it was contrary to local statutes. In practice, it became the basic law throughout Germany, displacing Germanic local law to a large extent, although Germanic law was still operative at the lower courts. Other than the desire to achieve legal unity and other factors, the adoption also highlighted the continuity between the Ancient Roman empire and the Holy Roman Empire.\nTo realize his resolve to reform and unify the legal system, the emperor frequently intervened personally in matters of local legal matters, overriding local charters and customs. This practice was often met with irony and scorn from local councils, who wanted to protect local codes. Maximilian had a general reputation of justice and clemency, but could occasionally act in a violent and resentful manner if personally affronted.\nIn 1499, as the ruler of Tyrol, he introduced the \"\" (the Penal Code of Maximilian). This was the first codified penal law in the German speaking world. The law attempted to introduce regularity into contemporary discrete practices of the courts. This would be part of the basis for the Constitutio Criminalis Carolina established under Charles V in 1530. Regarding the use of torture, the court needed to decide whether someone should be tortured. If such a decision was made, three council members and a clerk should be present and observe whether a confession was made only because of the fear of torture or the pain of torture, or that another person would be harmed.\nDuring the Austrian-Hungarian war (1477\u20131488), Maximilian's father Frederick III issued the first modern regulations to strengthen military discipline. In 1508, using this ordinance as the basis, Maximilian devised the first military code (\"Articles\"). This code included 23 articles. The first five articles prescribed total obedience to imperial authority. Article 7 established the rules of conduct in camps. Article 13 exempted churches from billeting while Article 14 forbade violence against civilians: \"You shall swear that you will not harm any pregnant women, widows and orphans, priests, honest maidens and mothers, under the fear of punishment for perjury and death\". These actions that indicated the early developments of a \"military revolution\" in European laws had a tradition in the Roman concept of a just war and ideas of sixteenth-century scholars, who developed this ancient doctrine with a main thesis which advocated that war was a matter between two armies and thus the civilians (especially women, children and old people) should be given immunity. The code would be the basis for further ordinances by Charles V and new \"Articles\" by Maximilian II, which became the universal military code for the whole Holy Roman Empire until 1642.\nThe legal reform seriously weakened the ancient Vehmic court (\"Vehmgericht\", or Secret Tribunal of Westphalia, traditionally held to be instituted by Charlemagne but this theory is now considered unlikely), although it would not be abolished completely until 1811 (when it was abolished under the order of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte).\nIn 1518, after a general diet of all Habsburg hereditary lands, the emperor issued the \"Innsbrucker Libell\" which set out the general defence order (Verteidigungsordnung) of Austrian provinces, which \"gathered together all the elements that had appeared and developed over the preceding centuries.\". The provincial army, based on noble cavalry, was for defence only; bonded labourers were conscripted using a proportional conscription system; upper and lower Austrian provinces agreed on a mutual defence pact in which they would form a joint command structure if either were attacked. The military system and other reforms were threatened after Maximilian's de\u1ea1th but would be restored and reorganized later under Ferdinand I.\nAccording to Brady Jr., Maximilian was no reformer of the church though. Personally pious, he was also a practical caesaropapist who was only interested in the ecclesiastical organization as far as reforms could bring him political and fiscal advantages. He met Luther once at the Diet of Augsburg in 1518, \"a rehearsal for Worms in 1521\". He saw the grievances and agreed with Luther on some points. However as the religious question was a matter of money and power to him, he had no interest in stopping the indulgences. At this point, he was too busy with his grandson's election. As Luther was about to be arrested by the papal legate, he granted him a letter of safe passage. Brady notes that blindness to the need to reform from above would lead to the reform from below.\nFinance and Economy.\nMaximilian was always troubled by financial shortcomings; his income never seemed to be enough to sustain his large-scale goals and policies. For this reason he was forced to take substantial credits from Upper German banker families, especially from the Gossembrot, Baumgarten, Fugger, and Welser families. J\u00f6rg Baumgarten even served as Maximilian's financial advisor. The connection between the emperor and banking families in Augsburg was so widely known that Francis I of France derisively nicknamed him \"the Mayor of Augsburg\" (another story recounts that a French courtier called him the alderman of Augsburg, to which Louis XII replied: \"Yes, but every time that this alderman rings the tocsin from his belfry, he makes all France tremble.\", referring to Maximilian's military ability). Around 70 percent of his income went to wars (and by the 1510s, he was waging wars on almost all sides of his border). At the end of Maximilian's rule, the Habsburgs' mountain of debt totalled six million gulden to six and a half million gulden, depending on the sources. By 1531, the remaining amount of debt was estimated at 400,000 gulden (about 282,669 Spanish ducats).\nIn his entire reign, he had spent around 25 million gulden, much of which was contributed by his most loyal subjects\u2014the Tyrolers. The historian Thomas Brady comments: \"The best that can be said of his financial practices is that he borrowed democratically from rich and poor alike and defaulted with the same even-handedness\". By comparison, when he abdicated in 1556, Charles V left Philip a total debt of 36 million ducats (equal to the income from Spanish America for his entire reign), while Ferdinand I left a debt of 12.5 million gulden when he died in 1564. Economy and economic policies under the reign of Maximilian is a relatively unexplored topic, according to Benecke.\nOverall, according to Whaley, \"The reign of Maximilian I saw recovery and growth but also growing tension. This created both winners and losers.\", although Whaley opines that this is no reason to expect a revolutionary explosion (in connection to Luther and the Reformation). Whaley points out, though, that because Maximilian and Charles V tried to promoted the interests of the Netherlands, after 1500, the Hanseatic League was negatively affected and their growth relative to England and the Netherlands declined.\nIn the Low Countries, during his regency, to get more money to pay for his campaigns, he resorted to debase coins in the Burgundian mints, causing more conflicts with the interests of the Estates and the merchant class.\nIn Austria, although this was never enough for his needs, his management of mines and salt works proved efficient, with a marked increase in revenue, the fine silver production in Schwaz increased from 2,800\u00a0kg in 1470 to 14,000\u00a0kg in 1516. Benecke remarks that Maximilian was a ruthless, exploitative businessman while Hollegger sees him as a clearheaded manager with sober cost-benefit analysis. Ultimately, he had to mortgage these properties to the Fuggers to get quick cash. The financial price would ultimately fall on the Austrian population. Fichtner states that Maximilian's pan-European vision was very expensive, and his financial practices antagonized his subjects both high and low in Burgundy, Austria and Germany (who tried to temper his ambitions, although they never came to hate the charismatic ruler personally), this was still modest in comparison with what was about to come, and the Ottoman threat gave the Austrians a reason to pay.\nFor both economic and military purposes, he encouraged the mining of copper, silver and calamine, coining, brass manufacturing and the arms industry. He took pains to protect the local economy, especially in Tyrol, where there was a mining boom (accompanied by a population boom), although Safley notes that he also enabled families like the Hochstetters to exploit the economy for their own ends. Agriculture also developed significantly, except in Lower Austria which suffered from the war with Matthias Corvinus.\nAugsburg benefitted majorly from the establishment and expansion of the Kaiserliche Reichspost as well as Maximilian's personal attachment to the city. The imperial city became \"the dominant centre of early capitalism\" of the 16th century, and \"the location of the most important post office within the Holy Roman Empire\". From Maximilian's time, as the \"terminuses of the first transcontinental post lines\" began to shift from Innsbruck to Venice and from Brussels to Antwerp, in these cities, the communication system and the news market started to converge. As the Fuggers as well as other trading companies based their most important branches in these cities, these traders gained access to these systems as well. (Despite a widely circulated theory which holds that the Fuggers themselves operated their own communication system, in reality they relied upon the imperial posts, presumably from the 1490s onwards, as official members of the court of Maximilian I).\nLeipzig started its rise into one of the largest European trade fair cities after Maximilian granted them wide-ranged privileges in 1497 (and raised their three markets to the status of Imperial Fair in 1507).\n\"Tu felix Austria nube\".\nBackground.\nTraditionally, German dynasties had exploited the potential of the imperial title to bring Eastern Europe into the fold, in addition to their lands north and south of the Alps. Under Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor, the House of Luxembourg, predecessors of the Habsburgs as the Imperial dynasty, had managed to gain an empire almost comparable in scale to the later Habsburg empire, although at the same time they lost the Kingdom of Burgundy and control over Italian territories. Their focus on the East, especially Hungary (which was outside the Holy Roman Empire and also gained by the Luxembourgs with a marriage), allowed the new Burgundian rulers from the House of Valois to foster discontent among German princes. Thus, the Habsburgs were forced to refocus their attention on the West. Frederick III's cousin and predecessor, Albert II (who was Sigismund's son-in-law and heir through his marriage with Elizabeth of Luxembourg) had managed to combine the crowns of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia and Croatia under his rule, but he died young. During his rule, Maximilian had a double focus on both the East and the West. The successful expansion (with the notable role of marriage policy) under Maximilian bolstered his position in the Empire, and also created more pressure for an imperial reform, so that they could get more resources and coordinated help from the German territories to defend their realms and counter hostile powers such as France.\nMarriage and foreign policy under Maximilian.\nAs part of the Treaty of Arras, Maximilian betrothed his three-year-old daughter Margaret to the Dauphin of France (later Charles VIII), son of his adversary Louis XI. The betrothal was the result of clandestine negotiations between Louis XI and Ghent\u2014as Maximilian's position was temporarily weakened by his wife's death, he had no say in the matter.\nDying shortly after signing the Treaty of Le Verger, Francis II, Duke of Brittany, left his realm to his daughter Anne. In search of alliances to protect her domain from neighboring interests, she betrothed herself to Maximilian I in 1490. About a year later, they married by proxy.\nHowever, Charles VIII and his sister Anne wanted her inheritance for France. So, when the former came of age in 1491, and taking advantage of Maximilian and his father's interest in the succession of their adversary Mathias Corvinus, King of Hungary, Charles repudiated his betrothal to Margaret, invaded Brittany, forced Anne of Brittany to repudiate her unconsummated marriage to Maximilian, and married her himself.\nMargaret then remained in France as a hostage of sorts until 1493, when she was finally returned to her father with the signing of the Treaty of Senlis.\nIn the same year, as the hostilities of the lengthy Italian Wars with France were in preparation, Maximilian contracted another marriage for himself, this time to Bianca Maria Sforza, daughter of Galeazzo Maria Sforza, Duke of Milan, with the intercession of his brother, Ludovico Sforza, then regent of the duchy after the former's death.\nIn the East, Maximilian faced the need to reduce the growing pressures on the Empire brought about by treaties between the rulers of France, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, and Russia, as well as to bolster his dynasty's position\u2014temporarily threatened by the union between Anne of Foix-Candale and Vladislaus II of Hungary, in addition to resistance of the Hungarian magnates\u2014in Bohemia and Hungary (that the Habsburgs claimed through inheritance and overlordship). Maximilian met with the Jagiellonian kings Ladislaus II of Hungary and Bohemia and Sigismund I of Poland at the First Congress of Vienna in 1515. There they arranged for Maximilian's granddaughter Mary to marry Louis, the son of Ladislaus, and for Anne (the sister of Louis) to marry Maximilian's grandson Ferdinand (both grandchildren being the children of Philip the Handsome, Maximilian's son, and Joanna of Castile). The marriages arranged there brought Habsburg kingship over Hungary and Bohemia in 1526. In 1515, Louis was adopted by Maximilian. Maximilian had to serve as the proxy groom to Anna in the betrothal ceremony, because only in 1516 did Ferdinand agree to enter into the marriage, which would happen in 1521.\nThese political marriages were summed up in the following Latin elegiac couplet, reportedly spoken by Matthias Corvinus: \"Bella gerant ali\u012b, t\u016b f\u0113lix Austria n\u016bbe/ Nam quae Mars ali\u012bs, dat tibi regna Venus\", \"Let others wage war, but thou, O happy Austria, marry; for those kingdoms which Mars gives to others, Venus gives to thee.\"\nContrary to the implication of this motto though, Maximilian waged war aplenty (In four decades of ruling, he waged 27 wars in total). Late in his life though, only the military situation in the East worked well\u2014the Magyars was said to fear him more than the Turks or the Devil. In the West, he could do no more than blocking French expansion and only with Spanish aid. His general strategy was to combine his intricate systems of alliance, military threats and offers of marriage to realize his expansionist ambitions. Using overtures to Russia, Maximilian succeeded in coercing Bohemia, Hungary and Poland into acquiesce in the Habsburgs' expansionist plans. Combining this tactic with military threats, he was able to gain the favourable marriage arrangements In Hungary and Bohemia (which were under the same dynasty). According to Bence P\u00e9terfi, many Hungarian nobles maintained dual loyalty to both the Habsburgs and the Jagiellons. After the Peace of Pressburg (1491) legalized this phenomenon, there was a change in dynamic: \"While at the time of the conflicts between Frederick III and Matthias Corvinus it was primarily those who took the side of the Hungarian king who were able to pursue successful careers, after 1491, the situation reversed, and those who were\non the side of the Habsburgs seemed to have more opportunities.\"\nAt the same time, his sprawling panoply of territories as well as potential claims constituted a threat to France, thus forcing Maximilian to continuously launch wars in defense of his possessions in Burgundy, the Low Countries and Italy against four generations of French kings (Louis XI, Charles VIII, Louis XII, Francis I). Coalitions he assembled for this purpose sometimes consisted of non-imperial actors like England. Edward J. Watts comments that the nature of these wars was dynastic, rather than imperial.\nFortune was also a factor that helped to bring about the results of his marriage plans. The double marriage could have given the Jagiellon a claim in Austria, while a potential male child of Margaret and John, a prince of Spain, would have had a claim to a portion of the maternal grandfather's possessions as well. But as it turned out, Vladislaus's male line became extinct, while the frail John died without offspring, so Maximilian's male line was able to claim the thrones.\nDeath and succession.\nIn 1501, Maximilian fell from his horse and badly injured his leg, causing him pain for the rest of his life. Some historians have suggested that he was \"morbidly\" depressed: from 1514, he traveled everywhere with his coffin.\nDuring his last years, Maximilian began to focus on the question of imperial succession. After the death of his son Philip in 1506, his goal was to secure the imperial throne for his grandson Charles. In 1518, at the Diet of Augsburg, the ailing emperor made substantial efforts, both political and financial, in order to secure the election of Charles as King of the Romans, also hoping to obtain his own imperial coronation (still being only the proclaimed emperor since 1508). All of those efforts failed, because of various political and legal obstacles, including the reluctance of pope Leo X to see the young lord of southern Italian realms (since 1516, Charles was king of Sicily, Naples and Sardinia) also becoming the heir to the imperial throne and thus achieving domination over the entire peninsula.\nAfter the failure at Augsburg, feeling his death near after seeing an eclipse, Maximilian returned to his beloved Innsbruck, but the city's innkeepers and purveyors did not grant the emperor's entourage further credit. The resulting fit led to a stroke that left him bedridden on 15 December 1518. However, he continued to read documents and received foreign envoys right until the end. Maximilian died in Wels, Upper Austria, at three o'clock in the morning on 12 January 1519. Different historians have listed different diseases as the main cause of death, including cancer (likely stomach cancer or intestinal cancer), pneumonia, syphilis, gall stones, stroke (he did have a combination of dangerous medical problems) etc.\nFor penitential reasons, Maximilian gave very specific instructions for the treatment of his body after death. He wanted his hair to be cut off and his teeth knocked out, and the body was to be whipped and covered with lime and ash, wrapped in linen, and \"publicly displayed to show the perishableness of all earthly glory\". Gregor Reisch, the emperor's friend and confessor who closed his eyes, did not obey the instruction though. He placed a rosary in Maximilian's hand and other sacred objects near the corpse. He was buried in the Castle Chapel at Wiener Neustadt on borrowed money. The casket was opened during renovation under Maria Theresa. After that, the body was reinterred in a Baroque sarcophagus, that later was found unscathed amidst the wreckage of the chapel (due to the Second World War) on 6 August 1946. The emperor was ceremoniously buried again in 1950.\nMaximilian was succeeded as by his grandson Charles, immediately as the new ruler of Habsburg hereditary lands, and consequently also as the newly elected emperor in 1519. According to the traditional view, a credit of one million gulden was provided (to Charles, after Maximilian's death, according to Wiesflecker and Koenigsberger) by the Fuggers (the Cortes had voted over 600,000 crowns for Charles's election campaign, but money from Spain could not arrive quick enough), which was used for advertising and to bribe the prince-electors, and that this was the decisive factor in Charles's successful election. Others point out that while the electors were paid, this was not the reason for the outcome, or at most played only a small part. The important factor that swayed the final decision was that Frederick refused the offer, and made a speech in support of Charles on the ground that they needed a strong leader against the Ottomans, Charles had the resources and was a prince of German extraction. The death of Maximilian in 1519 seemed to put the succession at risk, but in a few months the election of Charles V was secured.\nLegacy.\nThe legacy of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor left a lasting impact on Europe. Although known as \"the last knight,\" Maximilian balanced his chivalric ideals with the daily \u201cherculean tasks of bureaucracy,\u201d often dictating to several secretaries at once. James M. Bradburne notes that while every ruler sought victory, Maximilian aspired to embody Apollo Musagetes. His circle of humanists and admirers also portrayed him this way.\nA universal patron, Maximilian\u2019s intellect and imagination, according to Sydney Anglo, made even Castiglione\u2019s ideal courtier seem lesser\u2014though he often treated artists and scholars as mere tools for his ambitions.\nMore than a sponsor, Maximilian was a planner and inventor who immersed himself in every detail\u2014from politics and warfare to the arts, sciences, and technology. His boundless energy was sometimes criticized as excessive or distracting from governance. Later critics suggested he possessed the brilliance of a visionary more than the discipline of a ruler, his far-reaching intellect making him try to \"force the march of time.\"\nThrough wars and marriages, Maximilian expanded Habsburg influence across the Netherlands, Spain, Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, and Italy. This dominance shaped Europe for centuries and endured as the Austro-Hungarian Empire until its dissolution on 3 November 1918\u2014399 years, 11 months, and 9 days after Maximilian\u2019s death.\nGeoffrey Parker summarizes Maximilian\u2019s political legacy as follows:\nBy the time Charles received his presentation copy of Der Weisskunig in 1517, Maximilian could point to four major successes. He had protected and reorganized the Burgundian Netherlands, Whose political future had seemed bleak when he became their ruler forty years earlier. Likewise, he had overcome the obstacles posed by individual institutions, traditions and languages to forge the sub-Alpine lands he inherited from his father into a single state: \u2018Austria', ruled and taxed by a single administration that he created at Innsbruck. He had also reformed the chaotic central government of the Holy Roman Empire in ways that, though imperfect, would last almost until its demise three centuries later. Finally, by arranging strategic marriages for his grandchildren, he had established the House of Habsburg as the premier dynasty in central and eastern Europe, creating a polity that his successors would expand over the next four centuries.\nThe \"Britannica Encyclopaedia\" comments on Maximilian's achievements:\nMaximilian I [...] made his family, the Habsburgs, dominant in 16th-century Europe. He added vast lands to the traditional Austrian holdings, securing the Netherlands by his own marriage, Hungary and Bohemia by treaty and military pressure, and Spain and the Spanish empire by the marriage of his son Philip [...] Great as Maximilian's achievements were, they did not match his ambitions; he had hoped to unite all of western Europe by reviving the empire of Charlemagne [...] His military talents were considerable and led him to use war to attain his ends. He carried out meaningful administrative reforms, and his military innovations would transform Europe's battlefields for more than a century, but he was ignorant of economics and was financially unreliable.\nHollegger notes that, unable to win full support from his imperial estates, Maximilian built a network of alliances that foreshadowed modern European power politics\u2014\u201clike in the game of chess, no piece could be moved without thinking ahead about the others.\u201d\nCauchies writes that after the long struggles of Mary and Maximilian\u2019s joint rule, their state-building efforts bore fruit: \u201ca consortium of territories nevertheless emerged which found its place in the West under the heirs, Philip the Handsome and Charles V.\u201d Yet his anti-French stance and dream of imperial universality often alienated the Burgundians, unlike his peace-minded son Philip. Haemers adds that the Dutch find it \u201cimpossible to celebrate him the way Germans or Austrians do,\u201d reflecting national sentiment more than history itself.\nHugh Trevor-Roper remarks that although Maximilian\u2019s wars achieved little, \u201cBy harnessing the arts, he surrounded his dynasty with a lustrous aura it had previously lacked. It was to this illusion that his successors looked for their inspiration. To them, he was not simply the second founder of the dynasty; he was the creator of its legend\u2014one that transcended politics, nationality, even religion.\u201d Paula Sutter Fichtner calls him the author of a \u201cbasic but imperfect script for the organization of a Habsburg government,\u201d visionary yet fiscally reckless. His later creation of a \"Hofrat\" to share responsibilities came only when illness forced him to delegate. The alliance between crown and cities he envisioned never solidified; the Reformation and shifting priorities under Charles V and Ferdinand left his framework incomplete.\nOfficial style.\n\"We, Maximilian, by the Grace of God, elected Roman Emperor, always Augmenter of the Empire, King of Hungary, Dalmatia, Croatia, etc. Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brittany, Lorrain, Brabant, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, Limbourg, Luxembourg, and Guelders; Count of Flanders, Habsburg, Tyrol, Pfiert, Kybourg, Artois, and Burgundy; Count Palatine of Haynault, Holland, Zeland, Namur, and Zutphen; Marquess of the Roman Empire and of Burgau, Landgrave of Alsatia, Lord of Frisia, the Wendish Mark, Portenau, Salins, and Malines, etc. etc.\"\nChivalric orders.\nOn 30 April 1478, Maximilian was knighted by Adolph of Cleves, a senior member of the Order of the Golden Fleece and on the same day he became the sovereign of this exalted order. As its head, he did everything in his power to restore its glory as well as associate the order with the Habsburg lineage. He expelled the members who had defected to France and rewarded those loyal to him, and also invited foreign rulers to join its ranks.\nMaximilian I was a member of the Order of the Garter, nominated by King Henry VII of England in 1489. His Garter stall plate survives in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.\nMaximilian was patron of the Order of Saint George founded by his father, and also the founder of its secular confraternity.\nAppearance and personality.\nMaximilian was strongly built, had an upright posture, was over six feet tall, had blue eyes, neck length blond or reddish hair, a large hooked nose and a jutting jaw (like his father, he always shaved his beard. Although not conventionally handsome, he was well-proportioned and considered physically attractive, with abiding youthfulness and an affable, pleasing manner. A womanizer since his teenager days, he increasingly sought distraction from the tragedy of the first marriage and the frustration of the second marriage in the company of \"sleeping women\" in all corners of his empire. Sigrid-Maria Gr\u00f6ssing describes him as a charming heartbreaker for all his life. He could manoeuvre with one hand a seven-meter lance comfortably.\nMaximilian was a late developer. According to his teacher Johannes Cuspinian, he did not speak until he was nine-years-old, and after that only developed slowly. Frederick III recalled that when his son was twelve, he still thought that the boy was either mute or stupid. In his adulthood, he spoke six languages (he learned French from his wife Mary) and was a genuinely talented author. Other than languages, mathematics and religion, he painted and played various instruments and was also trained in farming, carpentry and blacksmithing, although the focus of his education was naturally kingship. According to Fichtner, he did not learn much from formal training though, because even as a boy, he never sat still and tutors could not do much about that. Gerhard Benecke opines that by nature he was the man of action, a \"vigorously charming extrovert\" who had a \"conventionally superficial interest in knowledge, science and art combined with excellent health in his youth\" (he remained virile into his late thirties and although later his health was damaged due to a leg accident and other ailments, the emperor displayed remarkable self-discipline and hardly ever recognized a weakness; at the 1510 Reichstag in Augsburg, Maximilian, 51, fought against Frederick of Saxony, 47, in front of a large audience.). He was brave to the point of recklessness, and this did not only show in battles. He once entered a lion's enclosure in Munich alone to tease the lion, and at another point climbed to the top of the Cathedral of Ulm, stood on one foot and turned himself round to gain a full view, at the trepidation of his attendants. In the nineteenth century, an Austrian officer lost his life trying to repeat the emperor's \"feat\", while another succeeded. While he paid magnificently for a princely style, he required little for personal needs. In his mature years, he exerted restraint on personal habits, except during his depressive phases (when he drank night and day, sometimes incapacitating the government, to the great annoyance of Chancellor Zyprian von Sernteiner) or in the companion of his artist friends. The artists got preferential treatment in criminal matters too, such as the case of Veit Stoss, whose sentence (imprisonment and having his hands chopped off for an actual crime) issued by Nuremberg got cancelled on the sole basis of genius. The emperor's reasoning was that, what came as a gift from God should not be treated according to usual norms or human proportions. To the astonishment of contemporaries, he laughed at the satire directed against his person and organized celebrations after defeats.\nHistorian Ernst Bock, with whom Benecke shares the same sentiment, writes the following about him:\nHis rosy optimism and utilitarianism, his totally naive amorality in matters political, both unscrupulous and machiavellian; his sensuous and earthy naturalness, his exceptional receptiveness towards anything beautiful especially in the visual arts, but also towards the various fashions of his time whether the nationalism in politics, the humanism in literature and philosophy or in matters of economics and capitalism; further his surprising yearning for personal fame combined with a striving for popularity, above all the clear consciousness of a developed individuality: these properties Maximilian displayed again and again.\nHistorian Paula Fichtner describes Maximilian as a leader who was ambitious and imaginative to a fault, with self-publicizing tendencies as well as territorial and administrative ambitions that betrayed a nature both \"soaring and recognizably modern\", while dismissing Benecke's presentation of Maximilian as \"an insensitive agent of exploitation\" as influenced by the author's personal political leaning.\nBerenger and Simpson consider Maximilian a greedy Renaissance prince, and also, \"a prodigious man of action whose chief fault was to have 'too many irons in the fire'\". On the other hand, Steven Beller criticizes him for being too much of a medieval knight who had a hectic schedule of warring, always crisscrossing the whole continent to do battles (for example, in August 1513, he commanded Henry VIII's English army in the second Guinegate, and a few weeks later joined the Spanish forces in defeating the Venetians) with little resources to support his ambitions. According to Beller, Maximilian should have spent more time at home persuading the estates to adopt a more efficient governmental and fiscal system.\nThomas A. Brady Jr. praises the emperor's sense of honour, but criticizes his financial immorality\u2014according to Geoffrey Parker, both points, together with Maximilian's martial qualities and hard-working nature, would be inherited from the grandfather by Charles V:\n[...]though punctilious to a fault about his honor, he lacked all morals about money. Every florin was spent, mortgaged, and promised ten times over before it ever came in; he set his courtiers a model for their infamous venality; he sometimes had to leave his queen behind as pledge for his debts; and he borrowed continuously from his servitors\u2014large sums from top officials, tiny ones from servants\u2014and never repaid them. Those who liked him tried to make excuses.\nCertain English sources describe him as a ruler who habitually failed to keep his words. According to Wiesflecker, people could often depend on his promises more than those of most princes of his days, although he was no stranger to the \"clausola francese\" and also tended to use a wide variety of statements to cover his true intentions, which unjustly earned him the reputation of being fickle. Hollegger concurs that Maximilian's court officials, except Eitelfriedrich von Zollern and Wolfgang von F\u00fcrstenberg, did expect gifts and money for tips and help, and the emperor usually defended his counselors and servants even if he acted against the more blatant displays of material greed. Maximilian though was not a man who could be controlled or influenced easily by his officials. Hollegger also opines that while many of his political and artistic schemes leaned towards megalomania, there was a sober realist who believed in progression and relied on modern modes of management underneath. Personally, \"frequently described as humane, gentle, and friendly, he reacted with anger, violence, and vengefulness when he felt his rights had been injured or his honor threatened, both of which he valued greatly.\" The price for his warlike ruling style and his ambition for a globalized monarchy (that ultimately achieved considerable successes) was a continuous succession of war, that earned him the sobriquet \"Heart of steel\" (Coeur d'acier).\nMarriages and offspring.\nMaximilian was married three times, but only the first marriage produced offspring:\nThe marriage produced three children, of whom only two survived:\nThe drive behind this marriage, to the great annoyance of Frederick III (who characterized it as \"disgraceful\"), was the desire of personal revenge against the French (Maximilian blamed France for the great tragedies of his life: Mary of Burgundy's death, political upheavals that followed, his troubled relationship with his son, and later, Philip's death). The young King of the Romans had in mind a pincer grip against France, while Frederick wanted him to focus on expansion towards the east and maintenance of stability in newly reacquired Austria. But Brittany was so weak that by itself it could not resist French attack even briefly as the Burgundian State had done, while Maximilian could not even personally come to Brittany to consummate the marriage.\nIn addition, he had several illegitimate children, but the number and identities of those are a matter of great debate. Johann Jakob Fugger writes in \"Ehrenspiegel\" (\"Mirror of Honour\") that the emperor began fathering illegitimate children after becoming a widower, and that there were eight children in total, four boys and four girls.\nThese were:\nTriumphal woodcuts.\nA set of woodcuts called the Triumph of Emperor Maximilian I.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39071", "revid": "26167860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39071", "title": "Samuel de Champlain", "text": "French explorer of North America (1574\u20131635)\nSamuel de Champlain (; baptized 13 August 1574 \u2013 25 December 1635) was a French colonizer, navigator, cartographer, soldier, geographer, diplomat, and chronicler who founded Quebec City and established New France as a permanent French colony in North America.\nChamplain made between 21 and 29 voyages across the Atlantic Ocean during his career, founding Quebec on 3 July 1608. As an accomplished cartographer, he created the first accurate maps of North America's eastern coastline and the Great Lakes region, combining direct observation with information provided by Indigenous peoples. His detailed maps and written accounts provided Europeans with their first comprehensive understanding of the geography and peoples of northeastern North America.\nBorn into a family of mariners, Champlain began exploring North America in 1603 under the guidance of Fran\u00e7ois Grav\u00e9 Du Pont. From 1604 to 1607, he participated in establishing Port Royal in Acadia, the first permanent European settlement north of Florida. His subsequent founding of Quebec in 1608 marked the beginning of sustained French colonization in the St. Lawrence River valley.\nChamplain forged crucial alliances with local Innu (Montagnais), Algonquin, and Wendat (Huron) peoples, relationships that proved essential to the survival and growth of New France. He participated in their conflicts against the Iroquois confederacy and spent extended periods living among Indigenous communities, making detailed ethnographic observations that formed the basis of his published works.\nIn 1620, King Louis XIII ordered Champlain to cease exploration and focus on colonial administration. Although he never held the formal title of governor due to his non-noble status, Champlain effectively governed New France until his death in Quebec on 25 December 1635. His legacy includes numerous geographical features named in his honor, most notably Lake Champlain, and recognition as the \"Father of New France.\"\nEarly life.\nBirth and family origins.\nSamuel de Champlain's exact birth date and location remain subjects of scholarly debate. He was the son of Antoine Champlain (also recorded as \"Anthoine Chappelain\" in some documents) and Marguerite Le Roy, and was likely born in the French province of Aunis, in either Hiers-Brouage or the port city of La Rochelle.\nThe traditional birth year of 1567, established by 19th-century historian Pierre-Damien Rainguet and reinforced by Canadian Catholic priest Laverdi\u00e8re in his 1870 \"\u0152uvres de Champlain\", has been widely accepted and appears on numerous monuments. However, L\u00e9opold Delayant challenged this date as early as 1867, and subsequent research has revealed that Rainguet's calculations were based on incorrect assumptions.\nIn 1978, historian Jean Liebel conducted groundbreaking archival research and concluded that Champlain was born in approximately 1580 in Brouage. Liebel suggested that earlier scholars may have preferred dates when Brouage was under Catholic control (1567, 1570, and 1575) rather than Protestant occupation.\nMost recently, in 2012, French genealogist Jean-Marie Germe discovered a baptismal record dated 13 August 1574 in the Saint-Yon Protestant temple register at La Rochelle for one Samuel Chapeleau, son of Antoine Chapeleau and Marguerite Le Roy. While the similarity between \"Chapeleau\" and \"Champlain\" is striking, and the parental names match, scholars remain cautious about definitively identifying this record as Champlain's baptism. The names Antoine and Marguerite Le Roy were common in the region, and \"Chapeleau\" was a frequent surname in Saintonge. Before this document can be accepted as Champlain's baptismal certificate, additional corroborating sources are essential.\nFamily background and early environment.\nChamplain belonged to a Roman Catholic family, though his Old Testament first name suggests possible Protestant origins, which would align with the 1574 baptismal record found in a Protestant temple. The family appears to have owned property in both Brouage and La Rochelle, explaining historical confusion about his birthplace.\nBrouage, a fortified port town important for the salt trade, frequently changed hands between Catholic and Protestant forces during the French Wars of Religion. From 1627 until his death in 1635, Cardinal Richelieu served as governor of this royal fortress. At the time of Champlain's birth, his parents were living in Brouage, where they owned substantial property that Samuel would later inherit.\nMaritime education and early training.\nBorn into a family of mariners\u2014both his father and uncle-in-law were sailors or navigators\u2014Champlain received practical maritime education from an early age. He learned navigation, cartography, drafting, and the writing of practical reports. Unlike many educated men of his era, his education did not include Ancient Greek or Latin, indicating a practical rather than classical schooling focused on seamanship and commerce.\nAs French vessels were required to provide their own defense, Champlain also acquired military skills with firearms. He gained combat experience serving with King Henry IV's army during the final stages of the French Wars of Religion in Brittany from 1594 or 1595 to 1598. Beginning as a quartermaster responsible for provisioning and horse care, he advanced to \"capitaine d'une compagnie\" by 1597, commanding a garrison near Quimper.\nDuring this military service, Champlain claimed to undertake a \"certain secret voyage\" for the king and likely participated in combat, possibly including the Siege of Fort Crozon in late 1594. This military experience would prove valuable in his later colonial endeavors, providing him with leadership skills and knowledge of defensive tactics essential for establishing settlements in contested territories.\nEarly travels.\nIn year 3, his uncle-in-law Fran\u00e7ois Grav\u00e9 du Pont, a navigator whose ship \"Saint-Julien\" was to transport Spanish troops to C\u00e1diz under the Treaty of Vervins, allowed Champlain to accompany him.\nAfter a difficult passage, he spent some time in C\u00e1diz before his uncle, whose ship was then chartered to accompany a large Spanish fleet to the West Indies, again offered him a place on the ship. His uncle, who gave command of the ship to Jeronimo de Valaebrera, instructed the young Champlain to watch over the ship.\nThis journey lasted two years and allowed Champlain to see or hear about Spanish holdings from the Caribbean to Mexico City. Along the way, he took detailed notes, wrote an illustrated report on what he learned on this trip, and gave this secret report to King Henry, who rewarded Champlain with an annual pension.\nThis report was published for the first time in 1870, by Laverdi\u00e8re, as \"Brief Discours des Choses plus remarquables que Samuel Champlain de Brouage a reconneues aux Indes Occidentalles au voiage qu'il en a faict en icettes en l'ann\u00e9e 1599 et en l'ann\u00e9e 1601, comme ensuite\" (and in English as \"Narrative of a Voyage to the West Indies and Mexico 1599\u20131602\").\nThe authenticity of this account as a work written by Champlain has frequently been questioned, due to inaccuracies and discrepancies with other sources on some points; however, recent scholarship indicates that the work probably was authored by Champlain.\nOn Champlain's return to C\u00e1diz in August 1600, his uncle Guillermo Elena (Guillaume Allene), who had fallen ill, asked him to look after his business affairs. This Champlain did, and when his uncle died in June 1601, Champlain inherited his substantial estate. It included an estate near La Rochelle, commercial properties in Spain, and a 150-ton merchant ship.\nThis inheritance, combined with the king's annual pension, gave the young explorer a great deal of independence, as he did not need to rely on the financial backing of merchants and other investors.\nFrom 1601 to 1603 Champlain served as a geographer in the court of King Henry IV. As part of his duties, he traveled to French ports. He learned much about North America from the fishermen that seasonally traveled to coastal areas from Nantucket to Newfoundland to capitalize on the rich fishing grounds there.\nHe also made a study of previous French failures at colonization in the area, including that of Pierre de Chauvin at Tadoussac. When Chauvin forfeited his monopoly on the fur trade in North America in 1602, responsibility for renewing the trade was given to Aymar de Chaste. Champlain approached de Chaste about a position on the first voyage, which he received with the king's assent.\nChamplain's first trip to North America was as an observer on a fur-trading expedition led by Fran\u00e7ois Grav\u00e9 Du Pont. Du Pont was a navigator and merchant who had been a ship's captain on Chauvin's expedition, and with whom Champlain established a firm lifelong friendship.\nHe educated Champlain about navigation in North America, including the Saint Lawrence River. In dealing with the natives there (and in Acadia after). The \"Bonne-Renomm\u00e9e\" (the \"Good Fame\") arrived at Tadoussac on March 15, 1603. Champlain was anxious to see all of the places that Jacques Cartier had seen and described sixty years earlier, and wanted to go even further than Cartier, if possible.\nChamplain created a map of the Saint Lawrence on this trip and, after his return to France on 20 September, published an account as \"Des Sauvages: ou voyage de Samuel Champlain, de Brouages, faite en la France nouvelle l'an 1603\" (\"Concerning the Savages: or travels of Samuel Champlain of Brouages, made in New France in the year 1603\").\nIncluded in his account were meetings with Begourat, chief of the Montagnais at Tadoussac, in which positive relationships were established between the French and the many Montagnais gathered there, with some Algonquin friends.\nPromising to King Henry to report on further discoveries, Champlain joined a second expedition to New France in the spring of 1604. This trip, once again an exploratory journey without women and children, lasted several years, and focused on areas south of the St. Lawrence River, in what later became known as Acadia. It was led by Pierre Dugua de Mons, a noble and Protestant merchant who had been given a fur trading monopoly in New France by the king. Dugua asked Champlain to find a site for winter settlement.\nAfter exploring possible sites in the Bay of Fundy, Champlain selected Saint Croix Island in the St. Croix River as the site of the expedition's first winter settlement. After enduring a harsh winter on the island the settlement was relocated across the bay where they established Port Royal. Until 1607, Champlain used that site as his base, while he explored the Atlantic coast. Dugua was forced to leave the settlement for France in September 1605, because he learned that his monopoly was at risk. His monopoly was rescinded by the king in July 1607 under pressure from other merchants and proponents of free trade, leading to the abandonment of the settlement.\nIn 1605 and 1606, Champlain explored the North American coast as far south as Cape Cod, searching for sites for a permanent settlement. Minor skirmishes with the resident Nausets dissuaded him from the idea of establishing one near present-day Chatham, Massachusetts. He named the area Mallebar (\"bad bar\").\nFounding of Quebec.\nIn the spring of 1608, Dugua wanted Champlain to start a new French colony and fur trading centre on the shores of the St. Lawrence. Dugua equipped, at his own expense, a fleet of three ships with workers, that left the French port of Honfleur. The main ship, called \"Don-de-Dieu\" (French for \"Gift of God\"), was commanded by Champlain. Another ship, \"L\u00e9vrier\" (\"Hunt Dog\"), was commanded by his friend Du Pont. The small group of male settlers arrived at Tadoussac on the lower St. Lawrence in June. Because of the dangerous strength of the Saguenay River ending there, they left the ships and continued up the \"Big River\" in small boats bringing the men and the materials.\nUpon arriving in Quebec, Champlain later wrote: \"I arrived there on the third of July, when I searched for a place suitable for our settlement; but I could find none more convenient or better suited than the point of Quebec, so called by the savages, which was covered with nut-trees.\" Champlain ordered his men to gather lumber by cutting down the nut-trees for use in building habitations.\nSome days after Champlain's arrival in Quebec, Jean du Val, a member of Champlain's party, plotted to kill Champlain to the end of securing the settlement for the Basques or Spaniards and making a fortune for himself. Du Val's plot was ultimately foiled when an associate of Du Val confessed his involvement in the plot to Champlain's pilot, who informed Champlain. Champlain had a young man deliver Du Val, along with 3 co-conspirators and two bottles of wine, and invite the four worthies to an event on board a boat. Soon after the four conspirators arrived on the boat, Champlain had them arrested. Du Val was strangled and hanged in Quebec and his head was displayed in the \"most conspicuous place\" of Champlain's fort. The other three were sent back to France to be tried.\nRelations and war with Native Americans.\nDuring the summer of 1609, Champlain attempted to form better relations with the local First Nations tribes. He made alliances with the Wendat (called \"Huron\" by the French) and with the Algonquin, the Montagnais and the Etchemin, who lived in the area of the St. Lawrence River. These tribes sought Champlain's help in their war against the Iroquois, who lived farther south. Champlain set off with nine French soldiers and 300 natives to explore the \"Rivi\u00e8re des Iroquois\" (now known as the Richelieu River), and became the first European to map Lake Champlain. Having had no encounters with the Haudenosaunee at this point many of the men headed back, leaving Champlain with only 2 Frenchmen and 60 natives.\nOn 29 July, somewhere in the area near Ticonderoga and Crown Point, New York (historians are not sure which of these two places, but Fort Ticonderoga historians claim that it occurred near its site), Champlain and his party encountered a group of Haudenosaunee. In a battle that began the next day, two hundred and fifty Haudenosaunee advanced on Champlain's position, and one of his guides pointed out the three chiefs. In his account of the battle, Champlain recounts firing his arquebus and killing two of them with a single shot, after which one of his men killed the third. The Haudenosaunee turned and fled. While this cowed the Iroquois for some years, they would later return to successfully fight the French and Algonquin for the rest of the century.\nThe Battle of Sorel occurred on 19 June 1610, with Samuel de Champlain supported by the Kingdom of France and his allies, the Wendat people, Algonquin people and Innu people against the Mohawk people in New France at present-day Sorel-Tracy, Quebec. Champlain's forces armed with the arquebus engaged and slaughtered or captured nearly all of the Mohawks. The battle ended major hostilities with the Mohawks for 20 years.\nMarriage.\nOne route Champlain may have chosen to improve his access to the court of the regent was his decision to enter into marriage with the 12 year old H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Boull\u00e9. She was the daughter of Nicolas Boull\u00e9, a man charged with carrying out royal decisions at court. The marriage contract was signed on 27 December 1610 in presence of Dugua, who had dealt with the father, and the couple was married three days later. Champlain was then 36 years old. The terms of the contract called for the marriage to be consummated two years later.\nChamplain's marriage was initially quite troubled, as H\u00e9l\u00e8ne rallied against joining him in August 1613. Their relationship, while it apparently lacked any physical connection, recovered and was apparently good for many years. H\u00e9l\u00e8ne lived in Quebec for several years, but returned to Paris and eventually decided to enter a convent. The couple had no children, and Champlain adopted three Montagnais girls named Faith, Hope, and Charity in the winter of 1627\u201328.\nExploration of New France.\nOn 29 March 1613, arriving back in New France, he first ensured that his new royal commission be proclaimed. Champlain set out on May 27 to continue his exploration of the Huron country and in hopes of finding the \"northern sea\" he had heard about (probably Hudson Bay). He travelled the Ottawa River, later giving the first description of this area. Along the way, he apparently dropped or left behind a cache of silver cups, copper kettles, and a brass astrolabe dated 1603 https://, which was later found August 1867 by a farm boy named Edward Lee near Cobden, Ontario. However, Champlain's ownership of the astrolabe has been questioned by modern scholars.It was in June that he met with Tessouat, the Algonquin chief of Allumettes Island, and offered to build the tribe a fort if they were to move from the area they occupied, with its poor soil, to the locality of the Lachine Rapids.\nBy 26 August, Champlain was back in Saint-Malo. There, he wrote an account of his life from 1604 to 1612 and his journey up the Ottawa river, his \"Voyages\" and published another map of New France. In 1614, he formed the \"Compagnie des Marchands de Rouen et de Saint-Malo\" and \"Compagnie de Champlain\", which bound the Rouen and Saint-Malo merchants for eleven years. He returned to New France in the spring of 1615 with four Recollects in order to further religious life in the new colony. The Roman Catholic Church was eventually given \"en seigneurie\" large and valuable tracts of land, estimated at nearly 30% of all the lands granted by the French Crown in New France.\nIn 1615, Champlain reunited with \u00c9tienne Br\u00fbl\u00e9, his capable interpreter, following separate four-year explorations. There, Br\u00fbl\u00e9 reported North American explorations, including that he had been joined by another French interpreter named Grenolle with whom he had travelled along the north shore of \"la mer douce\" (the calm sea), now known as Lake Huron, to the great rapids of Sault Ste. Marie, where Lake Superior enters Lake Huron, some of which was recorded by Champlain.\nChamplain continued to work to improve relations with the natives, promising to help them in their struggles against the Iroquois. With his native guides, he explored further up the Ottawa River and reached Lake Nipissing. He then followed the French River until he reached Lake Huron.\nIn 1615, Champlain was escorted through the area that is now Peterborough, Ontario by a group of Wendat. He used the ancient portage between Chemong Lake and Little Lake (now Chemong Road) and stayed for a short period of time near what is now Bridgenorth.\nMilitary expedition.\nOn 1 September 1615, at Cahiagu\u00e9 (a Wendat village near what is now Lake Simcoe), he and the northern tribes started a third military campaign against the Iroquois. While he was at Cahiagu\u00e9, Champlain learned that the Susquehannock were interested in joining the proposed expedition against the Iroquois. The Huron dispatched a dozen warriors to carry their plans to this tribe, along with Champlain's interpreter Etienne Brule. Although the total number of warriors that finally assembled is not stated, if it resembled the average large Huron war-party, it would\u2019ve been about 500. After several days of delay due to war being an occasion for ritual among the Huron, it left to invade enemy territory. They passed Lake Ontario at its eastern tip, stopping frequently at intervals to hunt and fish for meat to feed the army, then when reaching the Bay of Quinte, they hid their canoes and continued their journey by land. They followed the Oneida River until they arrived at the village of the community they were intending to attack on October 10. The exact location of this place is still a matter of debate. Although the traditional location, Nichols Pond, is regularly disproved by professional and amateur archaeologists, many still claim that Nichols Pond is the location of the battle, south of Canastota, New York. Pressured by the Indians to attack prematurely, the assault failed. Champlain was wounded twice in the leg by arrows, one in his knee. The conflict ended on October 16 when the French Wendat were forced to flee.\nEtienne Brule and the twelve warriors dispatched by the Huron, despite being successful in their plans of convincing the Susquehannock to join them, arrived at the appointed rendezvous two days after the Huron had left for home. Once it was evident that they were too late, they turned back for Carantouan, the principal village of the Susquehannock. \nAlthough he did not want to, the Huron insisted that Champlain spend the winter with them. During his stay, he set off with them in their great deer hunt, during which he became lost and was forced to wander for three days living off game and sleeping under trees until he met up with a band of First Nations people by chance. He spent the rest of the winter learning \"their country, their manners, customs, modes of life\". On 22 May 1616, he left the Wendat country and returned to Quebec before heading back to France on 2 July.\nImproving administration in New France.\nChamplain returned to New France in 1620 and was to spend the rest of his life focusing on administration of the territory rather than exploration. Champlain spent the winter building Fort Saint-Louis on top of Cape Diamond. By mid-May, he learned that the fur trading monopoly had been handed over to another company led by the Caen brothers. After some tense negotiations, it was decided to merge the two companies under the direction of the Caens. Champlain continued to work on relations with the natives and managed to impose on them a chief of his choice. He also negotiated a peace treaty with the Iroquois.\nChamplain continued to work on the fortifications of what became Quebec City, laying the first stone on 6 May 1624. On 15 August he once again returned to France where he was encouraged to continue his work as well as to continue looking for a passage to China, something widely believed to exist at the time. By July 5 he was back at Quebec and continued expanding the city.\nIn 1627 the Caen brothers' company lost its monopoly on the fur trade, and Cardinal Richelieu (who had joined the Royal Council in 1624 and rose rapidly to a position of dominance in French politics that he would hold until his death in 1642) formed the Compagnie des Cent-Associ\u00e9s (the Hundred Associates) to manage the fur trade. Champlain was one of the 100 investors, and its first fleet, loaded with colonists and supplies, set sail in April 1628.\nChamplain had overwintered in Quebec. Supplies were low, and English merchants sacked Cap Tourmente in early July 1628. A war had broken out between France and England, and Charles I of England had issued letters of marque that authorized the capture of French shipping and its colonies in North America. Champlain received a summons to surrender on July 10 from English privateer David Kirke. Champlain refused to deal with Kirke, misleading him to believe that Quebec's defenses were better than they actually were (Champlain had only 50 pounds of gunpowder to defend the community). Successfully bluffed, they withdrew, but encountered and captured the French supply fleet, cutting off that year's supplies to the colony. By the spring of 1629 supplies were dangerously low and Champlain was forced to send people to Gasp\u00e9 and into Indian communities to conserve rations. On July 19, Kirke arrived before Quebec after intercepting Champlain's plea for help, and Champlain was forced to surrender the colony to him on the next day. Many colonists were transported first to England and then to France by Kirke, but Champlain remained in London to begin the process of regaining the colony. A peace treaty had been signed in April 1629, three months before the surrender, and, under the terms of that treaty, Quebec and other prizes that were taken by Kirke after the treaty were to be returned. It was not until the 1632 Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, however, that Quebec was formally given back to France. (Kirke was rewarded when Charles I knighted him and gave him a charter for Newfoundland.) Champlain reclaimed his role as commander of New France on behalf of Richelieu on 1 March 1633, having served in the intervening years as commander in New France \"in the absence of my Lord the Cardinal de Richelieu\" from 1629 to 1635. In 1632 Champlain published \"Voyages de la Nouvelle-France\", which was dedicated to Cardinal Richelieu, and \"Traitt\u00e9 de la marine et du devoir d'un bon marinier\", a treatise on leadership, seamanship, and navigation. (Champlain made more than 25 round-trip crossings of the Atlantic in his lifetime, without losing a single ship.)\nLast return, and last years working in Quebec.\nChamplain returned to Quebec on 22 May 1633, after an absence of four years. Richelieu gave him a commission as Lieutenant General of New France, along with other titles and responsibilities, but not that of governor. Despite this lack of formal status, many colonists, French merchants, and Indians treated him as if he had the title; writings survive in which he is referred to as \"our governor\". On 18 August 1634, he sent a report to Richelieu stating that he had rebuilt on the ruins of Quebec, enlarged its fortifications, and established two more habitations. One was 15 leagues upstream, and the other was at Trois-Rivi\u00e8res. He also began an offensive against the Iroquois, reporting that he wanted them either wiped out or \"brought to reason\".\nDeath and burial.\nChamplain had a severe stroke in October 1635, and died on 25 December, leaving no immediate heirs. Jesuit records state he died in the care of his friend and confessor Charles Lallemant.\nAlthough his will (drafted on 17 November 1635) gave much of his French property to his wife H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Boull\u00e9, he made significant bequests to the Catholic missions and to individuals in the colony of Quebec. However, Marie Camaret, a cousin on his mother's side, challenged the will in Paris and had it overturned. It is unclear exactly what happened to his estate.\nSamuel de Champlain was temporarily buried in the church while a standalone chapel was built to hold his remains in the upper part of the city. This small building, along with many others, was destroyed by a large fire in 1640. Though immediately rebuilt, no traces of it exist. His exact burial site is still unknown, despite much research since about 1850, including several archaeological digs in the city. There is general agreement that the previous Champlain chapel site, and the remains of Champlain, should be somewhere near the Notre-Dame de Qu\u00e9bec Cathedral.\nThe search for Champlain's remains supplies a key plot-line in the crime writer Louise Penny's 2010 novel, \"Bury Your Dead\".\nLegacy.\nMany sites and landmarks have been named to honour Champlain, who was a prominent figure in many parts of Acadia, Ontario, Quebec, New York, and Vermont. Memorialized as the \"Father of New France\" and \"Father of Acadia\", his historic significance endures in modern times. Lake Champlain, which straddles the border between northern New York and Vermont, extending slightly across the border into Canada, was named by him, in 1609, when he led an expedition along the Richelieu River, exploring a long, narrow lake situated between the Green Mountains of present-day Vermont and the Adirondack Mountains of present-day New York. The first European to map and describe it, Champlain claimed the lake as his namesake.\nMemorials include:\nWritten works.\nThese are works that were written by Champlain:\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39073", "revid": "1318969101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39073", "title": "Sifaka", "text": "Genus of lemur\nA sifaka (; ) is a lemur of the genus Propithecus from the family Indriidae within the order Primates. The common name is an onomatopoeia of their characteristic \"shi-fak\" alarm call. Like all lemurs, they are found only on the island of Madagascar. All species of sifakas are threatened, ranging from endangered to critically endangered.\nAnatomy and physiology.\nSifakas are medium-sized indriids with a head and body length of and a weight of . Their tail is just as long as their body, which differentiates them from the Indri. Their fur is long and silky, with coloration varying by species from yellowish-white to blackish-brown. Their round, hairless face is always black. As with all lemurs, the sifaka has special adaptations for grooming, including a toilet-claw on its second toe and a toothcomb.\nSifakas move by vertical clinging and leaping, meaning they maintain an upright position leaping from tree trunk to tree trunk and moving along branches. They are skillful climbers and powerful jumpers, able to make leaps up to from one tree to the next. On the ground, they move like all indrids, with bipedal, sideways leaping movements of the hind legs, holding their fore limbs up for balance. Sifakas are diurnal and arboreal. \nSifakas are herbivores, eating leaves, flowers, and fruits. When not searching for food, they spend a good part of the day sunbathing, stretched on the branches. Sifakas live in larger groups than the other indrids (up to 13 animals). They have a firm territory, which they mark with scent glands. Edges of different sifaka territories can overlap. Though they defend their territory from invasion by others of their species, they may peacefully co-exist with other lemur species such as the red-bellied lemur and the common brown lemur. Successful invasions are known to result in death of male members, group takeover, and infanticide.\nPredators of the sifaka include the fossa, a puma-like mammal native to Madagascar, and aerial hunters such as hawks. The sifaka usually avoids these attacks with its agile acrobatics through the trees high above the ground. However, they have been known to attack by biting and scratching and have even been witnessed fighting off a Madagascar ground boa.\nA four- to five-month gestation period ends with the birth of a single offspring in July. The young holds fast to the mother's belly when small, but then later is carried on her back. Young are weaned after about six months and reach full maturity at the age of two to three years. The life expectancy of the sifakas is up to 20 years.\nThreats.\nConservative estimates show that the utilization of fire for slash and burn cultivation, cattle raising, logging, and mining activities has contributed to the loss of 52% of the forested land since the 1950s, impacting the survival of sifakas. For instance, Perrier's sifaka relies solely on vast forest cover, so little to no institutions are addressing these threats or the species' conservation status.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39075", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39075", "title": "Spiro Agnew", "text": "Vice President of the United States from 1969 to 1973\nSpiro Theodore Agnew (; November 9, 1918\u00a0\u2013 September 17, 1996) was the 39th vice president of the United States, serving from 1969 until his resignation in 1973 under President Richard Nixon. A member of the Republican Party, he served as the 3rd Executive of Baltimore County from 1962 to 1966 and the 55th Governor of Maryland from 1967 to 1969. He is the second of two vice presidents to resign, the first being John C. Calhoun in 1832.\nAgnew was born in Baltimore to a Greek immigrant father and an American mother. He attended Johns Hopkins University and graduated from the University of Baltimore School of Law. He was a campaign aide for U.S. Representative James Devereux in the 1950s, and was appointed to the Baltimore County Board of Zoning Appeals in 1957. In 1962, he was elected Baltimore county executive. In 1966, Agnew was elected governor of Maryland, defeating his Democratic opponent George P. Mahoney and independent candidate Hyman A. Pressman.\nAt the 1968 Republican National Convention, Nixon asked Agnew to place his name in nomination, and named him as running mate. Agnew's centrist reputation interested Nixon; the law and order stance he had taken in the wake of civil unrest that year appealed to aides such as Pat Buchanan. Agnew made a number of gaffes during the campaign, but his rhetoric pleased many Republicans, and he may have made the difference in several key states. Nixon and Agnew defeated the Democratic ticket of incumbent vice president Hubert Humphrey and his running mate, Senator Edmund Muskie, and American Independent Party candidates George Wallace and Curtis LeMay. As vice president, Agnew was often called upon to attack the administration's enemies. In the years of his vice presidency, Agnew moved to the right, appealing to conservatives who were suspicious of moderate stances taken by Nixon. In the presidential election of 1972, Nixon and Agnew were re-elected for a second term, defeating Senator George McGovern and his running mate Sargent Shriver in one of the largest landslides in American history.\nIn 1973, Agnew was investigated by the United States Attorney for the District of Maryland on suspicion of criminal conspiracy, bribery, extortion, and tax fraud. Agnew took kickbacks from contractors during his time as Baltimore county executive and governor of Maryland. The payments had continued into his time as vice president, but had nothing to do with the Watergate scandal, in which he was not implicated. After months of maintaining his innocence, Agnew pleaded no contest to a single felony charge of tax evasion and resigned from office. Nixon replaced him with House Republican leader Gerald Ford. Agnew spent the remainder of his life quietly, rarely making public appearances and blaming Zionists for forcing him out of office. He wrote a novel and a memoir, both of which defended his actions. Agnew died at home in 1996 at age 77 of undiagnosed acute leukemia.\nEarly life.\nFamily background.\nSpiro Agnew's father was born Theophrastos Anagnostopoulos in about 1877, in the Greek town of Gargalianoi, Messenia. The family may have been involved in olive growing and been impoverished during a crisis in the industry in the 1890s. Anagnostopoulos emigrated to the United States in 1897 (some accounts say 1902) and settled in Schenectady, New York, where he changed his name to Theodore Agnew and opened a diner. A passionate self-educator, Agnew maintained a lifelong interest in philosophy; one family member recalled that \"if he wasn't reading something to improve his mind, he wouldn't read.\" Around 1908, he moved to Baltimore, where he purchased a restaurant. Here he met William Pollard, who was the city's federal meat inspector. The two became friends; Pollard and his wife Margaret were regular customers of the restaurant. After Pollard died in April 1917, Agnew and Margaret Pollard began a courtship which led to their marriage on December 12, 1917. Spiro Agnew was born 11 months later, on November 9, 1918.\nMargaret Pollard, born Margaret Marian Akers in Bristol, Virginia, in 1883, was the youngest in a family of 10 children. As a young adult she moved to Washington, D.C., and found employment in various government offices before marrying Pollard and moving to Baltimore. The Pollards had one son, Roy, who was 10 years old when Pollard died. After the marriage to Agnew in 1917 and Spiro's birth the following year, the new family settled in a small apartment at 226 West Madison Street, near downtown Baltimore.\nChildhood, education, early career, and marriage.\nIn accordance with his mother's wishes, the infant Spiro was baptized as an Episcopalian, rather than into the Greek Orthodox Church of his father. Nevertheless, Theodore was the dominant figure within the family, and a strong influence on his son. When in 1969, after his vice presidential inauguration, Baltimore's Greek community endowed a scholarship in Theodore Agnew's name, Spiro Agnew told the gathering: \"I am proud to say that I grew up in the light of my father. My beliefs are his.\" In 1973, he continued to also identify as \"an Episcopalian.\" \nDuring the early 1920s, the Agnews prospered. Theodore acquired a larger restaurant, the Piccadilly, and moved the family to a house in the Forest Park northwest section of the city, where Spiro attended Garrison Junior High School and later Forest Park High School. This period of affluence ended with the crash of 1929, and the restaurant closed. In 1931, the family's savings were wiped out when a local bank failed, forcing them to sell the house and move to a small apartment. Agnew later recalled how his father responded to these misfortunes: \"He just shrugged it off and went to work with his hands without complaint.\" Theodore Agnew sold fruit and vegetables from a roadside stall, while the youthful Spiro helped the family's budget with part-time jobs, delivering groceries and distributing leaflets. As he grew up, Spiro was increasingly influenced by his peers, and began to distance himself from his Greek background. He refused his father's offer to pay for Greek language lessons, and preferred to be known by a nickname, \"Ted\".\nUpon graduation from high school in February 1937, Agnew was accepted at Johns Hopkins University as a chemistry major. After a few months, he found the pressure of the academic work increasingly stressful, and was distracted by the family's continuing financial problems and worries about the international situation, in which war seemed likely. In 1939 he decided that his future lay in law rather than chemistry, left Johns Hopkins and began night classes at the University of Baltimore School of Law. To support himself, he took a day job as an insurance clerk with the Maryland Casualty Company at their Rotunda building on 40th Street in Roland Park.\nDuring the three years Agnew spent at the company he rose to the position of assistant underwriter. At the office, he met a young filing clerk, Elinor Judefind, known as \"Judy\". She had grown up in the same part of the city as Agnew, but the two had not previously met. They began dating, became engaged, and were married in Baltimore on May 27, 1942. They had four children; Pamela Lee, James Rand, Susan Scott, and Elinor Kimberly.\nWar and after.\nWorld War II (1941\u20131945).\nBy the time of the marriage, Agnew had been drafted into the United States Army. Shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, he began basic training at Camp Croft in South Carolina. There, he met people from a variety of backgrounds: \"I had led a very sheltered life\u2014I became unsheltered very quickly.\" Eventually, Agnew was sent to the Officer Candidate School at Fort Knox in Kentucky, and on May 24, 1942\u2014three days before his wedding\u2014he was commissioned as a second lieutenant.\nAfter a two-day honeymoon, Agnew returned to Fort Knox. He served there, or at nearby Fort Campbell, for nearly two years in a variety of administrative roles, before being sent to England in March 1944 as part of the pre-D-Day build-up. He remained on standby in Birmingham until late in the year, when he was posted to the 54th Armored Infantry Battalion in France as a replacement officer. After briefly serving as a rifle platoon leader, Agnew commanded the battalion's service company. The battalion became part of Combat Command \"B\" of the 10th Armored Division, which saw action in the Battle of the Bulge, including the Siege of Bastogne\u2014in all, \"thirty-nine days in the hole of the doughnut\", as one of Agnew's men put it. Thereafter, the 54th Battalion fought its way into Germany, seeing action at Mannheim, Heidelberg, and Crailsheim, before reaching Garmisch-Partenkirchen in Bavaria as the war concluded. Agnew returned home for discharge in November 1945, having been awarded the Combat Infantryman Badge and the Bronze Star.\nPostwar years (1945\u20131956).\nOn return to civilian life, Agnew resumed his legal studies, and secured a job as a law clerk with the Baltimore firm of Smith and Barrett. Until that time, Agnew had been largely non-political; his nominal allegiance had been to the Democratic Party, following his father's beliefs. The firm's senior partner, Lester Barrett, advised Agnew that if he wanted a career in politics, he should become a Republican. There were already many ambitious young Democrats in Baltimore and its suburbs, whereas competent, personable Republicans were scarcer. Agnew took Barrett's advice; on moving with family to the suburb of Lutherville in 1947, Agnew registered as a Republican, though he did not immediately become involved in politics.\nIn 1947, Agnew graduated with a Bachelor of Laws and passed the bar examination in Maryland. He started a law practice in downtown Baltimore, but was not successful, and took a job as an insurance investigator. A year later, Agnew moved to Schreiber's, a supermarket chain, where his role was store detective. He remained there for four years, a period briefly interrupted in 1951 by a recall to the Army after the outbreak of the Korean War. Agnew resigned from Schreiber's in 1952, and resumed his legal practice, specializing in labor law.\nIn 1955, Barrett was appointed a judge in Towson, the county seat of Baltimore County. Agnew moved his office there; at the same time, he moved his family from Lutherville to Loch Raven Village, a subdivision of Towson. There, he served as president of the local school district's Parent-Teacher Association, joining Kiwanis, and participating in a range of social and community activities. Historian William Manchester summed up Agnew in those days: \"His favorite musician was Lawrence Welk. His leisure interests were all midcult: watching the Baltimore Colts on television, listening to Mantovani, and reading the sort of prose the \"Reader's Digest\" liked to condense. He was a lover of order and an almost compulsive conformist.\"\nBeginnings in public life.\nPolitical awakening.\nIn the 1950s, Agnew volunteered for the congressional campaigns of U.S. Representative James Devereux. Agnew made his first bid for political office in 1956, when he sought to be a Republican candidate for Baltimore County Council. He was turned down by local party leaders, but nevertheless campaigned vigorously for the Republican ticket. The election resulted in an unexpected Republican majority on the council, and in recognition for his party work, Agnew was appointed for a one-year term to the county Zoning Board of Appeals at a salary of $3,600 per year. This quasi-judicial post provided an important supplement to his legal practice, and Agnew welcomed the prestige connected with the appointment. In April 1958, he was reappointed to the Board for a full three-year term and became its chairman.\nIn the November 1960 elections, Agnew decided to seek election to the county circuit court, against the local tradition that sitting judges seeking re-election were not opposed. He was unsuccessful, finishing last of five candidates. This failed attempt raised his profile, and he was regarded by his Democratic opponents as a Republican on the rise. The 1960 elections saw the Democrats win control of the county council, and one of their first actions was to remove Agnew from the Zoning Appeals Board. According to Agnew's biographer, Jules Witcover, \"The publicity generated by the Democrats' crude dismissal of Agnew cast him as the honest servant wronged by the machine.\" Seeking to capitalize on this mood, Agnew asked to be nominated as the Republican candidate in the 1962 U.S. congressional elections, in Maryland's 2nd congressional district. The party chose the more experienced J. Fife Symington, but wanted to take advantage of Agnew's local support. He accepted their invitation to run for county executive, the county's chief executive officer; Democrats had held the executive's post and its predecessor, chairman of the board of county commissioners, since 1895.\nAgnew's chances in 1962 were boosted by a feud in the Democratic ranks, as the retired former county executive, Michael Birmingham, fell out with his successor and defeated him in the Democratic primary. By contrast with his elderly opponent, Agnew was able to campaign as a \"White Knight\" promising change; his program included an anti-discrimination bill requiring public amenities such as parks, bars and restaurants be open to all races, policies that neither Birmingham nor any Maryland Democrat could have introduced at that time without angering supporters. In the November election, despite an intervention by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson on Birmingham's behalf, Agnew beat his opponent by 78,487 votes to 60,993. When Symington lost to Democrat Clarence Long in his congressional race, Agnew became the highest-ranking Republican in Maryland.\nCounty executive.\nAgnew's four-year term as county executive saw a moderately progressive administration, which included the building of new schools, increases to teachers' salaries, reorganization of the police department, and improvements to the water and sewer systems. His anti-discrimination bill passed, and gave him a reputation as a liberal, but its impact was limited in a county where the population was 97 percent white. His relations with the increasingly militant civil rights movement were sometimes troubled. In a number of desegregation disputes involving private property, Agnew appeared to prioritize law and order, showing a particular aversion to any kind of demonstration. His reaction to the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing in Alabama, in which four children died, was to refuse to attend a memorial service at a Baltimore church, and to denounce a planned demonstration in support of the victims.\nAs county executive, Agnew was sometimes criticized for being too close to rich and influential businessmen, and was accused of cronyism after bypassing the normal bidding procedures and designating three of his Republican friends as the county's insurance brokers of record, ensuring them large commissions. Agnew's standard reaction to such criticisms was to display moral indignation, denounce his opponents' \"outrageous distortions\", deny any wrongdoing and insist on his personal integrity; tactics which, Cohen and Witcover note, were to be seen again as he defended himself against the corruption allegations that ended his vice presidency.\nIn the 1964 presidential election, Agnew was opposed to the Republican frontrunner, the conservative Barry Goldwater, initially supporting the moderate California senator Thomas Kuchel, a candidacy that, Witcover remarks, \"died stillborn\". After the failure of moderate Pennsylvania Governor William Scranton's candidacy at the party convention, Agnew gave his reluctant support to Goldwater, but privately opined that the choice of so extremist a candidate had cost the Republicans any chance of victory.\nGovernor of Maryland (1967\u20131969).\nElection 1966.\nAs his four-year term as executive neared its end, Agnew knew that his chances of re-election were slim, given that the county's Democrats had healed their rift. Instead, in 1966 he sought the Republican nomination for governor, and with the backing of party leaders won the April primary by a wide margin.\nIn the Democratic party, three candidates\u2014a moderate, a liberal, and an outright segregationist\u2014battled for their party's gubernatorial nomination, which to general surprise was won by the segregationist George P. Mahoney, a perennially unsuccessful candidate for office. Mahoney's candidacy split his party, provoking a third-party candidate, Comptroller of Baltimore City Hyman A. Pressman. In Montgomery County, the state's wealthiest area, a \"Democrats for Agnew\" organization flourished, and liberals statewide flocked to the Agnew standard. Mahoney, a fierce opponent of integrated housing, exploited racial tensions with the slogan: \"Your Home is Your Castle. Protect it!\" Agnew painted him as the candidate of the Ku Klux Klan, and said voters must choose \"between the bright, pure, courageous flame of righteousness and the fiery cross\". In the November election Agnew, helped by 70 percent of the black vote, beat Mahoney by 455,318 votes (49.5\u00a0percent) to 373,543, with Pressman taking 90,899 votes.\nAfter the campaign, it emerged that Agnew had failed to report three alleged attempts to bribe him that had been made on behalf of the slot-machine industry, involving sums of $20,000, $75,000, and $200,000, if he would promise not to veto legislation keeping the machines legal in Southern Maryland. He justified his silence on the grounds that no actual offer had been made: \"Nobody sat down in front of me with a suitcase of money.\" Agnew was also criticized over his part-ownership of land close to the site of a planned, but never-built second bridge over Chesapeake Bay. Opponents claimed a conflict of interest, since some of Agnew's partners in the venture were simultaneously involved in business deals with the county. Agnew denied any conflict or impropriety, saying that the property involved was outside Baltimore County and his jurisdiction. Nevertheless, he sold his interest.\nIn office.\nAgnew's term as governor was marked by an agenda which included tax reform, clean water regulations, and the repeal of laws against interracial marriage. Community health programs were expanded, as were higher educational and employment opportunities for those on low incomes. Steps were taken towards ending segregation in schools. Agnew's fair housing legislation was limited, applying only to new projects above a certain size. These were the first such laws passed south of the Mason\u2013Dixon line. Agnew's attempt to adopt a new state constitution was rejected by the voters in a referendum.\nFor the most part, Agnew remained somewhat aloof from the state legislature, preferring the company of businessmen. Some of these had been associates in his county executive days, such as Lester Matz and Walter Jones, who had been among the first to encourage him to seek the governorship. Agnew's close ties to the business community were noted by officials in the state capital of Annapolis: \"There always seemed to be people around him who were in business.\" Some suspected that, while not himself corrupt, he \"allowed himself to be used by the people around him.\"\nAgnew publicly supported civil rights, but deplored the militant tactics used by some black leaders. During the 1966 election, his record had won him the endorsement of Roy Wilkins, leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). In mid-1967, racial tension was rising nationally, fueled by black discontent and an increasingly assertive civil rights leadership. Several cities exploded in violence, and there were riots in Cambridge, Maryland, after an incendiary speech there on July 24, 1967, by radical student leader H. Rap Brown. Agnew's principal concern was to maintain law and order, and he denounced Brown as a professional agitator, saying, \"I hope they put him away and throw away the key.\" When the Kerner Commission, appointed by President Johnson to investigate the causes of the unrest, reported that the principal factor was institutional white racism, Agnew dismissed these findings, blaming the \"permissive climate and misguided compassion\" and adding: \"It is not the centuries of racism and deprivation that have built to an explosive crescendo, but\u00a0... that lawbreaking has become a socially acceptable and occasionally stylish form of dissent\". In March 1968, when faced with a student boycott at Bowie State College, a historically black institution, Agnew again blamed outside agitators and refused to negotiate with the students. When a student committee came to Annapolis and demanded a meeting, Agnew closed the college and ordered more than 200 arrests.\nFollowing the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. on April 4, 1968, there was widespread rioting and disorder across the US. The trouble reached Baltimore on April 6, and for the next three days and nights the city burned. Agnew declared a state of emergency and called out the National Guard. When order was restored there were six dead, more than 4,000 were under arrest, the fire department had responded to 1,200 fires, and there had been widespread looting. On April 11, Agnew summoned more than 100 moderate black leaders to the state capitol, where instead of the expected constructive dialogue he delivered a speech roundly castigating them for their failure to control more radical elements, and accused them of a cowardly retreat or even complicity. One of the delegates, the Rev. Sidney Daniels, rebuked the governor: \"Talk to us like we are ladies and gentlemen\", he said, before walking out. Others followed him; the remnant was treated to further accusations as Agnew rejected all socio-economic explanations for the disturbances. Many white suburbanites applauded Agnew's speech: over 90 percent of the 9,000 responses by phone, letter or telegram supported him, and he won tributes from leading Republican conservatives such as Jack Williams, governor of Arizona, and former senator William Knowland of California. To members of the black community the April 11 meeting was a turning point. Having previously welcomed Agnew's stance on civil rights, they now felt betrayed, one state senator observing: \"He has sold us out ... he thinks like George Wallace, he talks like George Wallace\".\nVice presidential candidate (1968).\nBackground: Rockefeller and Nixon.\nAt least until the April 1968 disturbances, Agnew's image was that of a liberal Republican. Since 1964 he had supported the presidential ambitions of Governor Nelson Rockefeller of New York, and early in 1968, with that year's elections looming, he became chairman of the \"Rockefeller for President\" citizens' committee. When in a televised speech on March 21, 1968, Rockefeller shocked his supporters with an apparently unequivocal withdrawal from the race, Agnew was dismayed and humiliated; despite his very public role in the Rockefeller campaign, he had received no advance warning of the decision. He took this as a personal insult and as a blow to his credibility.\nWithin days of Rockefeller's announcement, Agnew was being wooed by supporters of the former vice president Richard Nixon, whose campaign for the Republican nomination was well under way. Agnew had no antagonism towards Nixon, and in the wake of Rockefeller's withdrawal had indicated that Nixon might be his \"second choice\". When the two met in New York on March 29 they found an easy rapport. Agnew's words and actions after the April disturbances in Baltimore delighted conservative members of the Nixon camp such as Pat Buchanan, and also impressed Nixon. When on April 30 Rockefeller re-entered the race, Agnew's reaction was cool. He commended the governor as potentially a \"formidable candidate\" but did not commit his support: \"A lot of things have happened since his withdrawal\u00a0... I think I've got to take another look at this situation\".\nIn mid-May, Nixon, interviewed by David Broder of \"The Washington Post\", mentioned the Maryland governor as a possible running mate. As Agnew continued to meet with Nixon and with the candidate's senior aides, there was a growing impression that he was moving into the Nixon camp. At the same time, Agnew denied any political ambitions beyond serving his full four-year term as governor.\nRepublican National Convention.\nAs Nixon prepared for the August 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami Beach, he discussed possible running mates with his staff. Among these were Ronald Reagan, the conservative Governor of California; and the more liberal Mayor of New York City, John Lindsay. Nixon felt that these high-profile names could split the party, with Lindsay in particular unacceptable to Southern conservatives, and looked for a less divisive figure. He did not indicate a preferred choice, and Agnew's name was not raised at this stage. Agnew was intending to go to the convention with his Maryland delegation as a favorite son, uncommitted to any of the main candidates.\nAt the convention, held August 5\u20138, Agnew abandoned his favorite son status, placing Nixon's name in nomination. Nixon narrowly secured the nomination on the first ballot. In the discussions that followed about a running mate, Nixon kept his counsel while various party factions thought they could influence his choice: Strom Thurmond, the senator from South Carolina, told a party meeting that he held a veto on the vice presidency. It was evident that Nixon wanted a centrist, though there was little enthusiasm when he first proposed Agnew, and other possibilities were discussed. Agnew was seen as a candidate who could appeal to Rockefeller Republicans, was acceptable to Southern Conservatives, and had a solid law-and-order record. Some party insiders thought that Nixon had privately settled on Agnew early on, and that the consideration of other candidates was little more than a charade. On August 8, after a final meeting of advisers and party leaders, Nixon declared that Agnew was his choice, and shortly afterwards announced his decision to the press. Delegates formally nominated Agnew for the vice presidency later that day, before adjourning.\nIn his acceptance speech, Agnew told the convention he had \"a deep sense of the improbability of this moment\". Agnew was not yet a national figure, and a widespread reaction to the nomination was \"Spiro who?\" In Atlanta, three pedestrians gave their reactions to the name when interviewed on television: \"It's some kind of disease\"; \"It's some kind of egg\"; \"He's a Greek that owns that shipbuilding firm.\"\nCampaign.\nIn 1968, the Nixon\u2013Agnew ticket faced two principal opponents. The Democrats, at a convention marred by violent demonstrations, had nominated Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Maine Senator Edmund Muskie as their standard-bearers. The segregationist former Governor of Alabama, George Wallace, ran as a third-party candidate and was expected to do well in the Deep South. Nixon, mindful of the restrictions he had labored under as Dwight Eisenhower's running mate in 1952 and 1956, was determined to give Agnew a much freer rein and to make it clear his running mate had his support. Agnew could also usefully play an \"attack dog\" role, as Nixon had in 1952.\nInitially, Agnew played the centrist, pointing to his civil rights record in Maryland. As the campaign developed, he quickly adopted a more belligerent approach, with strong law-and-order rhetoric, a style which alarmed the party's Northern liberals but played well in the South. John Mitchell, Nixon's campaign manager, was impressed, some other party leaders less so; Senator Thruston Morton described Agnew as an \"asshole\".\nThroughout September, Agnew was in the news, generally as a result of what one reporter called his \"offensive and sometimes dangerous banality\". He used the derogatory term \"Polack\" to describe Polish-Americans, referred to a Japanese-American reporter as \"the fat Jap\", and appeared to dismiss poor socio-economic conditions by stating that \"if you've seen one slum you've seen them all.\" He attacked Humphrey as soft on communism, an appeaser like Britain's prewar prime minister Neville Chamberlain. Agnew was mocked by his Democratic opponents; a Humphrey commercial displayed the message \"Agnew for Vice President?\" against a soundtrack of prolonged hysterical laughter that degenerated into a painful cough, before a final message: \"This would be funny if it weren't so serious...\" Agnew's comments outraged many, but Nixon did not rein him in; such right-wing populism had a strong appeal in the Southern states and was an effective counter to Wallace. Agnew's rhetoric was also popular in some Northern areas, and helped to galvanize \"white backlash\" into something less racially defined, more attuned to the suburban ethic defined by historian Peter B. Levy as \"orderliness, personal responsibility, the sanctity of hard work, the nuclear family, and law and order\".\nIn late October, Agnew survived an expos\u00e9 in \"The New York Times\" that questioned his financial dealings in Maryland, with Nixon denouncing the paper for \"the lowest kind of gutter politics\". In the election on November 5, the Republicans were victorious, with a narrow popular vote plurality \u2013 500,000 out of a total of 73\u00a0million votes cast. The Electoral College result was more decisive: Nixon 301, Humphrey 191 and Wallace 46. The Republicans narrowly lost Maryland, but Agnew was credited by pollster Louis Harris with helping his party to victory in several border and Upper South states that might easily have fallen to Wallace\u2014South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky\u2014and with bolstering Nixon's support in suburbs nationally. Had Nixon lost those five states, he would have had only the minimum number of electoral votes needed, 270, and any defection by an elector would have thrown the election to the Democrat-controlled House of Representatives.\nVice presidency (1969\u20131973).\nTransition and early days.\nImmediately after the 1968 election, Agnew was still uncertain what Nixon would expect of him as vice president. He met with Nixon several days after the election in Key Biscayne, Florida. Nixon, vice president himself for eight years under Eisenhower, wanted to spare Agnew the boredom and lack of a role he had sometimes experienced in that office. Nixon initially gave Agnew an office in the West Wing of the White House, a first for a vice president, although in December 1969 it was given to deputy assistant Alexander Butterfield and Agnew had to move to an office in the Executive Office Building. When they stood before the press after the meeting, Nixon pledged that Agnew would not have to undertake the ceremonial roles usually undertaken by the holders of the vice presidency, but would have \"new duties beyond what any vice president has previously assumed\". Nixon told the press that he planned to make full use of Agnew's experience as county executive and as governor in dealing with matters of federal-state relations and in urban affairs.\nNixon established transition headquarters in New York, but Agnew was not invited to meet with him there until November 27, when the two met for an hour. When Agnew spoke to reporters afterwards, he stated that he felt \"exhilarated\" with his new responsibilities, but did not explain what those were. During the transition period, Agnew traveled extensively, enjoying his new status. He vacationed on St. Croix, where he played a round of golf with Humphrey and Muskie. He went to Memphis for the 1968 Liberty Bowl, and to New York to attend the wedding of Nixon's daughter Julie to David Eisenhower. Agnew was a fan of the Baltimore Colts; in January, he was the guest of team owner Carroll Rosenbloom at Super Bowl III, and watched Joe Namath and the New York Jets upset the Colts, 16\u20137. There was as yet no official residence for the vice president, and Spiro and Judy Agnew secured a suite at the Sheraton Hotel in Washington formerly occupied by Johnson while vice president. Only one of their children, Kim, the youngest daughter, moved there with them, the others remaining in Maryland.\nDuring the transition, Agnew hired a staff, choosing several aides who had worked with him as county executive and as governor. He hired Charles Stanley Blair as chief of staff; Blair had been a member of the House of Delegates and served as Maryland Secretary of State under Agnew. Arthur Sohmer, Agnew's long-time campaign manager, became his political advisor, and Herb Thompson, a former journalist, became press secretary.\nAgnew was sworn in along with Nixon on January 20, 1969; as was customary, he sat down immediately after being sworn in, and did not make a speech. Soon after the inauguration, Nixon appointed Agnew as head of the Office of Intergovernmental Relations, to head government commissions such as the National Space Council and assigned him to work with state governors to bring down crime. It became clear that Agnew would not be in the inner circle of advisors. The new president preferred to deal directly with only a trusted handful, and was annoyed when Agnew tried to call him about matters Nixon deemed trivial. After Agnew shared his opinions on a foreign policy matter in a cabinet meeting, an angry Nixon sent Bob Haldeman to warn Agnew to keep his opinions to himself. Nixon complained that Agnew had no idea how the vice presidency worked, but did not meet with Agnew to share his own experience of the office. Herb Klein, director of communications in the Nixon White House, later wrote that Agnew had allowed himself to be pushed around by senior aides such as Haldeman and John Mitchell, and that Nixon's \"inconsistent\" treatment of Agnew had left the vice president exposed.\nAgnew's pride had been stung by the negative news coverage of him during the campaign, and he sought to bolster his reputation by assiduous performance of his duties. It had become usual for the vice president to preside over the Senate only if he might be needed to break a tie, but Agnew opened every session for the first two months of his term, and spent more time presiding, in his first year, than any vice president since Alben Barkley, who held that role under Harry S. Truman. The first postwar vice president not to have previously been a senator, he took lessons in Senate procedures from the Parliamentarian and from a Republican committee staffer. He lunched with small groups of senators, and was initially successful in building good relations. Although silenced on foreign policy matters, he attended White House staff meetings and spoke on urban affairs; when Nixon was present, he often presented the perspective of the governors. Agnew earned praise from the other members when he presided over a meeting of the White House Domestic Council in Nixon's absence but, like Nixon during Eisenhower's illnesses, did not sit in the president's chair. Nevertheless, many of the commission assignments Nixon gave Agnew were sinecures, with the vice president only formally the head.\n\"Nixon's Nixon\": attacking the left.\nThe public image of Agnew as an uncompromising critic of the violent protests that had marked 1968 persisted into his vice presidency. At first, he tried to take a more conciliatory tone, in line with Nixon's own speeches after taking office. Still, he urged a firm line against violence, stating in a speech in Honolulu on May 2, 1969, that \"we have a new breed of self-appointed vigilantes arising\u2014the counterdemonstrators\u2014taking the law into their own hands because officials fail to call law enforcement authorities. We have a vast faceless majority of the American public in quiet fury over the situation\u2014\"and with good reason\".\"\nOn October 14, 1969, the day before the anti-war Moratorium, North Vietnamese premier Pham Van Dong released a letter supporting demonstrations in the United States. Nixon resented this, but on the advice of his aides, thought it best to say nothing, and instead had Agnew give a press conference at the White House, calling upon the Moratorium protesters to disavow the support of the North Vietnamese. Agnew handled the task well, and Nixon tasked Agnew with attacking the Democrats generally, while remaining above the fray himself. This was analogous to the role Nixon had performed as vice president in the Eisenhower White House; thus Agnew was dubbed \"Nixon's Nixon\". Agnew had finally found a role in the Nixon administration, one he enjoyed.\nNixon had Agnew deliver a series of speeches attacking their political opponents. In New Orleans on October 19, Agnew blamed liberal elites for condoning violence by demonstrators: \"a spirit of national masochism prevails, encouraged by an effete corps of impudent snobs who characterize themselves as intellectuals\". The following day, in Jackson, Mississippi, Agnew told a Republican dinner, \"for too long the South has been the punching bag for those who characterize themselves as liberal intellectuals\u00a0... their course is a course that will ultimately weaken and erode the very fiber of America.\" Denying Republicans had a Southern Strategy, Agnew stressed that the administration and Southern whites had much in common, including the disapproval of the elites. Levy argued that such remarks were designed to attract Southern whites to the Republican Party to help secure the re-election of Nixon and Agnew in 1972, and that Agnew's rhetoric \"could have served as the blueprint for the culture wars of the next twenty-to-thirty years, including the claim that Democrats were soft on crime, unpatriotic, and favored flag burning rather than flag waving\". The attendees at the speeches were enthusiastic, but other Republicans, especially from the cities, complained to the Republican National Committee that Agnew's attacks were overbroad.\nIn the wake of these remarks, Nixon delivered his Silent Majority speech on November 3, 1969, calling on \"the great silent majority of my fellow Americans\" to support the administration's policy in Vietnam. The speech was well received by the public, but less so by the press, who strongly attacked Nixon's allegations that only a minority of Americans opposed the war. Nixon speechwriter Pat Buchanan penned a speech in response, to be delivered by Agnew on November 13 in Des Moines, Iowa. The White House worked to assure the maximum exposure for Agnew's speech, and the networks covered it live, making it a nationwide address, a rarity for vice presidents. According to Witcover, \"Agnew made the most of it\".\nHistorically, the press had enjoyed considerable prestige and respect to that point, though some Republicans complained of bias. But in his Des Moines speech, Agnew attacked the media, complaining that immediately after Nixon's speech, \"his words and policies were subjected to instant analysis and querulous criticism\u00a0... by a small band of network commentators and self-appointed analysts, the majority of whom expressed in one way or another their hostility to what he had to say\u00a0... It was obvious that their minds were made up in advance.\" Agnew continued, \"I am asking whether a form of censorship already exists when the news that forty million Americans receive each night is determined by a handful of men\u00a0... and filtered through a handful of commentators who admit their own set of biases\".\nAgnew thus put into words feelings that many Republicans and conservatives had long felt about the news media. Television network executives and commentators responded with outrage. Julian Goodman, president of NBC, stated that Agnew had made an \"appeal to prejudice\u00a0... it is regrettable that the Vice President of the United States should deny to TV freedom of the press\". Frank Stanton, head of CBS, accused Agnew of trying to intimidate the news media, and his news anchor, Walter Cronkite, agreed. The speech was praised by conservatives from both parties, and gave Agnew a following among the right. Agnew deemed the Des Moines speech one of his finest moments.\nOn November 20 in Montgomery, Alabama, Agnew reinforced his earlier speech with an attack on \"The New York Times\" and \"The Washington Post\", again originated by Buchanan. Both papers had enthusiastically endorsed Agnew's candidacy for governor in 1966 but had castigated him as unfit for the vice presidency two years later. The \"Post\" in particular had been hostile to Nixon since the Hiss case in the 1940s. Agnew accused the papers of sharing a narrow viewpoint alien to most Americans. Agnew alleged that the newspapers were trying to circumscribe his First Amendment right to speak of what he believed, while demanding unfettered freedom for themselves, and warned, \"the day when the network commentators and even the gentlemen of \"The New York Times\" enjoyed a form of diplomatic immunity from comment and criticism of what they said is over.\"\nAfter Montgomery, Nixon sought a d\u00e9tente with the media, and Agnew's attacks ended. Agnew's approval rating soared to 64 percent in late November, and the \"Times\" called him \"a formidable political asset\" to the administration. The speeches gave Agnew a power base among conservatives, and boosted his presidential chances for the 1976 election.\n1970: Protesters and midterm elections.\nAgnew's attacks on the administration's opponents, and the flair with which he made his addresses, made him popular as a speaker at Republican fundraising events. He traveled over on behalf of the Republican National Committee in early 1970, speaking at a number of Lincoln Day events, and supplanted Reagan as the party's leading fundraiser. Agnew's involvement had Nixon's strong support. In his Chicago speech, the vice president attacked \"supercilious sophisticates\", while in Atlanta, he promised to continue speaking out lest he break faith with \"the Silent Majority, the everyday law-abiding American who believes his country needs a strong voice to articulate his dissatisfaction with those who seek to destroy our heritage of liberty and our system of justice\".\nAgnew continued to try to increase his influence with Nixon, against the opposition of Haldeman, who was consolidating his power as the second most powerful person in the administration. Agnew was successful in being heard at an April 22, 1970, meeting of the National Security Council. An impediment to Nixon's plan for Vietnamization of the war in Southeast Asia was increasing Viet Cong control of parts of Cambodia, beyond the reach of South Vietnamese troops and used as sanctuaries. Feeling that Nixon was getting overly dovish advice from Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, Agnew stated that if the sanctuaries were a threat, they should be attacked and neutralized. Nixon chose to attack the Viet Cong positions in Cambodia, a decision that had Agnew's support, and that he remained convinced was correct after his resignation.\nThe continuing student protests against the war brought Agnew's scorn. In a speech on April 28 in Hollywood, Florida, Agnew stated that responsibility of the unrest lay with those who failed to guide them, and suggested that the alumni of Yale University fire its president, Kingman Brewster. The Cambodia incursion brought more demonstrations on campus, and on May 3, Agnew went on \"Face the Nation\" to defend the policy. Reminded that Nixon, in his inaugural address, had called for the lowering of voices in political discourse, Agnew commented, \"When a fire takes place, a man doesn't run into the room and whisper\u00a0... he yells, 'Fire!' and I am yelling 'Fire!' because I think 'Fire!' needs to be called here\". The Kent State shootings took place the following day, but Agnew did not tone down his attacks on demonstrators, alleging that he was responding to \"a general malaise that argues for violent confrontation instead of debate\". Nixon had Haldeman tell Agnew to avoid remarks about students; Agnew strongly disagreed and stated that he would only refrain if Nixon directly ordered it.\nNixon's agenda had been impeded by the fact that Congress was controlled by Democrats and he hoped to take control of the Senate in the 1970 midterm elections. Worried that Agnew was too divisive a figure, Nixon and his aides initially planned to restrict Agnew's role to fundraising and the giving of a standard stump speech that would avoid personal attacks. The president believed that appealing to white, middle- and lower-class voters on social issues would lead to Republican victories in November. He planned not to do any active campaigning, but to remain above the fray and let Agnew campaign as spokesman for the Silent Majority.\nOn September 10 in Springfield, Illinois, speaking on behalf of Republican Senator Ralph Smith, Agnew began his campaign, which would be noted for harsh rhetoric and memorable phrases. Agnew attacked the \"pusillanimous pussyfooting\" of the liberals, including those in Congress, who Agnew said cared nothing for the blue- and white-collar workers, the \"Forgotten Man of American politics\". Addressing the California Republican Convention in San Diego, Agnew targeted \"the nattering nabobs of negativism. They have formed their own 4-H Club\u2014the 'Hopeless, Hysterical, Hypochondriacs of History'.\" He warned that candidates of any party who espoused radical views should be voted out, a reference to New York Senator Charles Goodell, who was on the ballot that November, and who opposed the Vietnam War. Believing that the strategy was working, Nixon met with Agnew at the White House on September 24, and urged him to continue.\nNixon wanted to get rid of Goodell, a Republican who had been appointed by Governor Rockefeller after the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy, and who had shifted considerably to the left while in office. Goodell could be sacrificed as there was a Conservative Party candidate, James Buckley, who might win the seat. Nixon did not want to be seen as engineering the defeat of a fellow Republican, and did not have Agnew go to New York until after Nixon left on a European trip, hoping Agnew would be perceived as acting on his own. After dueling long-distance with Goodell over the report of the Scranton Commission on campus violence (Agnew considered it too permissive), Agnew gave a speech in New York in which, without naming names, he made it clear he supported Buckley. That Nixon was behind the machinations did not remain secret long, as both Agnew and Nixon adviser Murray Chotiner disclosed it; Goodell stated he still believed he had Nixon's support. Although it was by then deemed unlikely the Republicans could gain control of the Senate, both Nixon and Agnew went on the campaign trail for the final days before the election. The outcome was disappointing: Republicans gained only two seats in the Senate, and lost eleven governorships. For Agnew, one bright spot was Goodell's defeat by Buckley in New York, but he was disappointed when his former chief of staff, Charles Blair, failed to unseat Governor Marvin Mandel, Agnew's successor and a Democrat, in Maryland.\nRe-election in 1972.\nThrough 1971, it was uncertain if Agnew would be retained on the ticket as Nixon sought a second term in 1972. Neither Nixon nor his aides were enamored of Agnew's independence and outspokenness, and were less than happy at Agnew's popularity among conservatives suspicious of Nixon. The President considered replacing him with Treasury Secretary John Connally, a Democrat and former Governor of Texas. For his part, Agnew was unhappy with many of Nixon's stances, especially in foreign policy, disliking Nixon's rapprochement with China (on which Agnew was not consulted) and believing that the Vietnam War could be won with sufficient force. Even after Nixon announced his re-election bid at the start of 1972, it was unclear if Agnew would be his running mate, and it was not until July 21 that Nixon asked Agnew and the vice president accepted. A public announcement was made the following day.\nNixon instructed Agnew to avoid personal attacks on the press and the Democratic presidential nominee, South Dakota Senator George McGovern, to stress the positives of the Nixon administration, and not to comment on what might happen in 1976. At the 1972 Republican National Convention in Miami Beach, Agnew was greeted as a hero by delegates who saw him as the party's future. After being nominated for a second term, Agnew delivered an acceptance speech focused on the administration's accomplishments, and avoided his usual slashing invective, but he condemned McGovern for supporting busing, and alleged that McGovern, if elected, would beg the North Vietnamese for the return of American prisoners of war. The Watergate break-in was a minor issue in the campaign; for once, Agnew's exclusion from Nixon's inner circle worked in his favor, as he knew nothing of the matter until reading of it in the press, and upon learning from Jeb Magruder that administration officials were responsible for the break-in, cut off discussion of the matter. He viewed the break-in as foolish, and felt that both major parties routinely spied on each other. Nixon had instructed Agnew not to attack McGovern's initial running mate, Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton, and after Eagleton withdrew amid revelations concerning past mental health treatment, Nixon renewed those instructions for former ambassador Sargent Shriver, who had become the new candidate for vice president.\nNixon took the high road in the campaign, but still wanted McGovern attacked for his positions, and the task fell in part to Agnew. The vice president told the press he was anxious to discard the image he had earned as a partisan campaigner in 1968 and 1970, and wanted to be perceived as conciliatory. He defended Nixon on Watergate, and when McGovern alleged that the Nixon administration was the most corrupt in history, made a speech in South Dakota, describing McGovern as a \"desperate candidate who can't seem to understand that the American people don't want a philosophy of defeat and self-hate put upon them\".\nThe race was never close, as the McGovern/Shriver ticket's campaign was effectively over before it even began. The Nixon/Agnew ticket easily won reelection, winning 49 states (losing only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia) and over 60 percent of the vote. Trying to position himself as the front-runner for 1976, Agnew campaigned widely for Republican candidates, something Nixon would not do. Despite Agnew's efforts, Democrats easily held both houses of Congress, gaining two seats in the Senate, though the Republicans gained twelve in the House.\nCriminal investigation and resignation.\nIn early 1972, George Beall, the United States Attorney for the District of Maryland, opened an investigation of corruption in Baltimore County, involving public officials, architects, engineering firms, and paving contractors. Beall's target was the then-current political leadership in Baltimore County. There were rumors that Agnew might be involved, which Beall initially discounted; Agnew had not been county executive since December 1966, so any wrongdoing potentially committed while he held that office could not be prosecuted because the statute of limitations had expired. As part of the investigation, Lester Matz's engineering firm was served with a subpoena for documents, and through his counsel he sought immunity in exchange for cooperation in the investigation. Matz had been kicking back to Agnew five percent of the value of contracts received through his influence, first county contracts during his term in Towson, and subsequently state contracts while Agnew was governor.\nInvestigative reporters and Democratic operatives had pursued rumors that Agnew had been corrupt during his years as a Maryland official, but had been unable to substantiate them. In February 1973, Agnew heard of the investigation and had Attorney General Richard Kleindienst contact Beall. The vice president's personal attorney, George White, visited Beall, who stated that Agnew was not under investigation, and that prosecutors would do their best to protect Agnew's name. In June, Matz's attorney disclosed to Beall that his client could show that Agnew not only had been corrupt, but that payments to him had continued into his vice presidency. The statute of limitations would not prevent Agnew from being prosecuted for these later payments. On July 3, Beall informed the new Attorney General, Elliot Richardson. At the end of the month Nixon, through his chief of staff, Alexander Haig, was informed. Agnew had already met with both Nixon and Haig to assert his innocence. On August 1, Beall sent a letter to Agnew's attorney, formally advising that the vice president was under investigation for tax fraud and corruption. Matz was prepared to testify that he had met with Agnew at the White House and given him $10,000 in cash Another witness, Jerome B. Wolff, head of Maryland's road commission, had extensive documentation that detailed, as Beall put it, \"every corrupt payment he participated in with then-Governor Agnew\".\nRichardson, whom Nixon had ordered to take personal responsibility for the investigation, met with Agnew and his attorneys on August 6 to outline the case, but Agnew denied culpability, saying the selection of Matz's firm had been routine, and the money was a campaign contribution. The story broke in \"The Wall Street Journal\" later that day. Agnew publicly proclaimed his innocence and on August 8 held a press conference at which he called the stories \"damned lies\". Nixon, at a meeting on August 7, assured Agnew of his complete confidence, but Haig visited Agnew at his office and suggested that if the charges could be sustained, Agnew might want to take action before being indicted. By this time, the Watergate investigation that would lead to Nixon's resignation was well advanced. For the next two months, fresh revelations in each scandal were almost daily fare in the newspapers.\nUnder increasing pressure to resign, Agnew took the position that a sitting vice president could not be indicted and met with Speaker of the House Carl Albert on September 25, asking for an investigation. He cited as precedent an 1826 House investigation of Vice President John C. Calhoun, who was alleged to have taken improper payments while a cabinet member. Albert, second in line to the presidency under Agnew, responded that it would be improper for the House to act in a matter before the courts. Agnew also filed a motion to block any indictment on the grounds that he had been prejudiced by improper leaks from the Justice Department, and tried to rally public opinion, giving a speech before a friendly audience in Los Angeles asserting his innocence and attacking the prosecution. Nevertheless, Agnew entered into negotiations for a plea bargain on the condition that he would not serve jail time. He wrote in his memoirs that he entered the plea bargain because he was worn out from the extended crisis, to protect his family, and because he feared he could not get a fair trial. He made his decision on October 5, and plea negotiations took place over the following days. On October 9, Agnew visited Nixon at the White House and informed the President of his impending resignation.\nOn October 10, 1973, Agnew appeared before the federal court in Baltimore, and pleaded \"nolo contendere\" (no contest) to one felony charge, tax evasion, for the year 1967. Richardson agreed that there would be no further prosecution of Agnew, and released a 40-page summary of the evidence. Agnew was fined $10,000 and placed on three years' unsupervised probation. Immediately prior to entering court, Agnew had an aide submit his formal letter of resignation to the Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, and sent a letter to Nixon stating he was resigning in the best interest of the nation. Nixon responded with a letter concurring that the resignation was necessary to avoid a lengthy period of division and uncertainty, and applauding Agnew for his patriotism and dedication to the welfare of the United States.\nPost-vice presidency (1973\u20131996).\nSubsequent career: 1973\u20131990.\nSoon after his resignation, Agnew moved to his summer home at Ocean City. To cover urgent tax and legal bills, and living expenses, he borrowed $200,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) from his friend Frank Sinatra. He had hoped he could resume a career as a lawyer, but in 1974, the Maryland Court of Appeals disbarred him, calling him \"morally obtuse\". To earn his living, he founded a business consultancy, Pathlite Inc., which in the following years attracted a widespread international clientele. One deal concerned a contract for the supply of uniforms to the Iraqi Army, involving negotiations with Saddam Hussein and Nicolae Ceau\u015fescu of Romania.\nAgnew pursued other business interests: an unsuccessful land deal in Kentucky, and an equally fruitless partnership with golfer Doug Sanders over a beer distributionship in Texas. In 1976 he published a novel, \"The Canfield Decision\", about an American vice president's troubled relationship with his president. The book received mixed reviews, but was commercially successful, with Agnew receiving $100,000 for serialization rights alone. The book landed Agnew in controversy; his fictional counterpart, George Canfield, refers to \"Jewish cabals and Zionist lobbies\" and their hold over the American media, a charge which Agnew, while on a book tour, asserted was true in real life. This brought complaints from Seymour Graubard, of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, and a rebuke from President Ford, then campaigning for re-election. Agnew denied any antisemitism or bigotry: \"My contention is that routinely the American news media ... favors the Israeli position and does not in a balanced way present the other equities\". Also in 1976, Agnew announced that he was establishing a charitable foundation \"Education for Democracy\", but nothing more was heard of this after B'nai B'rith accused it of being a front for Agnew's anti-Israeli views. Agnew's anti-Zionist views seemed to have developed after leaving office\u2014as vice president, he expressed admiration for Israel and was friendly with his Jewish staff members.\nIn 1977, Agnew was wealthy enough to move to a new home at The Springs Country Club in Rancho Mirage, California, and shortly afterwards to repay the Sinatra loan. That year, in a series of televised interviews with British TV host David Frost, Nixon claimed that he had had no direct role in the processes that had led to Agnew's resignation and implied that his vice president had been hounded by the liberal media: \"He made mistakes ... but I do not think for one minute that Spiro Agnew consciously felt that he was violating the law\".\nIn 1980, Agnew wrote to Fahd bin Abdulaziz, at the time Crown Prince and \"de facto\" Prime Minister of Saudi Arabia, claiming that he had been bled dry by attacks on him by Zionists, whom he blamed for forcing him out of office. He requested an interest-free three-year loan of $2 million, to be deposited in a Swiss bank account, on which the interest would be available to Agnew. He stated that he would use the funds to \"continue my effort to inform the American people of their (i.e., Zionists') control of the media and other influential sectors of American society.\" He also congratulated the crown prince on his call for jihad against Israel, whose declaration of Jerusalem as its capital he characterized as \"the final provocation\". A month later he thanked the crown prince for giving him \"the resources to continue the battle against the Zionist community here in the U.S.\"\nIn 1980, Agnew published a memoir, \"Go Quietly ... or Else\". In it, he protested his total innocence of the charges that had brought his resignation. His assertions of innocence were undermined when his former lawyer George White testified that his client had admitted statehouse bribery to him, saying it had been going on \"for a thousand years\". Agnew also made a new claim: that he resigned because he had been warned by White House Chief of Staff Alexander Haig to \"go quietly\" or face an unspoken threat of possible assassination. Haig denied the story, saying that it was \"preposterous\", and the Agnew aide who supposedly reported this warning to Agnew also denied it, saying there was \"never any threat of bodily harm\". Agnew biographer Joseph P. Coffey describes the claim as \"absurd\".\nAfter the publication of \"Go Quietly\", Agnew largely disappeared from public view. In a rare TV interview in 1980, he advised young people not to go into politics because too much was expected of those in high public office. Students of Professor John F. Banzhaf III from the George Washington University Law School found three residents of the state of Maryland willing to put their names on a case that sought to have Agnew repay the state $268,482, the amount it was said he had taken in bribes, including interest and penalties, as a public employee. In 1981, a judge ruled that \"Mr. Agnew had no lawful right to this money under any theory,\" and ordered him to pay the state $147,500 for the kickbacks and $101,235 in interest. After two unsuccessful appeals by Agnew, he finally paid the sum in 1983. In 1989, Agnew applied unsuccessfully for this sum to be treated as tax-deductible.\nAgnew also was briefly in the news in 1987, when as the plaintiff in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, he revealed information about his then-recent business activities through his company, Pathlite, Inc. Among other activities, Agnew arranged contracts in Taiwan and Saudi Arabia, and represented a conglomerate based in South Korea, a German aircraft manufacturer, a French company that made uniforms, and a dredging company from Greece. He also represented the Hoppmann Corporation, an American company attempting to arrange for communications work in Argentina. He also discussed with local businessmen a potential concert by Frank Sinatra in Argentina. Agnew wrote in court papers \"I have one utility, and that's the ability to penetrate to the top people.\"\nFinal years and death.\nFor the remainder of his life, Agnew kept distant from news media and Washington politics. Stating he felt \"totally abandoned\", Agnew declined to take any and all phone calls from President Nixon. When Nixon died in 1994, his daughters invited Agnew to attend the funeral at Yorba Linda, California. At first he refused, still bitter over how he had been treated by the White House in his final days as vice president; over the years he had rejected various overtures from the Nixon camp to mend fences. He was persuaded to accept the invitation, and received a warm welcome there from his former colleagues. \"I decided after twenty years of resentment to put it aside\", he said. A year later, Agnew appeared at the Capitol in Washington for the dedication of a bust of him, to be placed with those of other vice presidents. Agnew commented: \"I am not blind or deaf to the fact that some people feel that ... the Senate by commissioning this bust is giving me an honor I don't deserve. I would remind these people that ... this ceremony has less to do with Spiro Agnew than with the office I held\".\nOn September 16, 1996, Agnew collapsed at his summer home in Ocean City, Maryland. He was taken to Atlantic General Hospital in Berlin, Maryland, where he died the following evening. The cause of death was undiagnosed acute leukemia. Agnew remained fit and active into his seventies, playing golf and tennis regularly, and was scheduled to play tennis with a friend on the day of his death. The funeral, at Timonium, Maryland, was mainly confined to family; Buchanan and some of Agnew's former Secret Service detail also attended to pay their final respects. In recognition of his service as vice president and combat veteran, an honor guard of the combined military services fired a rifle volley at the graveside. Agnew's wife Judith survived him by 16 years, dying at Rancho Mirage on June 20, 2012.\nLegacy.\nAt the time of his death, Agnew's legacy was perceived largely in negative terms. The circumstances of his fall from public life, particularly in the light of his declared dedication to law and order, did much to engender cynicism and distrust towards politicians of every stripe. His disgrace led to a greater degree of care in the selection of potential vice presidents. Most of the running mates selected by the major parties after 1972 were seasoned politicians\u2014Walter Mondale, George H. W. Bush, Lloyd Bentsen, Dan Quayle, Al Gore, Jack Kemp, Joe Lieberman, Dick Cheney, and Joe Biden\u2014some of whom themselves became their party's nominee for president.\nSome recent historians have seen Agnew as important in the development of the New Right, arguing that he should be honored alongside the acknowledged founding fathers of the movement such as Goldwater and Reagan; Victor Gold, Agnew's former press secretary, considered him the movement's \"John the Baptist\". Goldwater's crusade in 1964, at the height of Johnsonian liberalism, came too early, but by the time of Agnew's election, liberalism was on the wane, and as Agnew moved to the right after 1968, the country moved with him. Agnew's fall shocked and saddened conservatives, but it did not inhibit the growth of the New Right. Agnew, the first suburban politician to achieve high office, helped to popularize the view that much of the national media was controlled by elitist and effete liberals. Levy noted that Agnew \"helped recast the Republicans as a Party of 'Middle Americans' and, even in disgrace, reinforced the public's distrust of government.\"\nFor Agnew himself, despite his rise from his origins in Baltimore to next in line to the presidency, \"there could be little doubt that history's judgment was already upon him, the first Vice President of the United States to have resigned in disgrace. All that he achieved or sought to achieve in his public life\u00a0... had been buried in that tragic and irrefutable act\".\nLevy sums up the \"might-have-been\" of Agnew's career thus:\nIt is not a far stretch to imagine that if Agnew had contested corruption charges half as hard as Nixon denied culpability for Watergate\u2014as Goldwater and several other stalwart conservatives wanted him to\u2014today we might be speaking of Agnew-Democrats and Agnewnomics, and deem Agnew the father of modern conservatism.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "39076", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39076", "title": "Battle of Moh\u00e1cs", "text": "1526 battle of the Ottoman\u2013Hungarian Wars\nThe Battle of Moh\u00e1cs (; , ) took place on 29 August 1526 near Moh\u00e1cs, in the Kingdom of Hungary. It was fought between the forces of Hungary, led by King Louis II, and the invading Ottoman Empire, commanded by Suleiman the Magnificent and his grand vizier, Pargal\u0131 Ibrahim Pasha. The Ottomans achieved a decisive victory through superior planning, firepower, and a well-executed encirclement that overwhelmed the Hungarian forces.\nThe Hungarian army, encouraged by the nobility to engage prematurely, launched a frontal assault that collapsed under coordinated Ottoman counterattacks. King Louis and much of the Hungarian aristocracy were killed, resulting in the destruction of the royal army and the end of the Jagiellonian dynasty in Hungary and Bohemia. The aftermath saw the partition of Hungary between the Ottoman Empire, the Habsburg monarchy, and the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom in 1541.\nThe battle marked the beginning of sustained Ottoman\u2013Habsburg wars and the decline of Hungary as an independent power. In Hungarian historical memory, Moh\u00e1cs remains a national tragedy, symbolised by the saying \"\u201cMore was lost at Moh\u00e1cs\u201d\".\nBackground.\nDecline of the royal power in Hungary (1490\u20131526).\nAfter the death of the absolutist King Matthias Corvinus in 1490, the Hungarian magnates, who did not want another heavy-handed king, procured the accession of the notoriously weak-willed King Vladislaus of Bohemia, who reigned as King Vladislaus II of Hungary from 1490 to 1516. He was known as King Dob\u0159e (or \"Dobzse\" in Hungarian orthography), meaning \"all right\", for his habit of accepting, without question, every petition and document laid before him. The freshly-elected King Vladislaus II donated most of the Hungarian royal estates, r\u00e9gales, and royalties to the nobility. Thus the king tried to stabilize his new reign and preserve his popularity among the magnates.\nGiven the naive fiscal and land policy of the royal court, the central power began to experience severe financial difficulties, largely due to the enlargement of feudal lands at royal expense. The noble estate of the parliament succeeded in reducing their tax burden by 70\u201380%, at the expense of the country's ability to defend itself. Vladislaus became the magnates' helpless \"prisoner\"; he could make no decision without their consent.\nEurope's largest standing mercenary army (the Black Army) of Matthias Corvinus was dissolved by the aristocracy. The magnates also dismantled the national administration systems and bureaucracy throughout the country. The country's defenses sagged as border-guards and castle garrisons went unpaid, fortresses fell into disrepair, and initiatives to increase taxes to reinforce defenses were stifled. Hungary's international role declined, its political stability shaken; social progress was deadlocked. The arrival of Protestantism further worsened internal relations in the country.\nIn 1514, the weakened and old King Vladislaus II faced a major peasant rebellion led by Gy\u00f6rgy D\u00f3zsa, which was ruthlessly crushed by the nobles, led by John Z\u00e1polya. After the D\u00f3zsa Rebellion, the brutal suppression of the peasants greatly aided the 1526 Turkish invasion as the Hungarians were no longer a politically united people. The resulting degradation of order paved the way for Ottoman pre-eminence.\nJagiellonian-Habsburg attempt to organize defence against the Ottomans.\nKing Louis II of Hungary married Mary of Habsburg in 1522. The Ottomans saw this Jagiellonian\u2013Habsburg marital alliance as a threat to their power in the Balkans and worked to break it. After Suleiman I came to power in Constantinople in 1520, the High Porte made the Hungarians at least one and possibly two offers of peace. For unclear reasons, Louis refused. It is possible that Louis was well aware of Hungary's situation (especially after the Ottomans defeated Persia in the Battle of Chaldiran (1514) and the Polish-Ottoman peace from 1525) and believed that war was a better option than peace. Even in peacetime, the Ottomans raided Hungarian lands and conquered small territories (with border castles), but a final battle still offered Louis a glimmer of hope. Accordingly, another Ottoman\u2013Hungarian war ensued, and in June 1526 an Ottoman expedition advanced up the Danube.\nIn the early 1500s, Vladislav II (ruled 1490\u20131516), Louis II and Croatian nobles repeatedly asked Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I for help, but during Maximilian's reign, assistance for Hungary remained only theoretical. After the first chain of fortresses fell however, assessing the threat to his own provinces, Archduke Ferdinand (later Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand I) made a significant effort to help his brother-in-law. When N\u00e1ndorfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r was being besieged, he summoned his estates and proposed sending troops to Hungary. In the end, 2,000 German infantry troops were sent. From 1522 to the 1526 defeat at Moh\u00e1cs, field troops from Austria frequently arrived but were not placed into fortresses at the border as regular garrisons yet. Even though this military aid purportedly strengthened this area of the border, it had the undesired effect of dissolving the unified leadership that the \"ban\" had held until that time.\n opines that the coordination effort attempted by Ferdinand, Mary and Louis failed because the young Hungarian king showed a lack of vigour, which was also recognized by Hungarian nobles. Mary, on the other hand, was much more decisive and vigorous, but the non-Hungarian advisors she relied on created distrust.\nThe loss of Belgrade.\nThe Hungarians had long opposed Ottoman expansion in southeastern Europe, but in 1521 the Turks advanced up the Danube River and took N\u00e1ndorfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r (present-day Belgrade, Serbia) \u2013 the strongest Hungarian fortress on the Danube \u2013 and Szab\u00e1cs (now \u0160abac, Serbia). This left most of southern Hungary indefensible.\nThe loss of N\u00e1ndorfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r caused great alarm in Hungary.\nOn 18 October 1523, the Hungarian aristocrats united for the recapture of Belgrade, pledging funds that would support an army of 60,000 troops and 100 cannons\u2014an undertaking that was an unprecedentedly huge and costly military force by contemporary European standards. Even the papal legate, by the end of January 1524, denied the disbursement of the aid funds he had brought, arguing that: \"if the Hungarians were capable of assembling such an enormous force, then they had no need for the money.\"\nThe huge 60,000-strong royal army \u2013 led by the king, but recruited too late and too slowly \u2013 neglected to take food along and bad organization of logistics. Therefore, the army disbanded spontaneously under pressure from hunger and disease without even trying to recapture Belgrade from the newly installed Turkish garrisons. In 1523, Archbishop P\u00e1l Tomori, a valiant priest-soldier, was made captain of Southern Hungary.\nEuropean events, and the Franco-Ottoman alliance.\nIn Europe, especially in Germany, negative trends had started to unfold. The Fuggers, who had taken control of the finances, \"by around 1503 had a veritable monopoly of 'favoritism' in Germany, Hungary, Poland and Scandinavia, to the extent that any priest who wanted to get access to even the most modest parish had to turn to the merchants of Augsburg.\"\nThe Fugger family controlled the distribution of the Roman Catholic Church's indulgences, which, among other reasons, soon led to an international scandal and then to strong social unrest. After 1517, European public opinion became increasingly preoccupied and divided by the Reformation launched by Martin Luther. The religious upheaval was compounded by the German Peasants' War of 1524\u20131526, which mobilised considerable forces and, in addition to the material damage, caused more than 100,000 deaths.\nBetween 1521 and 1526, the Western European powers were preoccupied with the current episode of the Italian wars (which lasted from 1494 to 1559, with minor interruptions). France first sought allies in Eastern Europe against Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. French envoy Antonio Rincon visited Poland and Hungary several times between 1522 and 1525. After the Battle of Bicocca (1522), King Francis I of France tried \u2013 unsuccessfully \u2013 to ally himself with King Sigismund I of Poland. The Hungarian royal court also rejected the French offer. However, John Z\u00e1polya, the Voivode of Transylvania, showed a willingness to cooperate with the French, although the formal treaty was not signed until 1528.\nKing Francis I of France was defeated at the Battle of Pavia on 24 February 1525 by the troops of the Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V. After several months in prison, Francis I was forced to sign the Treaty of Madrid.\nIn a watershed moment in European diplomacy, Francis formed a formal Franco-Ottoman alliance with Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent as an ally against Charles V. The French-Ottoman strategic, and sometimes tactical, alliance lasted for about three centuries.\nTo relieve the Habsburg pressure on France, in 1525 Francis asked Suleiman to make war on the Holy Roman Empire, and the road from Turkey to the Holy Roman Empire led across Hungary. The request of the French king coincided well with the ambitions of Suleiman in Europe and gave him an incentive to attack Hungary in 1526, leading to the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs.\nAt the news of the war, the young King Louis II of Hungary appealed to the European princes for help, but only King Henry VIII of England offered aid (which arrived only in 1527 to Queen Mary of Hungary in Pozsony) and the Pope offered 50,000 gold pieces, while neither Charles V nor Ferdinand Habsburg (Archduke of Austria, the Hungarian king's brother-in-law) did anything. The fact was that the Habsburgs' armies were still on the battlefields of Italy.\nPreparation for Moh\u00e1cs.\nThe general apathy that had characterized the country forced Tomori to lean on his own bishopric revenues when he started to repair and reinforce the second line of Hungary's border defense system. (P\u00e9terv\u00e1rad would fall to the Turks on 15 July 1526, due to the chronic lack of castle garrisons.) Three years later, an Ottoman army set out from Constantinople on 16 April 1526, led by Suleiman the Magnificent personally. The Danube River was an extremely important transport route for the Ottoman army in the region, so it was clear to everyone that the Ottoman army would follow the line of the Danube. For about along the banks of the Danube between P\u00e9terv\u00e1rad and Buda there was no single Hungarian fortification, town, or even a village of any sort.\nThe Hungarian nobles, who still did not realize the magnitude of the approaching danger, did not immediately heed their king's call for troops. Eventually, the Hungarians assembled in three main units: the Transylvanian army under John Z\u00e1polya, charged with guarding the passes in the Transylvanian Alps, with between 8,000 and 13,000 men; the main army, led by Louis himself (beside numerous Spanish, German, Czech, and Serbian mercenaries); and another smaller force, commanded by the Croatian count Christoph Frankopan, numbering around 5,000 men. The Ottomans deployed the largest field artillery of the era, comprising some 300 cannons, while the Hungarians had only 85 cannons, though even this number was greater than other contemporary Western European armies deployed on the battlefields during the major conflicts of Western European powers.\nThe number of regular professional paid soldiers (Kap\u0131kulu) employed by the High Porte throughout the Ottoman Empire did not exceed 15,000\u201316,000 men in the first third of the 16th century. During this time Suleiman could raise an army between 50,000\u201360,000 for campaigns.\nThe Ottomans obtained most of the arquebuses for their janissary army from Hungarian and Venetian gunsmiths. This phenomenon was so widespread and severe, that in 1525 the Hungarian Parliament had to pass a law against the export of Hungarian-made arquebuses for the Ottoman Empire.\nContrary to popular belief, the Hungarian infantry was so well equipped with arquebuses that, it had an unusually high firepower in a comparison with contemporary Western European standards. Both armies faced a tactical challenge, namely that they could not move their firepower very well. As a result, they were only able to use it effectively if they fired from a defensive position.\nThe question was who could force the other to start the attack on the battlefield, that is, to attack positions that could then be defended with cannons and arquebuses.\nThe currently known division of the Hungarian army by arms includes: 3,000 armoured knights from the Hungarian noble banderiums, the king's bodyguard (1,000 armoured knights), 4,500 light cavalry (mainly hussars of Serbian origin), 6,700 mainly Hungarian infantry, 5,300 papal infantry (mainly German , but Italian and Spanish contingents were also represented in smaller numbers) and 1,500 Polish infantry, with an unknown number of artillerymen. Available data do not allow a detailed reconstruction of the rest of the army.\nThe geography of the area meant that the Hungarians could not know the Ottomans' ultimate goal until the latter crossed the Balkan Mountains, and when they did, the Transylvanian and Croatian forces were farther from Buda than the Ottomans were. Contemporary historical records, though sparse, indicate that Louis preferred a plan of retreat, in effect ceding the country to Ottoman advances, rather than directly engaging the Ottoman army in open battle. The Hungarian war council \u2013 without waiting for reinforcements from Croatia and Transylvania only a few days march away \u2013 made a serious tactical error by choosing the battlefield near Moh\u00e1cs, an open but uneven plain with some swampy marshes.\nFichtner writes that before the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs, there was a breakdown of communication between Louis and his brother-in-law, Archduke Ferdinand. Ferdinand was unaware of the urgency of the situation. To make the matter worse, Louis and the Hungarian court failed to inform him that they had decided to fight a decisive battle on the plain of Moh\u00e1cs (this decision was made on 26 August, one day before Ferdinand's departure: in a conference in Louis's camp in Bata, the chancellor Stephen Brodarics advised the king to wait for reinforcements from Austria and Bohemia, but a group of impetuous nobles managed to persuade the king to engage in an open, immediate battle on the plains of Mohacs against the numerically superior Ottomans). Ferdinand, facing religious tensions and uprisings in his own lands as well as his brothers' requests for more troops for other theaters, decided to tend to what he thought to be more urgent affairs first. According to Stephen Fischer-Galati, that literature shows that Louis himself seemed to be unable to fully understand the seriousness or immediacy of the Turkish threat. It was possible that Louis based his confidence on the assurances of John Z\u00e1polya and his supporters, who promised to help. Magnates who feared Habsburg interference desired a total Hungarian effort to either contain (militarily or diplomatically) or reach a truce with the Porte.\nThe Ottomans had advanced toward Moh\u00e1cs almost unopposed. While Louis waited in Buda, they had besieged several towns (Petervarad, Ujlak, and Eszek), and crossed the Sava and Drava Rivers. At Moh\u00e1cs the Hungarians numbered some 25,000 to 30,000 soldiers. The only external help was a small contingent of Polish troops (1,500 soldiers and knights) led by the royal captain Lenart Gnoi\u0144ski (but organized and equipped by the Papal State). The Ottoman army numbered perhaps 50,000, though some contemporary and modern-day historians put the number of the Ottoman troops at 100,000. Most of the Ottoman Balkan forces registered before this battle were described as Bosnians or Croats.\nThe Hungarian army was arrayed to take advantage of the terrain and hoped to engage the Ottoman army piecemeal. They had the advantage that their troops were well-rested, while the Turks had just completed a strenuous march in scorching summer heat.\nThe Role of Firepower.\nThe earliest type of Turkish hand cannons are called as \"\u015eakaloz\", which word came from the Hungarian hand cannon \"Szak\u00e1llas puska\" in the 15th century.\nHungary had a long tradition of unusually extensive use of handheld firearms (arquebus) as early as the 15th century, for example in the famous Black Army of the late ruler King Matthias Corvinus (r. 1458 - 1490). The Hungarians abandoned the use of the bow and crossbow completely in the last decade of the 15th century and switched entirely to firearms.\nThe Ottomans obtained most of the arquebuses for their janissary army from Hungarian and Venetian gunsmiths. This phenomenon was so widespread and severe, that in 1525 the Hungarian Parliament had to pass a law against the export of Hungarian-made arquebuses for the Ottoman Empire.\nContrary to popular belief, the Hungarian infantry was so well equipped with arquebuses that, it had an unusually high firepower in a comparison with contemporary Western European standards. Both armies faced a tactical challenge, namely that they could not move their firepower very well. As a result, they were only able to use them effectively if they fired from a defensive position.\nThe question was who could force the other to start the attack on the battlefield, that is, to attack positions that could then be defended with cannons and arquebuses.\nOnly half of the jannisaries used arquebuses and muskets, the other half still belonged to the traditional archery. The Ottomans have no numerical superiority regarding to handheld firearms during the battle of Moh\u00e1cs.\nDuring the battle, the Ottomans utilised the firearm kneeling position, the first of its kind, with 200 \"t\u00fcfenks\" (muskets) forming \"nine consecutive rows and they fired their weapons row by row\" in a \"kneeling or standing position without the need for additional support or rest\". This method was later adopted by the Chinese, with writer Zhao Shizhen deeming Turkish muskets superior to European ones. Volley fire with matchlocks was also first used in this battle by Janissaries.\nThe Ottomans deployed the largest field artillery of the era, comprising some 300 cannons, while the Hungarians had only 85 cannons, though even this number was greater than other contemporary Western European armies deployed on the battlefields during the major conflicts of Western European powers.\nBattle.\nThe battle took place on the afternoon of 29 August 1526, on a wide and waterlogged plain near the village of Moh\u00e1cs. The Hungarian army, numbering around 25,000\u201330,000 men, was arranged in two lines: the first composed of mercenary infantry and artillery in the centre, with heavy cavalry on both flanks; the second consisted largely of levy infantry and reserve cavalry. Opposing them was an Ottoman force of perhaps 45,000 fighting troops, including Janissaries, Timarli cavalry, conscripted Balkan levies, and artillery, under the overall command of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent and his grand vizier, Ibrahim Pasha.\nLeadership played a crucial role in the unfolding of the battle. Suleiman and Ibrahim, who had left Constantinople together in April with an army of 100,000 men and 300 guns, had prepared carefully for the campaign. While the Sultan remained at the centre of command, Ibrahim led the vanguard, ensured the bridging of rivers, and personally oversaw the advance through southern Hungary. He commanded the Ottoman centre during the battle and was credited by contemporaries with orchestrating a tactical feigned retreat that drew the Hungarians into an encirclement.\nThe Hungarian leadership, in contrast, was divided and under pressure from nobles who pushed for immediate battle rather than waiting for reinforcements. Confident in the strength of their heavy cavalry, they hoped to break the Ottoman line with a direct assault. In the early afternoon, Archbishop P\u00e1l Tomori led a charge that initially drove back the Ottoman front line, causing disorder among the irregulars. Ibrahim Pasha's centre fell back in a controlled manoeuvre, forming a crescent that exposed the flanks of the advancing Hungarian cavalry. As King Louis and the reserves moved in support, the Ottomans launched a counterattack with cavalry and light infantry from both wings, while Janissaries and artillery opened concentrated fire from prepared positions.\nAccording to some accounts, Suleiman himself was struck by Hungarian bullets that hit his cuirass during the charge. The Hungarian army, having advanced too far and too fast, found itself encircled and subjected to concentrated musket and cannon fire. Within two hours, their lines collapsed. Ottoman tactics echoed those used by John Hunyadi against the Ottomans in earlier campaigns, turning the Hungarian strategy back upon itself.\nKing Louis II attempted to flee but drowned in the marshy terrain near the Csele stream, weighed down by his armour. His body was discovered weeks later, buried in the mud. Suleiman, on finding the corpse, is reported to have expressed regret for the young king's death. Upon encountering the lifeless body of King Louis, the Sultan is said to have lamented: \"I came indeed in arms against him; but it was not my wish that he should be thus cut off before he scarcely tasted the sweets of life and royalty.\"\nAmong the dead were thousands of Hungarian soldiers and over 1,000 nobles, including seven bishops and twenty-eight barons. It is estimated that over 14,000 Hungarian troops died in the battle, including 4,000 cavalry and 10,000 infantry, with a further 2,000 prisoners executed in the aftermath. Ottoman chroniclers noted the scale of the loss, with one source claiming Suleiman was astonished that such a small force had been sent to oppose him. Suleiman proceeded to Buda, which surrendered without a fight, though his troops looted and burned both Buda and Pest despite his orders.\nAftermath.\nThe victory did not give the Ottomans the security they wanted. Buda was left undefended; only the French and Venetian ambassadors waited for the Sultan to congratulate him on his great victory. Though they entered the unguarded evacuated Buda and pillaged the castle and surroundings, they retreated soon afterwards. It was not until 1541 that the Ottomans finally captured and occupied Buda following the 1541 Siege of Buda. However, for all intents and purposes, the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs meant the end of the independent Kingdom of Hungary as a unified entity. Amid political chaos, the divided Hungarian nobility elected two kings simultaneously, John Z\u00e1polya in 1526 and Ferdinand of Austria in 1527. The Ottoman occupation was contested by the Habsburg Archduke of Austria, Ferdinand I, Louis's brother-in-law and successor by treaty with King Vladislaus II.\nBohemia fell to the Habsburgs, who also dominated the northern and western parts of Hungary and the remnants of the Kingdom of Croatia, while the Ottomans held central Hungary and suzerainty over semi-independent Transylvania. This provided the Hungarians with sufficient impetus to continue to resist the Ottoman occupation, which they did for another seventy years.\nThe Austrian branch of Habsburg monarchs needed the economic power of Hungary for the Ottoman wars. During the Ottoman wars the territory controlled by the Kingdom of Hungary shrank by around 60%. Despite these territorial and demographic losses, the smaller, heavily war-torn Royal Hungary remained as economically important as the Austrian hereditary lands or the Bohemian crown lands in the late 16th century. Of Ferdinand's territories, the depleted Kingdom of Hungary was at that time his largest source of revenue.\nThe subsequent near constant warfare required a sustained commitment of Ottoman forces, proving a drain on resources that the largely rural and war-torn kingdom proved unable to repay. Crusader armies besieged Buda several times during the 16th century. Sultan Suleiman himself died of natural causes in Hungary during the Battle of Szigetv\u00e1r in 1566. There were also two unsuccessful Ottoman sieges of Eger, which did not fall until 1596, seventy years after the Ottoman victory at Moh\u00e1cs. The Turks proved unable to conquer the northern and western parts of Hungary, which belonged to the Habsburg monarchs.\nA book on the Turkish culture was written by Georgius Bartholomaeus with information obtained from Christian troops released by the Ottomans after the battle.\nLegacy.\nMoh\u00e1cs is seen by many Hungarians as the decisive downward turning point in the country's history, a national trauma that persists in the nation's folk memory. To indicate magnitude of bad luck at hand, Hungarians still say: \"more was lost at Moh\u00e1cs\" (). Hungarians view Moh\u00e1cs as marking the end of Hungary as an independent and powerful European nation.\nWhilst Moh\u00e1cs was a decisive loss, it was the aftermath that truly put an end to fully independent Hungary. The ensuing two hundred years of near constant warfare between the two empires, Habsburg and Ottoman, turned Hungary into a perpetual battlefield and its territories were split into three parts. The countryside was regularly ravaged by armies moving back and forth, in turn devastating the population. Only in the 19th century would Hungary reestablish its former boundaries, with full independence from Habsburg rule coming only after the First World War. \nThe battlefield, beside the village of S\u00e1torhely, became an official national historical memorial site in 1976 on the 450th anniversary of the battle. The memorial was designed by architect Gy\u00f6rgy Vad\u00e1sz. A new reception hall and exhibition building, also designed by Vad\u00e1sz and partially funded by the European Union, was completed in 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39082", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39082", "title": "Peter Schickele", "text": "American composer, musical educator and parodist (1935\u20132024)\nPeter Schickele (; July 17, 1935 \u2013 January 16, 2024) was an American composer, musical educator and parodist, best known for comedy albums featuring his music, which he presented as being composed by the fictional P. D. Q. Bach. He also hosted a long-running weekly radio program called \"Schickele Mix\".\nFrom 1990 to 1993, Schickele's P. D. Q. Bach recordings earned him four consecutive wins for the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album.\nEarly life.\nPeter Schickele was born on July 17, 1935, in Ames, Iowa, to Alsatian immigrant parents. His father, Rainer Schickele (1905, Berlin \u2013 1989, Berkeley, California), was the son of writer Ren\u00e9 Schickele and was an agricultural economist teaching at Iowa State University. \nIn 1945, Schickele's father took a position at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., then became chairman of the Agricultural Sciences Department at North Dakota Agricultural College (now North Dakota State University) in Fargo, North Dakota in 1946.\nIn Fargo, the younger Schickele studied composition with Sigvald Thompson of the Fargo-Moorhead Symphony Orchestra. He graduated from Fargo Central High School in 1952, then attended Swarthmore College, graduating in 1957 with a degree in music. He was the first student at Swarthmore to earn a music degree. He was a contemporary of Ted Nelson at Swarthmore, and he scored Nelson's experimental film \"The Epiphany of Slocum Furlow\". It was his first film score. He graduated from the Juilliard School in 1960 with a master's degree in musical composition. He studied composition with Roy Harris and Vincent Persichetti.\nEarly career.\nSchickele wrote music for a number of folk musicians, most notably Joan Baez, for whom he also orchestrated and arranged three albums during the mid-1960s, \"No\u00ebl\" (1966), \"Joan\" (1967), and \"\" (1968). He also composed the original score for the 1972 science fiction film \"Silent Running\".\nSchickele, an accomplished bassoonist, was also a member of the chamber rock trio the Open Window, which wrote and performed music for the 1969 revue \"Oh! Calcutta!\" and released three albums.\nThe humorous aspect of Schickele's musical career came from his early interest in the music of Spike Jones, whose musical ensemble lampooned popular music in the 1940s and 1950s. in 1959, while at Juilliard, Schickele teamed with conductor Jorge Mester to present a humorous concert, which became an annual event at the college. In 1965, Schickele moved the concept to The Town Hall in New York City and invited the public to attend; Vanguard Records released an album of that concert, and the character of \"P. D. Q. Bach\" was launched. By 1972, the concerts had become so popular that they were moved to Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center.\nP.D.Q. Bach.\nSchickele developed an elaborate parody around his studies of P.D.Q. Bach, the fictional \"youngest and the oddest of the twenty-odd children\" of Johann Sebastian Bach. Among the fictional composer's \"forgotten\" repertory are such farcical works as \"The Abduction of Figaro\", the \"Unbegun\" symphony, \"Pervertimento for Bagpipes, Bicycle and Balloons\", \"Canine Cantata: \"Wachet Arf!\"\", \"Good King Kong Looked Out\", the \"\"Trite\" Quintet\", \"O Little Town of Hackensack\", \"A Little Nightmare Music\", the cantata \"Iphigenia in Brooklyn\", the \"Concerto for Horn and Hardart\", \"The Stoned Guest\", \"Hansel and Gretel and Ted and Alice\", the \"Concerto for Two Pianos vs. Orchestra\", the dramatic oratorio \"Oedipus Tex\" and \"Einstein on the Fritz\", a parody of Schickele's Juilliard classmate Philip Glass.\nHis fictitious \"home establishment\" is the University of Southern North Dakota at Hoople, where he reports having tenure as \"Very Full Professor\" of \"musicolology\" and \"musical pathology\". He invented a range of rather unusual instruments. The most complicated of these is the Hardart, a tone-generating device mounted on the frame of an \"automat\", a coin-operated food dispenser. This modified automat is used in the \"Concerto for Horn and Hardart\", a play on the name of Horn &amp; Hardart who pioneered the American use of the automat in their restaurants.\nSchickele also invented the \"dill piccolo\" for playing sour notes, the \"left-handed sewer flute\", the \"tromboon\" (\"a cross between a trombone and a bassoon, having all the disadvantages of both\"), the \"lasso d'amore\", the double-reed slide music stand, the \"tuba mirum\" (a flexible tube filled with wine), and the \"pastaphone\" (an uncooked tube of pasta played as a horn).\nTo a large degree, Schickele's music as P.D.Q. Bach has overshadowed his work as a \"serious\" composer. He frequently collaborated with soprano Michele Eaton and tenor David Dusing who often appeared with him in concerts.\nSchickele performed two concerts to commemorate the 50th anniversary of his first concert at The Town Hall in New York on December 28 and 29, 2015. He reduced his concert appearances due to health issues, but continued to schedule live concert performances through 2018.\nOther musical career.\nSchickele composed more than 100 original works for symphony orchestra, choral groups, chamber ensemble, voice, television and an animated adaptation of \"Where the Wild Things Are\" (which he also narrated). He made a brief foray into cinema with the Bruce Dern film \"Silent Running\" (1972), for which he composed the musical score and co-wrote the original songs \"Silent Running\" and \"Rejoice in the Sun\" with Diane Lampert. He also wrote music for school bands, as well as for a number of musicals, including \"Oh! Calcutta!\", and organized numerous concert performances as both musical director and performer. Schickele was active on the international and North American concert circuit.\nSchickele's musical creations won him multiple awards. His extensive body of work is marked by a distinctive style which integrates the European classical tradition with an unmistakable American idiom.\nSchickele also created such not-quite\u2013P. D. Q. Bach albums as \"Hornsmoke\", \"Sneaky Pete and the Wolf\", and \"The Emperor's New Clothes\".\nSchickele's music is published by the Theodore Presser Company.\nRadio.\nAs a musical educator he also hosted the classical music educational radio program \"Schickele Mix\", which aired on many public radio stations in the United States (and internationally on Public Radio International). The program began in 1992; lack of funding ended the production of new programs by 1999, and rebroadcasts of the existing programs finally ceased in June 2007. Only 119 of the 169 programs were in the rebroadcast rotation, because earlier shows contained American Public Radio production IDs rather than ones crediting Public Radio International. In March 2006, some of the other \"lost episodes\" were added back to the rotation, with one notable program remnant of the \"Periodic Table of Musics\", listing the names of musicians and composers as mythical element names in a format reminiscent of the periodic table.\nPersonal life.\nSchickele married poet Susan Sindall on October 27, 1962. Their children, Matt and Karla, are both musicians. The two played together in the trio Beekeeper in the 1990s. Karla is also an orchestral music composer.\nSchickele's brother David Schickele (1937\u20131999) was a film director and musician.\nPeter Schickele died at his home in Bearsville, New York, on January 16, 2024, at the age of 88, due to a series of infections that damaged his health.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39083", "revid": "49604163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39083", "title": "The Stoned Guest", "text": "Opera by P. D. Q. Bach\nThe Stoned Guest is a \"half-act opera\" by Peter Schickele in the satirical persona of P. D. Q. Bach. The title is a play on the \"stone guest\" character in \"Don Giovanni\" by Mozart, as well as the opera \"The Stone Guest\" by Alexander Sergeyevich Dargom\u00efzhsky after the play by Pushkin. The work is a parody of classical opera. The opera appears on the 1970 album of the same name.\nThe loose story combines elements of \"Don Giovanni\" with elements of \"Carmen\" by Georges Bizet. Some character names, such as \"Don Octave\" and \"Donna Ribalda\", play on the Mozart opera, referring to Don Ottavio and Donna Elvira respectively, while the castanet-clicking \"Carmen Ghia\" plays on the title character of Bizet's opera (and puns on the Volkswagen Karmann Ghia). The \"Commendatoreador\" plays on both operas at once, being a combination of \"Il Commendatore\" and the toreador Escamillo. The orchestral accompaniment for Donna Ribalda's opening aria, \"Let's face it\u2014I'm lost\", resembles the \"Rex tremendae majestatis\" from Mozart's \"Requiem\".\nAt one point in the opera, the rival divas Carmen Ghia and Donna Ribalda break character in the middle of a \"recitative\" to hold a conversation (still in recitative) about their singing careers. At a subsequent point, they have a contest to see who can hold a note the longest. The final scenes of the opera parody first the stereotype (exemplified by \"Don Giovanni\" itself) of classical opera as having a tragic ending and then the stereotype of the Romantic narrative (as reflected in, \"e.g.\", Goethe's revision of the Faust legend) by revealing the tragic ending to have been a false ending and introducing \"deus ex machina\" to generate a happy conclusion not warranted by the earlier plot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39085", "revid": "5183450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39085", "title": "Boris Godunov (opera)", "text": "Opera by Modest Mussorgsky\nBoris Godunov ( ) is an opera by Modest Mussorgsky (1839\u20131881). The work was composed between 1868 and 1873 in Saint Petersburg, Russia. It is Mussorgsky's only completed opera and is considered his masterpiece. Its subjects are the Russian ruler Boris Godunov, who reigned as Tsar (1598 to 1605) during the Time of Troubles, and his nemesis, the False Dmitriy (reigned 1605 to 1606). The Russian-language libretto was written by the composer, and is based on the 1825 drama \"Boris Godunov\" by Aleksandr Pushkin, and, in the Revised Version of 1872, on Nikolay Karamzin's \"History of the Russian State\".\nAmong major operas, \"Boris Godunov\" shares with Giuseppe Verdi's \"Don Carlos\" (1867) the distinction of having an extremely complex creative history, as well as a great wealth of alternative material. The composer created two versions\u2014the Original Version of 1869, which was rejected for production by the Imperial Theatres, and the Revised Version of 1872, which received its first performance in 1874 in Saint Petersburg.\n\"Boris Godunov\" has often been subjected to cuts, recomposition, re-orchestration, transposition of scenes, or conflation of the original and revised versions.\nSeveral composers, chief among them Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov and Dmitri Shostakovich, have created new editions of the opera to \"correct\" perceived technical weaknesses in the composer's original scores. Although these versions held the stage for decades, Mussorgsky's individual harmonic style and orchestration are now valued for their originality, and revisions by other hands have fallen out of fashion.\nIn the 1980s, \"Boris Godunov\" was closer to the status of a repertory piece than any other Russian opera, even Tchaikovsky's \"Eugene Onegin\", and is the most recorded Russian opera.\nHistory.\nComposition history.\n\"Note: Dates provided in this article for events taking place in Russia before 1918 are Old Style.\"\nBy the close of 1868, Mussorgsky had already started and abandoned two important opera projects\u2014the antique, exotic, romantic tragedy \"Salammb\u00f4\", written under the influence of Aleksandr Serov's \"Judith\", and the contemporary, Russian, anti-romantic farce \"Marriage\", influenced by Aleksandr Dargom\u00efzhsky's \"The Stone Guest\". Mussorgsky's next project would be a very original and successful synthesis of the opposing styles of these two experiments\u2014the romantic-lyrical style of \"Salammb\u00f4\", and the realistic style of \"Marriage\".\nIn the autumn of 1868, Vladimir Nikolsky, a professor of Russian history and language, and an authority on Pushkin, suggested to Mussorgsky the idea of composing an opera on the subject of Pushkin's \"dramatic chronicle\" \"Boris Godunov\". \"Boris\" the play, modelled on Shakespeare's histories, was written in 1825 and published in 1831, but was not approved for performance by the state censors until 1866, almost 30 years after the author's death. Production was permitted on condition that certain scenes were cut. Although enthusiasm for the work was high, Mussorgsky faced a seemingly insurmountable obstacle to his plans in that an Imperial ukaz of 1837 forbade the portrayal in opera of Russian Tsars (amended in 1872 to include only Romanov Tsars).\nOriginal Version\nWhen Lyudmila Shestakova, the sister of Mikhail Glinka, learned of Mussorgsky's plans, she presented him with a volume of Pushkin's dramatic works, interleaved with blank pages and bound, and using this, Mussorgsky began work in October 1868 preparing his own libretto. consists of 25 scenes, written predominantly in blank verse. Mussorgsky adapted the most theatrically effective scenes, mainly those featuring the title character, along with a few other key scenes (Novodevichy, Cell, Inn), often preserving Pushkin's verses.\nMussorgsky worked rapidly, composing first the vocal score in about nine months (finished 18 July 1869), and completed the full score five months later (15 December 1869), at the same time working as a civil servant. In 1870, he submitted the libretto to the state censor for examination, and the score to the literary and music committees of the Imperial Theatres. However, the opera was rejected (10 February 1871) by a vote of 6 to 1, ostensibly for its lack of an important female role. Lyudmila Shestakova recalled the reply made by conductor Eduard N\u00e1pravn\u00edk and stage manager Gennadiy Kondratyev of the Mariinsky Theatre in response to her question of whether \"Boris\" had been accepted for production:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"'No,' they answered me, 'it's impossible. How can there be an opera without the feminine element?! Mussorgsky has great talent beyond doubt. Let him add one more scene. Then \"Boris\" will be produced!'\"\u2014\u200a\nOther questionable accounts, such as Rimsky-Korsakov's, allege that there were additional reasons for rejection, such as the work's novelty:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...Mussorgsky submitted his completed \"Boris Godunov\" to the Board of Directors of the Imperial Theatres ... The freshness and originality of the music nonplussed the honorable members of the committee, who reproved the composer, among other things, for the absence of a reasonably important female role.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"All his closest friends, including myself, although moved to enthusiasm by the superb dramatic power and genuinely national character of the work, had constantly been pointing out to him that it lacked many essentials; and that despite the beauties with which it teemed, it might be found unsatisfactory in certain respects. For a long time he stood up (as every genuine artist is wont to do) for his creation, the fruit of his inspiration and meditations. He yielded only after \"Boris\" had been rejected, the management finding that it contained too many choruses and ensembles, whereas individual characters had too little to do. This rejection proved very beneficial to \"Boris\".\"\u2014\u200a\nMeanwhile, Pushkin's drama (18 of the published 24 scenes, condensed into 16) finally received its first performance in 1870 at the Mariinsky Theatre, three years in advance of the premiere of the opera in the same venue, using the same scene designs by Matvey Shishkov that would be recycled in the opera.\nRevised Version\nIn 1871, Mussorgsky began recasting and expanding the opera with enthusiasm, ultimately going beyond the requirements of the directorate of the Imperial Theatres, which called simply for the addition of a female role and a scene to contain it. He added three scenes (the two Sandomierz scenes and the Krom\u00ef Scene), cut one (The Cathedral of Vasiliy the Blessed), and recomposed another (the Terem Scene). The modifications resulted in the addition of an important prima donna role (Marina Mniszech), the expansion of existing female roles (additional songs for the Hostess, Fyodor, and the Nurse), and the expansion of the first tenor role (the Pretender). Mussorgsky augmented his adaptation of Pushkin's drama with his own lyrics, assisted by a study of the monumental \"History of the Russian State\" by Karamzin, to whom Pushkin's drama is dedicated.\nThe Revised Version was finished in 1872 (vocal score, 14 December 1871; full score 23 June 1872), and submitted to the Imperial Theatres in the autumn.\nMost Mussorgsky biographers claim that the directorate of the Imperial Theatres also rejected the revised version of \"Boris Godunov\", even providing a date: 6 May 1872 (Calvocoressi), or 29 October 1872 (Lloyd-Jones). Recent researchers point out that there is insufficient evidence to support this claim, emphasizing that in his revision Mussorgsky had rectified the only objection the directorate is known to have made.\nIn any case, Mussorgsky's friends took matters into their own hands, arranging the performance of three scenes (the Inn and both Sandomierz scenes) at the Mariinsky Theatre on 5 February 1873, as a benefit for stage manager Gennadiy Kondratyev. C\u00e9sar Cui's review noted the audience's enthusiasm:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;C\u00e9sar Cui, \"Sankt-Peterburgskie Vedomosti\", 1873\nThe success of this performance led V. Bessel and Co. to announce the publication of the piano vocal score of Mussorgsky's opera, issued in January 1874.\nPremiere\nThe triumphant 1873 performance of three scenes paved the way for the first performance of the opera, which was accepted for production on 22 October 1873. The premiere took place on 27 January 1874, as a benefit for prima donna Yuliya Platonova. The performance was a great success with the public. The Mariinsky Theatre was sold out; Mussorgsky had to take some 20 curtain calls; students sang choruses from the opera in the street. This time, however, the critical reaction was exceedingly hostile [see Critical Reception in this article for details].\nInitial performances of \"Boris Godunov\" featured significant cuts. The entire Cell Scene was cut from the first performance, not, as is often supposed, due to censorship, but because N\u00e1pravn\u00edk wished to avoid a lengthy performance, and frequently cut episodes he felt were ineffective. Later performances tended to be even more heavily cut, including the additional removal of the Krom\u00ef scene, likely for political reasons (starting 20 October 1876, the 13th performance). After protracted difficulties in obtaining the production of his opera, Mussorgsky was compliant with N\u00e1pravn\u00edk's demands, and even defended these mutilations to his own supporters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Presently cuts were made in the opera, the splendid scene 'Near Krom\u00ef' was omitted. Some two years later, the Lord knows why, productions of the opera ceased altogether, although it had enjoyed uninterrupted success, and the performances under Petrov and, after his death, by F. I. Stravinsky, Platonova, and Komissarzhevsky had been excellent. There were rumors afloat that the opera had displeased the Imperial family; there was gossip that its subject was unpleasant to the censors; the result was that the opera was stricken from the repertory.\"\u2014\u200a\n\"Boris Godunov\" was performed 21 times during the composer's lifetime, and 5 times after his death (in 1881) before being withdrawn from the repertory on 8 November 1882. When Mussorgsky's subsequent opera \"Khovanshchina\" was rejected for production in 1883, the Imperial Opera Committee reputedly said: \"One radical opera by Mussorgsky is enough.\" \"Boris Godunov\" did not return to the stage of the Mariinsky Theatre until 9 November 1904, when the Rimsky-Korsakov edition was presented under conductor Feliks Blumenfeld with bass Feodor Chaliapin in the title role.\n\"Boris Godunov\" and the Imperial Family.\nThe reports of the antipathy of the Imperial family to Mussorgsky's opera are supported by the following accounts by Platonova and Stasov:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"During the [premiere], after the scene by the fountain, Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich, a devoted friend of mine, but by the calumny of the Conservatory members, the sworn enemy of Musorgsky, approached me during the intermission with the following words: 'And you like this music so much that you chose this opera for a benefit performance?' 'I like it, Your Highness,' I answered. 'Then I am going to tell you that this is a shame to all Russia, and not an opera!' he screamed, almost foaming at the mouth, and then turning his back, he stomped away from me.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In the entire audience, I think only Konstantin Nikolayevich was unhappy (he does not like our school, in general) ... it was not so much the fault of the music as that of the libretto, where the 'folk scenes,' the riot, the scene where the police officer beats the people with his stick so that they cry out begging Boris to accept the throne, and so forth, were jarring to some people and infuriated them. There was no end to applause and curtain calls.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"When the list of operas for the winter was presented to His Majesty the Emperor, he, with his own hand, was pleased to strike out \"Boris\" with a wavy line in blue pencil.\"\u2014\u200a\nPerformance history.\n\"Note: This section lists performance data for the Saint Petersburg and Moscow premieres of each important version, the first performance of each version abroad, and premieres in English-speaking countries. Dates provided for events taking place in Russia before 1918 are Old Style.\"\nOriginal interpreters\n1872, Saint Petersburg \u2013 Excerpts\nThe Coronation Scene was performed on 5 February 1872 by the Russian Music Society, conducted by Eduard N\u00e1pravn\u00edk. The Polonaise from Act 3 was performed (without chorus) on 3 April 1872 by the Free School of Music, conducted by Miliy Balakirev.\n1873, Saint Petersburg \u2013 Three scenes\nThree scenes from the opera\u2014the Inn Scene, the Scene in Marina's Boudoir, and the Fountain Scene\u2014were performed on 5 February 1873 at the Mariinsky Theatre. Eduard N\u00e1pravn\u00edk conducted. The cast included Darya Leonova (Innkeeper), Fyodor Komissarzhevsky (Pretender), Osip Petrov (Varlaam), Vasiliy Vasilyev (or 'Vasilyev II') (Misail), Mikhail Sariotti (Police Officer), Yuliya Platonova (Marina), Josef Pale\u010dek (Rangoni), and Feliks Krzesi\u0144ski (Old Polish Noble).\n1874, Saint Petersburg \u2013 World premiere\nThe Revised Version of 1872 received its world premiere on 27 January 1874 at the Mariinsky Theatre. The Cell Scene was omitted. The Novodevichiy and Coronation scenes were combined into one continuous scene: 'The Call of Boris to the Tsardom'. Matvey Shishkov's design for the last scene of Pushkin's drama, 'The House of Boris' (see illustration, right), was substituted for this hybrid of the Novodevichiy and Coronation scenes. The scenes were grouped in five acts as follows:\nAct 1: 'The Call of Boris to the Tsardom' and 'Inn'\nAct 2: 'With Tsar Boris'\nAct 3: 'Marina's Boudoir' and 'At the Fountain'\nAct 4: 'The Death of Boris'\nAct 5: 'The Pretender near Krom\u00ef'\nProduction personnel included Gennadiy Kondratyev (stage director), Ivan Pomazansky (chorus master), Matvey Shishkov, Mikhail Bocharov, and Ivan Andreyev (scene designers), and Vasiliy Prokhorov (costume designer). Eduard N\u00e1pravn\u00edk conducted. The cast included Ivan Melnikov (Boris), Aleksandra Krutikova (Fyodor), Wilhelmina Raab (Kseniya), Olga Shryoder (nurse), Vasiliy Vasilyev, 'Vasilyev II' (Shuysky), Vladimir Sobolev (Shchelkalov), Vladimir Vasilyev, 'Vasilyev I' (Pimen, Lawicki), Fyodor Komissarzhevsky (Pretender), Yuliya Platonova (Marina), Josef Pale\u010dek (Rangoni), Osip Petrov (Varlaam), Pavel Dyuzhikov (Misail), Antonina Abarinova (Innkeeper), Pavel Bulakhov (Yur\u00f3div\u00efy), Mikhail Sariotti (Nikitich), Lyadov (Mityukha), Sobolev (Boyar-in-Attendance), Matveyev (Khrushchov), and Sobolev (Czernikowski). The production ran for 26 performances over 9 years.\nThe premiere established traditions that have influenced subsequent Russian productions (and many abroad as well): 1) Cuts made to shorten what is perceived as an overlong work; 2) Declamatory and histrionic singing by the title character, often degenerating in climactic moments into shouting (initiated by Ivan Melnikov, and later reinforced by Fyodor Shalyapin); and 3) Realistic and historically accurate sets and costumes, employing very little stylization.\n1879, Saint Petersburg \u2013 Cell Scene\nThe Cell Scene (Revised Version) was first performed on 16 January 1879 in Kononov Hall, at a concert of the Free School of Music, in the presence of Mussorgsky. Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov conducted. The cast included Vladimir Vasilyev, \"Vasilyev I\" (Pimen), and Vasiliy Vasilyev, 'Vasilyev II' (Pretender).\n1888, Moscow \u2013 Bolshoy Theatre premiere\nThe Revised Version of 1872 received its Moscow premiere on 16 December 1888 at the Bolshoy Theatre. The Cell and Krom\u00ef scenes were omitted. Production personnel included Anton Bartsal (stage director), and Karl Valts (scene designer). Ippolit Altani conducted. The cast included Bogomir Korsov (Boris), Nadezhda Salina (Fyodor), Aleksandra Karatayeva (Kseniya), O. Pavlova (Nurse), Anton Bartsal (Shuysky), Pyotr Figurov (Shchelkalov), Ivan Butenko (Pimen), Lavrentiy Donskoy (Pretender), Mariya Klimentova (Marina), Pavel Borisov (Rangoni), Vladimir Streletsky (Varlaam), Mikhail Mikhaylov (Misail), Vera Gnucheva (Innkeeper), and Aleksandr Dodonov (Boyar-in-attendance). The production ran for 10 performances.\n1896, Saint Petersburg \u2013 Premiere of the Rimsky-Korsakov edition\nThe Rimsky-Korsakov edition premiered on 28 November 1896 in the Great Hall of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory. Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov conducted. The cast included Mikhail Lunacharsky (Boris), Gavriil Morskoy (Pretender), Nikolay Kedrov (Rangoni), and Fyodor Stravinsky (Varlaam). The production ran for 4 performances.\n1898, Moscow \u2013 Fyodor Shalyapin as Boris\nBass Fyodor Shalyapin first appeared as Boris on 7 December 1898 at the Solodovnikov Theatre in a Private Russian Opera production. The Rimsky-Korsakov edition of 1896 was performed. Production personnel included Savva Mamontov (producer), and Mikhail Lentovsky (stage director). Giuseppe Truffi conducted. The cast also included Anton Sekar-Rozhansky (Pretender), Serafima Selyuk-Roznatovskaya (Marina), Varvara Strakhova (Fyodor), and Vasiliy Shkafer (Shuysky). The production ran for 14 performances.\n1908, Paris \u2013 First performance outside Russia\nThe Rimsky-Korsakov edition of 1908 premiered on 19 May 1908 at the Paris Op\u00e9ra. The Cell Scene preceded the Coronation Scene, the Inn Scene and the Scene in Marina's Boudoir were omitted, the Fountain Scene preceded the Terem Scene, and the Krom\u00ef Scene preceded the Death Scene. Production personnel included Sergey Dyagilev (producer), Aleksandr Sanin (stage director), Aleksandr Golovin, Konstantin Yuon, Aleksandr Benua, and Yevgeniy Lansere (scene designers), Ulrikh Avranek (chorusmaster), and Ivan Bilibin (costume designer). Feliks Blumenfeld conducted. The cast included Fyodor Shalyapin (Boris), Klavdiya Tugarinova (Fyodor), Dagmara Renina (Kseniya), Yelizaveta Petrenko (Nurse), Ivan Alchevsky (Shuysky), Nikolay Kedrov (Shchelkalov), Vladimir Kastorsky (Pimen), Dmitri Smirnov (Pretender), Nataliya Yermolenko-Yuzhina (Marina), Vasiliy Sharonov (Varlaam), Vasiliy Doverin-Kravchenko (Misail), Mitrofan Chupr\u00efnnikov (Yur\u00f3div\u00efy), and Khristofor Tolkachev (Nikitich). The production ran for 7 performances.\n1913, New York \u2013 United States premiere\nThe United States premiere of the 1908 Rimsky-Korsakov edition took place on 19 March 1913 at the Metropolitan Opera, and was based on Sergey Dyagilev's Paris production. The opera was presented in three acts. The Cell Scene preceded the Coronation Scene, the scene in Marina's Boudoir was omitted, and the Krom\u00ef Scene preceded the Death Scene. However, the Inn Scene, which was omitted in Paris, was included. Scenery and costume designs were the same as used in Paris in 1908\u2014made in Russia by Golovin, Benua, and Bilibin, and shipped from Paris. Arturo Toscanini conducted. The cast included Adamo Didur (Boris), Anna Case (Fyodor), Leonora Sparkes (Kseniya), Maria Duch\u00eane (Nurse), Angelo Bad\u00e0 (Shuysky), Vincenzo Reschiglian (Shchelkalov, Lawicki), Jeanne Maubourg (Innkeeper), L\u00e9on Rothier (Pimen), Paul Althouse (Pretender), Louise Homer (Marina), Andr\u00e9s de Segurola (Varlaam), Pietro Audisio (Misail), Albert Reiss (Yur\u00f3div\u00efy), Giulio Rossi (Nikitich), Leopoldo Mariani (Boyar-in-Attendance), and Louis Kreidler (Czernikowski). This performance was sung in Italian.\n1913, London \u2013 United Kingdom premiere\nThe United Kingdom premiere of the 1908 Rimsky-Korsakov edition took place on 24 June 1913 at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in London. Production personnel included Sergey Dyagilev (producer) and Aleksandr Sanin (stage director). Emil Cooper conducted. The cast included Fyodor Shalyapin (Boris), Mariya Dav\u00efdova (Fyodor), Mariya Brian (Kseniya), Yelizaveta Petrenko (Nurse, Innkeeper), Nikolay Andreyev (Shuysky), A.\u00a0Dogonadze (Shchelkalov), Pavel Andreyev (Pimen), Vasiliy Damayev (Pretender), Yelena Nikolayeva (Marina), Aleksandr Belyanin (Varlaam), Nikolay Bolshakov (Misail), Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (Yur\u00f3div\u00efy), and Kapiton Zaporozhets (Nikitich).\n1927, Moscow \u2013 St. Basil's Scene\nThe newly published St. Basil's Scene was performed on 18 January 1927 at the Bolshoy Theatre in the 1926 revision by Mikhail Ippolitov-Ivanov, commissioned in 1925 to accompany the Rimsky-Korsakov edition. Production personnel included Vladimir Lossky (stage director) and Fyodor Fedorovsky (scene designer). Ariy Pazovsky conducted. The cast included Ivan Kozlovsky (Yur\u00f3div\u00efy), and Leonid Savransky (Boris). The production ran for 144 performances.\n1928, Leningrad \u2013 World premiere of the 1869 Original Version\nThe Original Version of 1869 premiered on 16 February 1928 at the State Academic Theatre of Opera and Ballet. Production personnel included Sergey Radlov (stage director), and Vladimir Dmitriyev (scene designer). Vladimir Dranishnikov conducted. The cast included Mark Reyzen (Boris), Aleksandr Kabanov (Shuysky), Ivan Pleshakov (Pimen), Nikolay Pechkovsky (Pretender), Pavel Zhuravlenko (Varlaam), Yekaterina Sabinina (Innkeeper), and V. Tikhiy (Yur\u00f3div\u00efy).\n1935, London \u2013 First performance of the 1869 Original Version outside Russia\nThe first performance of the 1869 Original Version abroad took place on 30 September 1935 at the Sadler's Wells Theatre. The opera was sung in English. Lawrance Collingwood conducted. The cast included Ronald Stear (Boris).\n1959, Leningrad \u2013 First performance of the Shostakovich orchestration\nThe premiere of the Shostakovich orchestration of 1940 of Pavel Lamm's vocal score took place on 4 November 1959 at the Kirov Theatre. Sergey Yeltsin conducted. The cast included Boris Shtokolov (Boris).\n1974, New York \u2013 First Russian Language Performance in the United States\nOn 16 December 1974, an adapted version of the original Mussorgsky orchestration was used for this New production, with Martti Talvela performing the title role by the Metropolitan Opera, which was also the first performance of Boris Godunov in the new Lincoln Center building since its opening in 1966.\nVersions.\n\"Note: Musicologists are often not in agreement on the terms used to refer to the two authorial versions of \"Boris Godunov\". Editors Pavel Lamm and Boris Asafyev used \"preliminary redaction\" and \"principal redaction\" for the 1st and 2nd versions, respectively, and David Lloyd-Jones designated them \"initial\" and \"definitive.\" This article, aiming for utmost objectivity, uses \"original\" and \"revised.\"\"\nThe differences in approach between the two authorial versions are sufficient as to constitute two distinct ideological conceptions, not two variations of a single plan.\n1869 Original Version\nThe Original Version of 1869 is rarely heard. It is distinguished by its greater fidelity to Pushkin's drama and its almost entirely male cast of soloists. It also conforms to the recitative opera style (op\u00e9ra dialogu\u00e9) of \"The Stone Guest\" and \"Marriage\", and to the ideals of kuchkist realism, which include fidelity to text, formlessness, and emphasis on the values of spoken theatre, especially through naturalistic declamation. The unique features of this version include:\nThe terse Terem Scene of the 1869 version and the unrelieved tension of the two subsequent and final scenes make this version more dramatically effective to some critics (e.g., Boris Asafyev).\n1872 Revised Version\nThe Revised Version of 1872 represents a retreat from the ideals of Kuchkist realism, which had come to be associated with comedy, toward a more exalted, tragic tone, and a conventionally operatic style\u2014a trend that would be continued in the composer's next opera, \"Khovanshchina\". This version is longer, is richer in musical and theatrical variety, and balances naturalistic declamation with more lyrical vocal lines. The unique features of this version include:\nMussorgsky rewrote the Terem Scene for the 1872 version, modifying the text, adding new songs and plot devices (the parrot and the clock), modifying the psychology of the title character, and virtually recomposing the music of the entire scene.\nThis version has made a strong comeback in recent years, and has become the dominant version.\n1874 Piano Vocal Score\nThe Piano Vocal Score of 1874 was the first published form of the opera, and is essentially the 1872 version with some minor musical variants and small cuts. The 1874 vocal score does not constitute a 'third version', but rather a refinement of the 1872 Revised Version.\nScene structure.\nThe distribution of scenes in the authorial versions is as follows:\nUpon revising the opera, Mussorgsky initially replaced the St. Basil's Scene with the Krom\u00ef Scene. However, on the suggestion of Vladimir Nikolsky, he transposed the order of the last two scenes, concluding the opera with the Krom\u00ef Scene rather than the Faceted Palace Scene. This gives the overall structure of the 1872 Revised Version the following symmetrical form:\nEditions by other hands\nThe Rimsky-Korsakov Version of 1908 has been the most traditional version over the last century, but has recently been almost entirely eclipsed by Mussorgsky's Revised Version (1872). It resembles the Vocal Score of 1874, but the order of the last two scenes is reversed [see Versions by Other Hands in this article for more details].\nRoles.\n\"Note:\" Roles designated with an asterisk (*) do not appear in the 1869 Original Version. 'Yur\u00f3div\u00efy' is often translated as 'Simpleton' or 'Idiot'. However, 'Holy Fool' is a more accurate English equivalent. In other roles lists created by Mussorgsky, Pimen is designated a monk (\u0438\u043d\u043e\u043a), Grigoriy a novice (\u043f\u043e\u0441\u043b\u0443\u0448\u043d\u0438\u043a), Rangoni a Cardinal (\u043a\u0430\u0440\u0434\u0438\u043d\u0430\u043b), Varlaam and Misail vagrant-monks (\u0431\u0440\u043e\u0434\u044f\u0433\u0438-\u0447\u0435\u0440\u043d\u0435\u0446\u044b), the Innkeeper a hostess (\u0445\u043e\u0437\u044f\u0439\u043a\u0430), and Khrushchov a Voyevoda (\u0432\u043e\u0435\u0432\u043e\u0434\u0430). Pimen, Grigoriy, Varlaam, and Misail were likely given non-clerical designations to satisfy the censor.\nInstrumentation.\nMussorgsky orchestration\n\"Strings\": violins I &amp; II, violas, cellos, double basses\n\"Woodwinds\": 3\u00a0flutes (3rd doubling piccolo), 2\u00a0oboes (2nd doubling english horn), 3\u00a0clarinets, 2\u00a0bassoons\n\"Brass\": 4\u00a0horns, 2\u00a0trumpets, 3\u00a0trombones, 1\u00a0tuba\n\"Percussion\": timpani, bass drum, snare drum, tambourine, cymbals\n\"Other\": piano, harp\n\"On/Offstage instruments\": 1\u00a0trumpet, bells, tam-tam\nRimsky-Korsakov orchestration\n\"Strings\": violins I &amp; II, violas, cellos, double basses\n\"Woodwinds\": 3\u00a0flutes (3rd doubling piccolo), 2\u00a0oboes (2nd doubling english horn), 3 clarinets (3rd doubling bass clarinet), 2\u00a0bassoons\n\"Brass\": 4\u00a0horns, 3\u00a0trumpets, 3\u00a0trombones, 1\u00a0tuba\n\"Percussion\": timpani, bass drum, snare drum, tambourine, cymbals\n\"Other\": piano, harp\n\"On/Offstage instruments\": 1\u00a0trumpet, bells, tam-tam\nShostakovich orchestration\n\"Strings\": violins I &amp; II, violas, cellos, double basses\n\"Woodwinds\": 3\u00a0flutes (3rd doubling piccolo), 2\u00a0oboes, english horn, 3\u00a0clarinets (3rd doubling E-flat clarinet), bass clarinet, 3\u00a0bassoons (3rd doubling contrabassoon)\n\"Brass\": 4\u00a0horns, 3\u00a0trumpets, 3\u00a0trombones, 1\u00a0tuba\n\"Percussion\": timpani, bass drum, snare drum, tambourine, cymbals, tam-tam, triangle, bells, glockenspiel, xylophone\n\"Other\": piano, harp, celesta\n\"On/Offstage instruments\": 4\u00a0trumpets, 2\u00a0cornets, 2\u00a0horns, 2\u00a0baritone horns, 2\u00a0euphoniums, 2\u00a0tubas, balalaika and domra ad libitum\nHistorical basis of the plot.\nAn understanding of the drama of \"Boris Godunov\" may be facilitated by a basic knowledge of the historical events surrounding the Time of Troubles, the interregnum of relative anarchy following the end of the Ryurik Dynasty (1598) and preceding the Romanov Dynasty (1613). Key events are as follows:\nNote: The culpability of Boris in the matter of Dmitriy's death can neither be proved nor disproved. Karamzin accepted his responsibility as fact, and Pushkin and Mussorgsky after him assumed his guilt to be true, at least for the purpose of creating a tragedy in the mold of Shakespeare. Modern historians, however, tend to acquit Boris.\nSynopsis.\nNote: \"Shishkov and Bocharev designed the sets (samples below), some of which were used in the first complete performance in 1874.\"\n( ) = \"Arias and numbers\"\n[ ] = \"Passages cut from or added to the 1872 Revised Version [see Versions in this article for details]\"\nSetting\nTime: The years 1598 to 1605\nPlace: Moscow; the Lithuanian frontier; a castle in Sandomierz; Krom\u00ef\nPart 1 / Prologue.\n\"Scene 1: The Courtyard of the Novodevichiy Monastery near Moscow (1598)\"\nThere is a brief introduction foreshadowing the 'Dmitriy Motif'. The curtain opens on a crowd in the courtyard of the monastery, where the weary regent Boris Godunov has temporarily retired. Nikitich the police officer orders the assembled people to kneel. He goads them to clamor for Boris to accept the throne. They sing a chorus of supplication (\"To whom dost thou abandon us, our father?\"). The people are bewildered about their purpose and soon fall to bickering with each other, resuming their entreaties only when the policeman threatens them with his club. Their chorus reaches a feverish climax. Andrey Shchelkalov, the Secretary of the Duma, appears from inside the convent, informs the people that Boris still refuses the throne of Russia (\"Orthodox folk! The boyar is implacable!\"), and requests that they pray that he will relent. An approaching procession of pilgrims sings a hymn (\"Glory to Thee, Creator on high\"), exhorting the people to crush the spirit of anarchy in the land, take up holy icons, and go to meet the Tsar. They disappear into the monastery.\n[\"Original 1869 Version only:\" The people discuss the statements of the pilgrims. Many remain bewildered about the identity of this Tsar. The police officer interrupts their discussion, ordering them to appear the next day at the Moscow Kremlin. The people move on, stoically exclaiming \"if we are to wail, we might as well wail at the Kremlin\".]\n\"Scene 2: [Cathedral] Square in the Moscow Kremlin (1598).\"\nThe orchestral introduction is based on bell motifs. From the porch of the Cathedral of the Dormition, Prince Shuysky exhorts the people to glorify Tsar Boris. As the people sing a great chorus of praise (\"Like the beautiful sun in the sky, glory\"), a solemn procession of boyars exits the cathedral. The people kneel. Boris appears on the porch of the cathedral. The shouts of \"Glory!\" reach a climax and subside. Boris delivers a brief monologue (\"My soul grieves\") betraying a feeling of ominous foreboding. He prays for God's blessing, and hopes to be a good and just ruler. He invites the people to a great feast, and then proceeds to the Cathedral of the Archangel to kneel at the tombs of Russia's past rulers. The people wish Boris a long life (\"Glory! Glory! Glory!\"). A crowd breaks toward the cathedral. The police officers struggle to maintain order. The people resume their shouts of \"Glory!\"\nIn this scene, Mussorgsky has been hailed as ahead of his time musically. His use of the whole tone scale, which uses only whole steps, made the Coronation scene stand out. This technique was replicated by impressionistic composers about 20 years later who noted his success. Mussorgsky also combined different two-beat and three-beat meters to create a unique sound for his composition called polymeters. These techniques were uncommon during this era and were believed to be almost too overwhelming for the public. This led to his rejection on two different occasions by the Imperial Opera before they decided to perform.\nPart 2 / Act 1.\n\"Scene 1: Night. A Cell in the Chudov Monastery [within the Moscow Kremlin] (1603)\"\nPimen, a venerable monk, writes a chronicle (\"Yet one last tale\") of Russian history. The young novice Grigoriy awakes from a horrible (and prophetic) dream, which he relates to Pimen, in which he climbed a high tower, was mocked by the people of Moscow, and fell. Pimen advises him to fast and pray. Grigoriy regrets that he retired so soon from worldly affairs to become a monk. He envies Pimen's early life of adventure. Pimen speaks approvingly of Ivan the Terrible and his son Fyodor, who both exhibited great spiritual devotion, and draws a contrast with Boris, a regicide.\n[\"Original 1869 Version only:\" At Grigoriy's request, Pimen tells the vivid details of the scene of the murder of Dmitriy Ivanovich, which he witnessed in Uglich.]\nUpon discovering the similarity in age between himself and the murdered Tsarevich, Grigoriy conceives the idea of posing as the Pretender. As Pimen departs for Matins, Grigoriy declares that Boris shall escape neither the judgment of the people, nor that of God.\n\"Scene 2: An Inn on the Lithuanian Border (1603)\"\nThere is a brief orchestral introduction based on three prominent themes from this scene.\n[\"Revised 1872 Version only:\" The Hostess enters and sings the 'Song of the Drake' (\"I have caught a gray drake\"). It is interrupted towards the end by approaching voices].\nThe vagrants Varlaam and Misail, who are dressed as monks and are begging for alms, and their companion Grigoriy, who is in secular garb, arrive and enter. After exchanging greetings, Varlaam requests some wine. When the Hostess returns with a bottle, he drinks and launches into a ferocious song (\"So it was in the city of Kazan\") of Ivan the Terrible's siege of Kazan. The two monks quickly become tipsy, and soon begin to doze. Grigoriy quietly asks the Hostess for directions to the Lithuanian border. The Hostess mentions that the police are watching the ordinary roads, but they are wasting their time, because there is an alternative, less well-known way to get to the border. Policemen appear in search of a fugitive heretic monk (Grigoriy) who has run off from the Chudov Monastery declaring that he will become Tsar in Moscow. Noticing Varlaam's suspicious appearance and behavior, the lead policeman thinks he has found his man. He cannot read the ukaz (edict) he is carrying, however, so Grigoriy volunteers to read it. He does so, but, eyeing Varlaam carefully, he substitutes Varlaam's description for his own. The policemen quickly seize Varlaam, who protests his innocence and asks to read the ukaz. Varlaam is only barely literate, but he manages to haltingly read the description of the suspect, which of course matches Grigoriy. Grigoriy brandishes a dagger, and leaps out of the window. The men set off in pursuit.\nPart 3 / Act 2.\n\"The Interior of the Tsar's Terem in the Moscow Kremlin (1605)\"\nKseniya (or Xenia), clutching a portrait of \"Prince Ivan\", her betrothed who has died, sings a brief mournful aria (\"Where are you, my bridegroom?\"). Fyodor studies a great map of the Tsardom of Russia.\n[\"Revised 1872 Version only:\" Fyodor tries to console Kseniya and shows her the magic of the clock, once it starts chiming].\nKseniya's nurse assures her that she will soon forget about \"Prince Ivan\".\n[\"1872:\" The nurse and Fyodor attempt to cheer Kseniya up with some songs (\"A gnat was chopping wood\" and \"A little tale of this and that\").]\nBoris abruptly enters, briefly consoles Kseniya, and then sends her and her nurse to their own quarters. Fyodor shows Boris the map of Russia. After encouraging his son to resume his studies, Boris delivers a long and fine soliloquy (\"I have attained supreme power\").\n[\"1872:\" At the end of this arioso he reveals that he has been disturbed by a vision of a bloody child begging for mercy. A commotion breaks out in his children's quarters. Boris sends Fyodor to investigate.]\nThe boyar-in-attendance brings word of the arrival of Prince Shuysky, and reports a denunciation against him for his intrigues.\n[\"1872:\" Fyodor returns to relate a whimsical tale (\"Our little parrot was sitting\") involving a pet parrot. Boris takes comfort in his son's imagination and advises Fyodor, when he becomes Tsar, to beware of evil and cunning advisors such as Shuysky.]\nPrince Shuysky now enters. Boris insults him, accusing him of conspiring with Pushkin, an ancestor of the poet. However, the prince brings grave tidings. A Pretender has appeared in Lithuania. Boris angrily demands to know his identity. Shuysky fears the Pretender might attract a following bearing the name of Tsarevich Dmitriy. Shaken by this revelation, Boris dismisses Fyodor. He orders Shuysky to seal the border with Lithuania, and, clearly on the edge of madness, asks Shuysky whether he has ever heard of dead children rising from their graves to question Tsars. Boris seeks assurance that the dead child the prince had seen in Uglich was really Dmitriy. He threatens Shuysky, if he dissembles, with a gruesome execution. The Prince describes the ghastly scene of Dmitriy's murder in a brief and beautiful aria (\"In Uglich, in the cathedral\"). But he gives hints that a miracle (incorruptibility) has occurred. Boris begins choking with guilt and remorse, and gives a sign for Shuysky to depart.\n[\"1872:\" The chiming clock again begins working.]\nBoris hallucinates (\"Hallucination or 'Clock' Scene\"). The spectre of the dead Dmitriy reaches out to him. Addressing the apparition, he denies his responsibility for the crime: \"Begone, begone child! I am not thy murderer... the will of the people!\" He collapses, praying that God will have mercy on his guilty soul.\nAct 3 (The 'Polish' Act) (1872 Version only).\n\"Scene 1: The Boudoir of Marina Mniszech in Sandomierz [Poland] (1604)\"\nMaidens sing a delicate, sentimental song (\"On the blue Vistula\") to entertain Marina as her chambermaid dresses her hair. Marina declares her preference for heroic songs of chivalry. She dismisses everyone. Alone, she sings of her boredom (\"How tediously and sluggishly\"), of Dmitriy, and of her thirst for adventure, power, and glory. The Jesuit Rangoni enters, bemoans the wretched state of the church, attempts to obtain Marina's promise that when she becomes Tsaritsa she will convert the heretics of Moscow (Russian Orthodox Church) to the true faith (Roman Catholicism), and encourages her to bewitch the Pretender. When Marina wonders why she should do this, Rangoni angrily insists that she stop short of nothing, including sacrificing her honor, to obey the dictates of the church. Marina expresses contempt of his hypocritical insinuations and demands he leave. As Rangoni ominously tells her she is in the thrall of infernal forces, Marina collapses in dread. Rangoni demands her obedience.\n\"Scene 2: Mniszech's Castle in Sandomierz. A Garden. A Fountain. A Moonlit Night (1604)\"\nWoodwind and harp accompany a pensive version of the 'Dmitriy Motif'. The Pretender dreams of an assignation with Marina in the garden of her father's castle. However, to his annoyance, Rangoni finds him. He brings news that Marina longs for him and wishes to speak with him. The Pretender resolves to throw himself at Marina's feet, begging her to be his wife and Tsaritsa. He entreats Rangoni to lead him to Marina. Rangoni, however, first begs the Pretender to consider him a father, allowing him to follow his every step and thought. Despite his mistrust of Rangoni, the Pretender agrees not to part from him if he will only let him see Marina. Rangoni convinces the Pretender to hide as the Polish nobles emerge from the castle dancing a polonaise (\"Polonaise\"). Marina flirts, dancing with an older man. The Poles sing of taking the Muscovite throne, defeating the army of Boris, and capturing him. They return to the castle. The Pretender comes out of hiding, cursing Rangoni. He resolves to abandon wooing Marina and begin his march on Moscow. But then Marina appears and calls to him. He is lovesick. She, however, only wants to know when he will be Tsar, and declares she can only be seduced by a throne and a crown. The Pretender kneels at her feet. She rejects his advances, and, attempting to spur him to action, dismisses him, calling him a lackey. Having reached his limit, he tells her he will depart the next day to lead his army to Moscow and to his father's throne. Furthermore, as Tsar he will take pleasure in watching her come crawling back looking for her own lost throne, and will command everyone to laugh at her. She quickly reverses course, tells him she adores him, and they sing a duet (\"O Tsarevich, I implore you\"). Rangoni observes the amorous couple from afar, and, joining them in a brief trio, cynically rejoices in his victory.\nPart 4 / Act 4.\n\"Scene 1 [1869 Version only]: The Square before the Cathedral of Vasiliy the Blessed in Moscow (1605)\"\nA crowd mills about before the Cathedral of the Intercession (the Temple of Vasiliy the Blessed) in Red Square. Many are beggars, and policemen occasionally appear. A group of men enters, discussing the anathema the deacon had declared on Grishka (Grigoriy) Otrepyev in the mass. They identify Grishka as the Tsarevich. With growing excitement they sing of the advance of his forces to Krom\u00ef, of his intent to retake his father's throne, and of the defeat he will deal to the Godunovs. A yur\u00f3div\u00efy enters, pursued by urchins. He sings a nonsensical song (\"The moon is flying, the kitten is crying\"). The urchins greet him and rap on his metal hat. The yur\u00f3div\u00efy has a kopek, which the urchins promptly steal. He whines pathetically. Boris and his retinue exit the cathedral. The boyars distribute alms. In a powerful chorus (\"Benefactor father... Give us bread!\"), the hungry people beg for bread. As the chorus subsides, the yur\u00f3div\u00efy's cries are heard. Boris asks why he cries. The yur\u00f3div\u00efy reports the theft of his kopek and asks Boris to order the boys' slaughter, just as he did in the case of the Tsarevich. Shuysky wants the yur\u00f3div\u00efy seized, but Boris instead asks for the holy man's prayers. As Boris exits, the yur\u00f3div\u00efy declares that the Mother of God will not allow him to pray for Tsar Herod (see Massacre of the Innocents). The yur\u00f3div\u00efy then sings his lament (\"Flow, flow, bitter tears!\") about the fate of Russia.\n\"Scene 2 [1869 Version] / Scene 1 [1872 version]: The Faceted Palace in the Moscow Kremlin (1605)\"\nA session of the Duma is in progress.\n[\"Original 1869 Version only:\" The assembled boyars listen as Shchelkalov, reading the Tsar's ukaz (edict), informs them of the Pretender's claim to the throne of Russia, and requests they pass judgment on him.]\nAfter some arguments, the boyars agree (\"Well, let's put it to a vote, boyars\"), in a powerful chorus, that the Pretender and his sympathizers should be executed. Shuysky, whom they distrust, arrives with an interesting story. Upon leaving the Tsar's presence, he observed Boris attempting to drive away the ghost of the dead Tsarevich, exclaiming: \"Begone, begone child!\" The boyars accuse Shuysky of spreading lies. However, a dishevelled Boris now enters, echoing Shuysky: \"Begone child!\" The boyars are horrified. After Boris comes to his senses, Shuysky informs him that a humble old man craves an audience. Pimen enters and tells the story (\"One day, at the evening hour\") of a blind man who heard the voice of the Tsarevich in a dream. Dmitry instructed him to go to Uglich and pray at his grave, for he has become a miracle worker in heaven. The man did as instructed and regained his sight. This story is the final blow for Boris. He calls for his son, declares he is dying (\"Farewell, my son, I am dying\"), gives Fyodor final counsel, and prays for God's blessing on his children. In a very dramatic scene (\"The bell! The funeral bell!\"), he dies.\n\"Scene 2 [1872 Version only]: A Forest Glade near Krom\u00ef (1605)\"\nTempestuous music accompanies the entry of a crowd of vagabonds who have captured the boyar Khrushchov. The crowd taunts him, then bows in mock homage (\"Not a falcon flying in the heavens\"). The yur\u00f3div\u00efy enters, pursued by urchins. He sings a nonsensical song (\"The moon is flying, the kitten is crying\"). The urchins greet him and rap on his metal hat. The yur\u00f3div\u00efy has a kopek, which the urchins promptly steal. He whines pathetically. Varlaam and Misail are heard in the distance singing of the crimes of Boris and his henchmen (\"The sun and moon have gone dark\"). They enter. The crowd gets worked up to a frenzy (\"Our bold daring has broken free, gone on a rampage\") denouncing Boris. Two Jesuits are heard in the distance chanting in Latin (\"Domine, Domine, salvum fac\"), praying that God will save Dmitriy. They enter. At the instigation of Varlaam and Misail, the vagabonds prepare to hang the Jesuits, who appeal to the Holy Virgin for aid. Processional music heralds the arrival of Dmitriy and his forces. Varlaam and Misail glorify him (\"Glory to thee, Tsarevich!\") along with the crowd. The Pretender calls those persecuted by Godunov to his side. He frees Khrushchov, and calls on all to march on Moscow. All exeunt except the yur\u00f3div\u00efy, who sings a plaintive song (\"Flow, flow, bitter tears!\") of the arrival of the enemy and of woe to Russia.\nCritical reception.\nRussian opera of the early 1870s was dominated by Western European works\u2014mainly Italian. The domestic product was regarded with skepticism and sometimes hostility. The playwright Tikhonov wrote in 1898:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In those days, splendid performances of Russian operas were given, but the attendance was generally poor. ...to attend the Russian opera was not fashionable. At the first performance of \"The Maid of Pskov\" [in 1873] there was a good deal of protest. An energetic campaign was being waged against the 'music of the future'\u2013that is, that of the 'mighty handful'.\"\nAs the most daring and innovative member of the Mighty Handful, Mussorgsky frequently became the target of conservative critics and rival composers, and was often derided for his supposedly clumsy and crude musical idiom. After the premiere of \"Boris Godunov\", influential critic Herman Laroche wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The general decorativeness and crudity of Mr. Mussorgsky's style, his passion for the brass and percussion instruments, may be considered to have been borrowed from Serov. But never did the crudest works of the model reach the naive coarseness we note in his imitator.\"\nReviews of the premiere performance of \"Boris Godunov\" were for the most part hostile. Some critics dismissed the work as \"chaotic\" and \"a cacophony\". Even his friends Mily Balakirev and C\u00e9sar Cui, leading members of the Mighty Handful, minimized his accomplishment. Unable to overlook Mussorgsky's \"trespasses against the conventional musical grammar of the time\", they failed to recognize the giant step forward in musical and dramatic expression that \"Boris Godunov\" represented. Cui betrayed Mussorgsky in a notoriously scathing review of the premiere performance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Mr. Mussorgsky is endowed with great and original talent, but \"Boris\" is an immature work, superb in parts, feeble in others. Its main defects are in the disjointed recitatives and the disarray of the musical ideas... These defects are not due to a lack of creative power... The real trouble is his immaturity, his incapacity for severe self-criticism, his self-satisfaction, and his hasty methods of composition...\"\nAlthough he found much to admire, particularly the Inn Scene and the Song of the Parrot, he reproved the composer for a poorly constructed libretto, finding the opera to exhibit a lack of cohesion between scenes. He claimed that Mussorgsky was so deficient in the ability to write instrumental music that he dispensed with composing a prelude, and that he had \"borrowed the cheap method of characterization by leitmotives from Wagner.\"\nOther composers were even more censorious. Pyotr Tchaikovsky wrote in a letter to his brother Modest:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I have studied \"Boris Godunov\" and \"The Demon\" thoroughly. Mussorgsky's music I send to the devil; it is the most vulgar and vile parody on music...\"\nOf the critics who evaluated the new opera, only the 19-year-old critic Vladimir Baskin defended Mussorgsky's skill as a composer. Writing under the pen name \"Foma Pizzicato\", Baskin wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dramatization in vocal music could go no farther. Mussorgsky has proved himself to be a philosopher-musician, capable of expressing with rare truth the mind and soul of his characters. He also has a thorough understanding of musical resources. He is a master of the orchestra; his working-out is fluent, his vocal and chorus parts are beautifully written.\"\nAlthough \"Boris Godunov\" is usually praised for its originality, dramatic choruses, sharply delineated characters, and for the powerful psychological portrayal of Tsar Boris, it has received an inordinate amount of criticism for technical shortcomings: weak or faulty harmony, part-writing, and orchestration. Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I both adore and abhor \"Boris Godunov\". I adore it for its originality, power, boldness, distinctiveness, and beauty; I abhor it for its lack of polish, the roughness of its harmonies, and, in some places, the sheer awkwardness of the music.\"\nThe perception that \"Boris\" needed correction due to Mussorgsky's poverty of technique prompted Rimsky-Korsakov to revise it after his death. His edition supplanted the composer's Revised Version of 1872 in Russia, and launched the work abroad, remaining the preferred edition for some 75 years (see Versions by Other Hands in this article for more details). For decades, critics and scholars pressing for the performance of Mussorgsky's own versions fought an often losing battle against the conservatism of conductors and singers, who, raised on the plush Rimsky-Korsakov edition, found it impossible to adapt to Mussorgsky's comparatively unrefined and bleak original scores.\nRecently, however, a new appreciation for the rugged individuality of Mussorgsky's style has resulted in increasing performances and recording of his original versions. Musicologist Gerald Abraham wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...in the perspective of a hundred years we can see that Musorgsky's score did not really need 'correction' and reorchestration, that in fact the untouched \"Boris\" is finer than the revised \"Boris\".\"\nAnalysis.\nModels and influences\nPerformance practice.\nA conflation of the 1869 and 1872 versions is often made when staging or recording \"Boris Godunov\". This typically involves choosing the 1872 version and augmenting it with the St. Basil's Scene from the 1869 version. This practice is popular because it conserves a maximum amount of music, it gives the title character another appearance on stage, and because in the St. Basil's Scene Boris is challenged by the Yurodiv\u00efy, the embodiment of his conscience.\nHowever, because the composer transferred the episode of the Yurodiv\u00efy and the urchins from the St. Basil's Scene to the Krom\u00ef Scene when revising the opera, restoring the St. Basil's Scene to its former location creates a problem of duplicate episodes, which can be partially solved by cuts. Most performances that follow this practice cut the robbery of the Yurodiv\u00efy in the Krom\u00ef Scene, but duplicate his lament that ends each scene.\nThe Rimsky-Korsakov Version is often augmented with the Ippolitov-Ivanov reorchestration of the St. Basil's Scene (commissioned by the Bolshoy Theatre in 1925, composed in 1926, and first performed in 1927).\nConductors may elect to restore the cuts the composer himself made in writing the 1872 version [see Versions in this article for more details]. The 1997 Mariinsky Theatre recording under Valery Gergiev is the first and only to present the 1869 Original Version side by side with the 1872 Revised Version, and, it would seem, attempts to set a new standard for musicological authenticity. However, although it possesses many virtues, the production fails to scrupulously separate the two versions, admitting elements of the 1872 version into the 1869 recording, and failing to observe cuts the composer made in the 1872 version.\nCritics argue that the practice of restoring the St. Basil's scene and all the cuts that Mussorgsky made when revising the opera\u2014that is, creating a \"supersaturated\" version\u2014can have negative consequences, believing that it destroys the symmetrical scene structure of the Revised Version, it undermines the composer's carefully devised and subtle system of leitmotiv deployment, and results in the overexposure of the Dmitriy motive.\nVersions by other hands.\nNikolay Rimsky-Korsakov (1896).\nAfter Mussorgsky's death in 1881, his friend Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov undertook to put his scores in order, completing and editing \"Khovanshchina\" for publication (1883), reconstructing \"Night on Bald Mountain\" (1886), and \"correcting\" some songs. Next, he turned to \"Boris\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Although I know I shall be cursed for so doing, I will revise \"Boris\". There are countless absurdities in its harmonies, and at times in its melodies.\"\u2014\u200a\nHe experimented first with the Polonaise, temporarily scoring it for a Wagner-sized orchestra in 1889. In 1892 he revised the Coronation Scene, and, working from the 1874 Vocal Score, completed the remainder of the opera, although with significant cuts, by 1896.\nNikolay Rimsky-Korsakov (1908).\nIn the spring of 1906, Rimsky-Korsakov revised and orchestrated several passages omitted in the 1896 revision:\nRimsky-Korsakov compiled a new edition in 1908, this time restoring the cuts, and making some significant changes:\nThese revisions clearly went beyond mere reorchestration. He made substantial modifications to harmony, melody, dynamics, etc., even changing the order of scenes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Maybe Rimsky-Korsakov's harmonies are softer and more natural, his part-writing better, his scoring more skillful; but the result is not Mussorgsky, nor what Mussorgsky aimed at. The genuine music, with all its shortcomings, was more appropriate. I regret the genuine \"Boris\", and feel that should it ever be revived on the stage of the Mariinskiy Theatre, it is desirable that it should be in the original.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Besides re-scoring \"Boris\" and correcting harmonies in it (which was quite justifiable), he introduced in it many arbitrary alterations, which disfigured the music. He also spoilt the opera by changing the order of scenes.\"\u2014\u200a\nRimsky-Korsakov immediately came under fire from some critics for altering \"Boris\", particularly in France, where his revision was introduced. The defense usually made by his supporters was that without his ministrations, Mussorgsky's opera would have faded from the repertory due to difficulty in appreciating his raw and uncompromising idiom. Therefore, Rimsky-Korsakov was justified in making improvements to keep the work alive and increase the public's awareness of Mussorgsky's melodic and dramatic genius.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I remained inexpressibly pleased with my revision and orchestration of \"Boris Godunov\", heard by me for the first time with a large orchestra. Moussorgsky's violent admirers frowned a bit, regretting something... But having arranged the new revision of \"Boris Godunov\", I had not destroyed its original form, had not painted out the old frescoes forever. If ever the conclusion is arrived at that the original is better, worthier than my revision, then mine will be discarded and \"Boris Godunov\" will be performed according to the original score.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe Rimsky-Korsakov version remained the one usually performed in Russia, even after Mussorgsky's earthier original (1872) gained a place in Western opera houses. The Bolshoy Theatre has only recently embraced the composer's own version.\nDmitriy Shostakovich (1940).\nDmitriy Shostakovich worked on \"Boris Godunov\" in 1939\u20131940 on a commission from the Bolshoy Theatre for a new production of the opera. A conflation of the 1869 and 1872 versions had been published by Pavel Lamm and aroused keen interest in the piece. However, it did not erase doubts as to whether Mussorgsky's own orchestration was playable. The invasion of Russia by Nazi Germany prevented this production from taking place, and it was not until 1959 that Shostakovich's version of the score was premiered.\nTo Shostakovich, Mussorgsky was successful with solo instrumental timbres in soft passages but did not fare as well with louder moments for the whole orchestra. Shostakovich explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Mussorgsky has marvelously orchestrated moments, but I see no sin in my work. I didn't touch the successful parts, but there are many unsuccessful parts because he lacked mastery of the craft, which comes only through time spent on your backside, no other way.\"\u2014\u200a\nShostakovich confined himself largely to reorchestrating the opera, and was more respectful of the composer's unique melodic and harmonic style. However, Shostakovich greatly increased the contributions of the woodwind and especially brass instruments to the score, a significant departure from the practice of Mussorgsky, who exercised great restraint in his instrumentation, preferring to utilize the individual qualities of these instruments for specific purposes. Shostakovich also aimed for a greater symphonic development, wanting the orchestra to do more than simply accompany the singers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This is how I worked. I placed Mussorgsky's piano arrangement in front of me and then two scores\u2014Mussorgsky's and Rimsky-Korsakov's. I didn't look at the scores, and I rarely looked at the piano arrangement either. I orchestrated by memory, act by act. Then I compared my orchestration with those of Mussorgsky and Rimsky-Korsakov. If I saw that either had done it better, then I stayed with that. I didn't reinvent bicycles. I worked honestly, with ferocity, I might say.\"\u2014\u200a\nShostakovich remembered Alexander Glazunov telling him how Mussorgsky himself played scenes from \"Boris\" at the piano. Mussorgsky's renditions, according to Glazunov, were brilliant and powerful\u2014qualities Shostakovich felt did not come through in the orchestration of much of \"Boris\". Shostakovich, who had known the opera since his student days at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, assumed that Mussorgsky's orchestral intentions were correct but that Mussorgsky simply could not realize them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"As far as I can tell, he imagined something like a singing line around the vocal parts, the way subvoices surround the main melodic line in Russian folk song. But Mussorgsky lacked the technique for that. What a shame! Obviously, he had a purely orchestral imagination, and purely orchestral imagery, as well. The music strives for \"new shores,\" as they say\u2014musical dramaturgy, musical dynamics, language, imagery. But his orchestral technique drags us back to the old shores.\"\u2014\u200a\nOne of those \"old shore\" moments was the large monastery bell in the scene in the monk's cell. Mussorgsky and Rimsky-Korsakov both use the gong. To Shostakovich, this was too elemental and simplistic to be effective dramatically, since this bell showed the atmosphere of the monk's estrangement. \"When the bell tolls,\" Shostakovich reportedly told Solomon Volkov, \"it's a reminder that there are powers mightier than man, that you can't escape the judgment of history.\" Therefore, Shostakovich reorchestrated the bell's tolling by the simultaneous playing of seven instruments\u2014bass clarinet, double bassoon, French horns, gong, harps, piano, and double basses (at an octave). To Shostakovich, this combination of instruments sounded more like a real bell.\nShostakovich admitted Rimsky-Korsakov's orchestration was more colorful than his own and used brighter timbres. However, he also felt that Rimsky-Korsakov chopped up the melodic lines too much and, by blending melody and subvoices, may have subverted much of Mussorgsky's intent. Shostakovich also felt that Rimsky-Korsakov did not use the orchestra flexibly enough to follow the characters' mood changes, instead making the orchestra calmer, more balanced.\nIgor Buketoff (1997).\nThe American conductor Igor Buketoff created a version in which he removed most of Rimsky-Korsakov's additions and reorchestrations, and fleshed out some other parts of Mussorgsky's original orchestration. This version had its first performance in 1997 at the Metropolitan Opera, New York, under Valery Gergiev.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\nExternal links.\nLibretto\nOther"}
{"id": "39086", "revid": "23530426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39086", "title": "Waylon Jennings", "text": "American country musician (1937\u20132002)\nWaylon Arnold Jennings (June 15, 1937\u00a0\u2013 February 13, 2002) was an American country music singer, songwriter, musician, and actor. He is considered one of the pioneers of the outlaw movement in country music.\nJennings started playing guitar at age eight and performed at fourteen on KVOW radio, after which he formed his first band, the Texas Longhorns. Jennings left high school at age sixteen, determined to become a musician, and worked as a performer and DJ on KVOW, KDAV, KYTI, KLLL, in Coolidge, Arizona, and Phoenix. In 1958, Buddy Holly arranged Jennings's first recording session, a cover of \u201cJole Blon,\u201d and hired him to play bass. Jennings gave up his seat on the ill-fated flight in 1959 that crashed and killed Holly, J. P. \"the Big Bopper\" Richardson and Ritchie Valens.\nJennings then returned to Texas, taking several years off from music before eventually moving to Arizona and forming a rockabilly club band, the Waylors, which became the house band at \"JD's\", a club in Tempe, Arizona. He recorded for independent label Trend Records and A&amp;M Records, but did not achieve success until moving to RCA Victor in 1965. In 1972 he acquired Neil Reshen as his manager, who negotiated significantly better touring and recording contracts. After he gained creative control from RCA Records, he released the critically acclaimed albums \"Lonesome, On'ry and Mean\" and \"Honky Tonk Heroes\", followed by the hit albums \"Dreaming My Dreams\" and \"Are You Ready for the Country\".\nDuring the 1970s, Jennings drove outlaw country. With Willie Nelson, Tompall Glaser, and Jessi Colter he recorded country music's first platinum album, \"Wanted! The Outlaws\". It was followed by another platinum album, a first for any solo artist in country music, \"Ol' Waylon\", and the hit song \"Luckenbach, Texas\". He was featured on the 1978 album \"White Mansions\", performed by various artists documenting the lives of Confederates during the Civil War. He appeared in films and television series, including \"Sesame Street\" and a stint as the Balladeer on \"The Dukes of Hazzard\", composing and singing its theme song and narrating the show.\nJennings struggled with cocaine addiction, which he overcame in 1984. Later, he joined the country supergroup the Highwaymen with Willie Nelson, Kris Kristofferson, and Johnny Cash, which released three albums between 1985 and 1995. During that period, Jennings released the successful album \"Will the Wolf Survive\". He has been named as one of the innovators of progressive country.\nJennings toured less after 1997 to spend more time with his family. Between 1999 and 2001, health problems limited his appearances. In 2001, he was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame. In 2007, he was posthumously awarded the Cliffie Stone Pioneer Award by the Academy of Country Music.\nEarly life.\nJennings was born on June 15, 1937, on the J. W. Bittner farm near Littlefield, Texas. He was the son of Lorene Beatrice (n\u00e9e Shipley, 1919\u20132006) and William Albert Jennings (1911\u20131968). The Jennings family line descended from Irish and Black-Dutch. He was the oldest of four children, followed by Tommy Jennings (1941\u20132019), James Jennings, and Bo Jennings (1950\u20132018). The Shipley line descended from his great-grandfather, a farmer and lawman from Tennessee, with Jennings adding that \"along the way, a lot of Indian blood mixed in,\" including Cherokee and Comanche families.\nThe name on Jennings's birth certificate was Wayland. It was changed after a Baptist preacher visited his parents and congratulated his mother for naming him after the Wayland Baptist College, now Wayland Baptist University, in Plainview, Texas. Lorene Jennings, who was Church of Christ and had been unaware of the college, changed the spelling to Waylon. Jennings later expressed in his autobiography, \"I didn't like Waylon. It sounded so corny and hillbilly, but it's been good to me, and I'm pretty well at peace with it now.\" After working as a laborer on the Bittner farm, Jennings's father moved the family to Littlefield and established a retail creamery.\nCareer.\nBeginnings in music.\nWhen Jennings was 8, his mother taught him to play guitar with the tune \"Thirty Pieces of Silver\". Jennings used to practice with his relatives' instruments until his mother bought him a used Stella guitar, and later ordered a Harmony Patrician. Early influences included Bob Wills, Floyd Tillman, Ernest Tubb, Hank Williams, Carl Smith, Dean Martin, and Elvis Presley.\nBeginning with performing at family gatherings, Jennings played his first public concert at the Youth Center with Anthony Bonanno, followed by appearances at the local Jaycees and Lions Clubs. He won a talent show at Channel 13, in Lubbock, singing \"Hey Joe\". He later made frequent performances at the Palace Theater in Littlefield, during local talent night.\nAt age 14, Jennings auditioned for a spot on KVOW in Littlefield, Texas. Owner J. B. McShan, along with Emil Macha, recorded Jennings's performance. McShan liked his style and hired him for a weekly 30-minute program. Following his performance on the show, Jennings formed his own band. He asked Macha to play bass for him and gathered other friends and acquaintances to form the Texas Longhorns. The style of the band\u2014a mixture of country and western and bluegrass music\u2014was often not well received.\nAfter several disciplinary infractions, 16-year-old Jennings was convinced to drop out of Littlefield High School by the superintendent. Upon leaving school, he worked for his father in the family store and also took temporary jobs. Jennings felt that music would turn into his career. The next year he, along with the Texas Longhorns, recorded demo versions of the songs \"Stranger in My Home\" and \"There'll Be a New Day\" at KFYO radio in Lubbock. Meanwhile, he drove a truck for the Thomas Land Lumber Company, and a cement truck for the Roberts Lumber Company. Tired of the owner, Jennings quit after a minor driving accident. Jennings, and other local musicians, often performed at country radio station KDAV. During this time he met Buddy Holly at a Lubbock restaurant. The two often met during local shows, and Jennings began to attend Holly's performances on KDAV's \"Sunday Party\".\nIn addition to performing on air for KVOW, Jennings started to work as a DJ in 1956 and moved to Lubbock. His program ran from 4:00 in the afternoon to 10:00 in the evening, filled with two hours of country classics, two of current country, and two of mixed recordings. The latter included early rock-and-roll stars such as Chuck Berry and Little Richard. The owner reprimanded Jennings for his selection, and after playing two Little Richard records in a row Jennings was fired.\nDuring his time at KVOW Jennings was visited by DJ Sky Corbin of KLVT in Levelland. Corbin was impressed with his voice, and decided to visit Jennings at the station after hearing him sing a jingle to the tune of Hank Snow's \"I'm Moving On\". Jennings expressed his struggle to live on a $50-a-week salary. Corbin invited Jennings to visit KLVT, where he eventually took Corbin's position when it opened. The Corbin family later purchased KLLL, in Lubbock. They changed the format of the station to country, becoming the main competition of KDAV. The Corbins hired Jennings as the station's first DJ.\nJennings produced commercials and created jingles with the rest of the DJs. As their popularity increased, the DJs made public appearances. Jennings's events included live performances. During one performance, Holly's father, L. O. Holley, approached them with his son's latest record and asked them to play it at the station. Holley mentioned his son's intention to start producing artists himself, and Corbin recommended Jennings. After returning from his tour of England Buddy Holly visited KLLL.\nHolly took Jennings as his first artist. He outfitted him with new clothes, and worked with him to improve his image. He arranged a session for Jennings at Norman Petty's recording studios in Clovis, New Mexico. On September 10, Jennings recorded the songs \"Jole Blon\" and \"When Sin Stops (Love Begins)\" with Holly and Tommy Allsup on guitars and saxophonist King Curtis. Holly then hired Jennings to play bass for him during his \"Winter Dance Party Tour\".\nWinter Dance Party tour.\nBefore the tour, Holly vacationed with his wife in Lubbock and visited Jennings's radio station in December 1958. Jennings and Sky Corbin performed the hand-claps to Holly's tune \"You're the One\". Jennings and Holly soon left for New York City, arriving on January 15, 1959. Jennings stayed at Holly's apartment by Washington Square Park prior to a meeting scheduled at the headquarters of the General Artists Corporation, which organized the tour. They later took a train to Chicago to join the band.\nThe Winter Dance Party tour began in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on January 23, 1959. The amount of travel created logistical problems, as the distance between venues had not been considered when scheduling each performance. Adding to the problem, the unheated tour buses twice broke down in freezing weather, leading to drummer Carl Bunch being hospitalized for frostbite on his toes. Holly made the decision to find another means of transportation.\nBefore their performance at the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake, Iowa, Holly chartered a four-seat Beechcraft Bonanza airplane from Dwyer Flying Service in Mason City, Iowa, for himself, Jennings, and Tommy Allsup, to avoid the long bus trip to their next venue in Moorhead, Minnesota. Following the Clear Lake show (which ended around midnight), Allsup lost a coin toss and gave up his seat on the charter plane to Ritchie Valens, while Jennings voluntarily gave up his seat to J. P. Richardson, known as the Big Bopper, who was suffering from the flu and complaining about how cold and uncomfortable the tour bus was for a man of his size.\nWhen Holly learned that his bandmates had given up their seats on the plane and had chosen to take the bus rather than fly, a friendly banter between Holly and Jennings ensued, and it would come back to haunt Jennings for decades to follow: Holly jokingly told Jennings, \"Well, I hope your ol' bus freezes up!\" Jennings jokingly replied, \"Well, I hope your ol' plane crashes!\" Under 90 minutes later, shortly after 1:00 am on February 3, 1959, Holly's charter plane crashed into a cornfield outside Mason City, instantly killing all on board.\nLater that morning, Jennings's family heard on the radio that \"Buddy Holly and his band had been killed.\" After calling his family, Jennings called Sky Corbin at KLLL from Fargo to confirm that he had not been aboard the plane. The General Artists Corporation promised to pay for first-class tickets for Jennings and the band to attend Holly's funeral in Lubbock in exchange for them playing that night in Moorhead. After the first show, they were initially denied their payment by the venue, but after Jennings's persistence, they were paid. The flights were never paid for, and Jennings and Allsup continued the tour for two more weeks, featuring Jennings as the lead singer. They were paid less than half of the original agreed salary, and upon returning to New York, Jennings put Holly's guitar and amplifier in a locker in Grand Central Terminal and mailed the keys to Maria Elena Holly. Then he returned to Lubbock.\nIn the early 1960s, Jennings wrote and recorded \"The Stage (Stars in Heaven)\", a tribute to Valens, the Big Bopper, and Holly, as well as Eddie Cochran, a young musician who died in a road accident a year after the plane crash.\nFor decades afterward, Jennings repeatedly stated that he felt responsible for the crash that killed Holly. This sense of guilt precipitated bouts of substance abuse through much of his career.\n\"Jole Blon\" was released on Brunswick in March 1959 with limited success. Now unemployed, Jennings returned to KLLL. Deeply affected by Holly's death, Jennings's performance at the station worsened. He left the station after he was denied a raise, and later worked briefly for the competition, KDAV.\nPhoenix.\nDue to his father-in-law's illness, Jennings had to shuttle between Arizona and Texas. While his family lived back in Littlefield, Jennings found a job briefly at KOYL in Odessa, Texas. He moved with his family to Coolidge, Arizona, where his wife Maxine's sister lived. He found a job performing at the Galloping Goose bar, where he was heard by Earl Perrin, who offered him a spot on KCKY. Jennings also played during the intermission at drive-in theaters and in bars. After a successful performance at the Cross Keys Club in Phoenix, he was approached by two contractors (Paul Pristo and Dean Coffman) who were building a club in Scottsdale for James (Jimmy) D. Musil, called JD's. Musil engaged Jennings as his main artist and designed the club around his act.\nJennings formed his backing band, the Waylors, with bassist Paul Foster, guitarist Jerry Gropp, and drummer Richie Albright. The band soon earned a strong local fan base at JD's, where Jennings developed his rock-influenced style of country music that defined him on his later career.\nIn 1961, Jennings signed a recording contract with Trend Records, and experienced moderate success with his single, \"Another Blue Day\". His friend Don Bowman took demos of Jennings to Jerry Moss, who at the time was starting A&amp;M Records with associate Herb Alpert. In July 1963 Jennings signed a contract with A&amp;M that granted him 5% of record sales. At A&amp;M, he recorded \"Love Denied\" backed with \"Rave On\", and Ian Tyson's \"Four Strong Winds\" backed with \"Just to Satisfy You\". He followed up by recording demos of \"The Twelfth of Never\", \"Kisses Sweeter than Wine\", and \"Don't Think Twice, It's All Right\", and also produced the single \"Sing the Girls a Song, Bill\", backed with \"The Race Is On\". The singles were released between April and October 1964.\nJennings's records found little success at A&amp;M, because the label was releasing mostly folk music rather than country at the time. He had a few regional hits around Phoenix, due to local radio airplay with \"Four Strong Winds\" and \"Just To Satisfy You\", which was co-written with Bowman. Meanwhile, he recorded an album on BAT records produced by James Musil and engineered by Jack Miller, called \"JD's Waylon Jennings\" on the front of the album, and \"Waylon Jennings at JD's\" on the back side. After 500 copies were sold at the club another 500 were pressed by the Sounds label. He also played lead guitar for Patsy Montana on a 1964 album.\nSinger Bobby Bare heard Jennings's \"Just to Satisfy You\" on his car radio while passing through Phoenix, and recorded it and \"Four Strong Winds\". After stopping in Phoenix to attend a Jennings performance at JD's, Bare called Chet Atkins, head of the RCA Victor studios in Nashville, and suggested he sign Jennings. Unsure after being offered a deal with RCA if he should quit his gig at JD's and relocate to Nashville, he sought the advice of RCA artist and friend Willie Nelson, who had attended one of Jennings's shows. Upon hearing how well financially Jennings was doing at JD's Nelson suggested he stay in Phoenix.\nJennings then asked Herb Alpert to release him from his contract with A&amp;M, which Alpert did. Later, after Jennings became successful, A&amp;M compiled all of his singles and unreleased recordings and issued them as an album, \"Don't Think Twice\". Atkins formally signed Jennings to RCA Victor in 1965. In August Jennings made his first appearance on \"Billboard's\" Hot Country Songs chart with \"That's the Chance I'll Have to Take\".\nThe Nashville Sound.\nIn 1966, Jennings released his debut RCA Victor album \"Folk-Country\", followed by \"Leavin' Town\" and \"Nashville Rebel\". \"Leavin' Town\" resulted in significant chart success as the first two singles \"Anita, You're Dreaming\" and \"Time to Bum Again\" both peaked at number 17 on the \"Billboard\" Hot Country Songs chart. The album's third single, a cover of Gordon Lightfoot's \"(That's What You Get) For Lovin' Me\", peaked at no. 9, Jennings's first top 10 single. \"Nashville Rebel\" was the soundtrack to an independent film, \"The Nashville Rebel\", starring Jennings. The single \"Green River\" charted on \"Billboard\" country singles at no. 11.\nIn 1967, Jennings released a hit single, \"Just to Satisfy You\". During an interview, Jennings remarked that the song was a \"pretty good example\" of the influence of his work with Buddy Holly and rockabilly music. Jennings produced mid-chart albums that sold well, including 1967's \"Just to Satisfy You\", which included the hit single. Jennings's singles enjoyed success. \"The Chokin' Kind\" peaked at number eight on \"Billboard's\" Hot Country Singles in 1967, while \"Only Daddy That'll Walk the Line\" hit number two the following year. In 1969, his collaboration with the Kimberlys on the single \"MacArthur Park\" earned a Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group. His single \"Brown Eyed Handsome Man\" reached number three at the Hot Country Singles chart by the end of the year.\nDuring this time, Jennings rented an apartment in Nashville with singer Johnny Cash. Jennings and Cash were both managed by \"Lucky\" Moeller's booking agency Moeller Talent, Inc. The tours organized by the agency were unproductive, with the artists being booked to venues located far from each other in close dates. After paying for the accommodation and travel expenditures, Jennings was frequently forced to request advances from the agency or RCA Victor to make the next venue. While playing 300 days on the road, Jennings's debt increased, and along with it his consumption of amphetamine. He believed himself to be \"trapped on the circuit\".\nIn 1972, Jennings released \"Ladies Love Outlaws\". The single that headlined the album became a hit for Jennings, and was his first approach to outlaw country. Jennings was accustomed to performing and recording with his own band, the Waylors, a practice that was not encouraged by powerful Nashville producers, who favored the Nashville sound produced by a roster of experienced local studio musicians. The music style publicized as \"countrypolitan\" was characterized by orchestral arrangements and the absence of most traditional country music instruments. The producers did not let Jennings play his own guitar or select material to record. Jennings felt limited by Nashville's lack of artistic freedom.\nOutlaw country.\nBy 1972, after the release of \"Ladies Love Outlaws\", his recording contract was nearing an end. Upon contracting hepatitis, Jennings was hospitalized. Sick and frustrated with the Nashville music industry, he was considering retirement. Albright visited him and convinced him to continue, suggesting he hire Neil Reshen as his new manager. Meanwhile, Jennings requested a $25,000 royalty advance from RCA Records to cover his living expenses during his recovery. The same day he met Reshen, RCA sent Jerry Bradley to offer Jennings $5,000 as a bonus for signing a new 5% royalty deal with RCA, the same terms he had accepted in 1965. After reviewing the offer with Reshen, he rejected it and hired Reshen.\nReshen started to renegotiate Jennings's recording and touring contracts. At a meeting in a Nashville airport Jennings introduced Reshen to Willie Nelson. By the end of the meeting Reshen had become Nelson's manager as well. Jennings's new deal included a $75,000 advance and artistic control. Reshen advised Jennings to keep the beard that he had grown in the hospital, to match the image of outlaw country.\nBy 1973 Nelson found success with Atlantic Records. Now based in Austin, Texas, he began to attract rock and roll fans to his shows, which gained him notice in its press. Atlantic Records made a bid to sign Jennings, but Nelson's rise to popularity persuaded RCA to renegotiate with him before losing another potential star.\nIn 1973, Jennings released \"Lonesome, On'ry and Mean\" and \"Honky Tonk Heroes\", the first albums recorded and released under his creative control. This heralded a major turning point for Jennings, resulting in his most critically and commercially successful years. More hit albums followed with \"This Time\" and \"The Ramblin' Man\", both released in 1974. The title tracks of both albums topped the \"Billboard\" Country singles chart, with the self-penned \"This Time\" becoming Jennings's first no. 1 single. \"Dreaming My Dreams\", released in 1975, included the no. 1 single \"Are You Sure Hank Done It This Way\", and became his first album to be certified gold by the RIAA; it was also the first of six consecutive solo studio albums to be certified gold or higher. In 1976 Jennings released \"Are You Ready for the Country\". Jennings wanted Los Angeles producer Ken Mansfield to produce the record, but RCA initially balked. Jennings and the Waylors traveled to Los Angeles and recorded with Mansfield at Jennings's own expense. A month later, Jennings returned to Nashville and presented the master tape to Chet Atkins, who, after listening to it, decided to release it. The album reached number 1 \"Billboard\"'s country albums three times the same year, topping the charts for 10 weeks. It was named country album of the year in 1976 by \"Record World\" magazine and was certified gold by the RIAA.\nIn 1976, RCA released the compilation album \"Wanted! The Outlaws\", with Jennings, Willie Nelson, Tompall Glaser, and Jennings's wife, Jessi Colter. The album was the first country music album certified platinum. The following year, RCA issued \"Ol' Waylon\", an album that produced a hit duet with Nelson, \"Luckenbach, Texas\". The album \"Waylon and Willie\" followed in 1978, producing the hit single \"Mammas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys\". Jennings released \"I've Always Been Crazy\", also in 1978. The same year, at the peak of his success, Jennings began to feel limited by the outlaw movement. Jennings referred to the overexploitation of the image in the song \"Don't You Think This Outlaw Bit's Done Got Out of Hand?\", claiming that the movement had become a \"self-fulfilling prophecy\". In 1979, RCA released Jennings first \"Greatest Hits\" compilation, which was certified gold the same year, and quintuple platinum in 2002.\nAlso in 1979, Jennings joined the cast of the CBS series \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" as the Balladeer, the narrator. The only episode to feature him as an actor was \"Welcome, Waylon Jennings\", during the seventh season. Jennings played himself, presented as an old friend of the Duke family. For the show he also wrote and sang the theme song \"Good Ol' Boys\", which became the biggest hit of his career. Released as a single in promotion with the show, it became Jennings's 12th single to reach number one on the \"Billboard\" Country Singles chart. It was also a crossover hit, peaking at no. 21 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nLater years.\nIn the mid-1980s, Johnny Cash, Kris Kristofferson, Willie Nelson, and Jennings formed a successful group called the Highwaymen. Aside from his work with the Highwaymen, Jennings released a gold album \"WWII\" (1982) with Willie Nelson.\nIn 1985, Jennings joined with USA for Africa to record \"We Are the World\", but he left the studio because of a dispute over the song's lyrics that were to be sung in Swahili. By this time, his sales had decreased. After the release of \"Sweet Mother Texas\", Jennings signed with MCA Records. His debut release with the label, \"Will the Wolf Survive\" (1985), peaked at number one in \"Billboard's\" Country albums in 1986. Jennings's initial success tailed off, and in 1990, he signed with Epic Records. His first release, \"The Eagle\", became his final top 10 album.\nAlso in 1985, he made a cameo appearance in the live-action children's film \"\". In the movie, he plays a turkey farm truck driver who gives Big Bird a lift. He also sings one of the film's songs, entitled \"Ain't No Road Too Long\". In 1993, in collaboration with Rincom Children's Entertainment, Jennings recorded an album of children's songs, \"Cowboys, Sisters, Rascals &amp; Dirt\", which included \"Shooter's Theme\", a tribute to his 14-year-old with the theme of \"a friend of mine\".\nAs his record sales and radio play declined through the 1990s, Jennings continued to draw large crowds to his live performances. In 1994 Jennings made a small appearance in the movie \"Maverick\", with Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, and James Garner.\nIn 1996, Jennings released his album, \"Right for the Time\". In 1997, after the \"Lollapalooza\" tour, he decreased his tour schedule to focus on his family. In 1998, Jennings teamed up with Bare, Jerry Reed, and Mel Tillis to form the Old Dogs. The group recorded a double album of songs by Shel Silverstein.\nIn mid-1999, Jennings assembled what he referred to as his \"hand-picked dream team\" and formed Waylon &amp; the Waymore Blues Band. Consisting primarily of former Waylors, the 13-member group performed concerts from 1999 to 2001. As his health declined, Jennings decided to end his touring career. In January 2000, Jennings recorded what became his final album at Nashville's Ryman Auditorium, \"\".\nMusic style and image.\nJennings's music was characterized by his powerful rough-edged singing voice, phrasing and texture.\nHe was also recognized for his \"spanky-twang\" guitar style. To create his sound, he used a pronounced 'phaser' effect plus a mixture of thumb and fingers during the rhythmic parts, while using picks for the lead runs. He combined hammer-on and pull-off riffs, with eventual upper-fret double stops and modulation effects. Jennings played a 1953 Fender Telecaster, a used guitar that was a gift from the Waylors. Jennings's bandmates adorned his guitar with a distinctive leather cover that featured a black background with a white floral work. Jennings further customized it by filing down the frets to lower the strings on the neck to obtain the slapping sound. Among his other guitars, Jennings used a 1950 Fender Broadcaster from the mid-1970s, until he gave it to guitarist Reggie Young in 1993. The leather covers of his guitars were carved by leather artist Terry Lankford.\nJennings's signature image was characterized by his long hair, mustache and beard, and black hat and black leather vest he wore during his appearances.\nPersonal life.\nJennings was married four times and had six children. He married Maxine Caroll Lawrence in 1956 at age 18, with whom he had four children. Jennings married Lynne Jones on December 10, 1962, and they adopted a daughter, but divorced in 1967. He married Barbara Elizabeth Rood the same year. He composed the song \"This Time\" about the trials and tribulations of his marriages and divorces, it went on to become his first number 1 chart-topping song upon release in 1974.\nJennings married country singer Jessi Colter in Phoenix, Arizona, on October 26, 1969. The couple had a son in 1979, Waylon Albright, known as Shooter Jennings. In the early 1980s, Colter and Jennings nearly divorced due to his abuse of drugs and alcohol. In 1990, after he stopped touring, Jennings earned a GED to set an example to Shooter about the importance of education. He studied for his GED by watching tapes of GED on TV programs from the Kentucky Educational Television network on his tour bus in 1989.\nAddiction and recovery.\nJennings started to consume amphetamines while he lived with Johnny Cash during the mid-1960s. Jennings later stated, \"Pills were the artificial energy on which Nashville ran around the clock.\"\nIn 1977, Jennings was arrested by federal agents for conspiracy and possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. A private courier warned the Drug Enforcement Administration about a package sent to Jennings by a New York colleague that contained 27 grams of cocaine. The DEA and the police searched Jennings's recording studio but found no evidence because, while they were waiting for a search warrant, Jennings disposed of the drug. The charges were later dropped and Jennings was released. The episode was recounted in Jennings's song \"Don't You Think This Outlaw Bit's Done Got Out of Hand\".\nDuring the early 1980s, his cocaine addiction intensified. Jennings claimed to have spent $1,500 () a day on his habit, draining his personal finances and leaving him bankrupt with debt up to $2.5\u00a0million. Though he insisted on repaying the debt and did additional tours to do so, his work became less focused and his tours deteriorated. Jennings leased a home in the Phoenix area and spent a month detoxing himself, intending to start using cocaine again in a more controlled fashion afterward. In 1984, he quit cocaine, claiming that his son Shooter was his main inspiration to finally do so.\nIllness and death.\nDecades of smoking and drug use took a large toll on Jennings's health in addition to obesity and a poor diet, which resulted in his developing Type 2 diabetes. In 1988, four years after quitting cocaine, he ended his six-pack-a-day smoking habit. That same year, he underwent heart bypass surgery. By 2000, his diabetes worsened, and the pain reduced his mobility to the point where he was forced to end most touring. That same year, he underwent surgery to improve his left leg's blood circulation. In December 2001, his left foot was amputated at a hospital in Phoenix.\nOn February 13, 2002, Jennings died in his sleep from complications of diabetes at his home in Chandler, Arizona, aged 64. He was buried in the City of Mesa Cemetery in nearby Mesa.\nLegacy.\nBetween 1965 and 1991, ninety-six Jennings singles appeared on \"Billboard's\" Hot Country Singles chart and sixteen topped it. Between 1966 and 1995 fifty-four of his albums charted on \"Billboard's\" Top Country Albums, with 11 reaching Number 1.\nIn October 2001, Jennings was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame, but he was unable to attend the ceremony due to the pain caused by his diabetes. On July 6, 2006, Jennings was inducted into Guitar Center's RockWalk in Hollywood, California. Jessi Colter attended the ceremony along with Kris Kristofferson, who was inducted on the same day. On June 20, 2007, Jennings was posthumously awarded the Cliffie Stone Pioneer Award by the Academy of Country Music. During the ceremony, Ray Scott sang \"Rainy Day Woman\" and the award was accepted by Buddy Jennings.\nJennings's music had an influence on numerous artists, including Hank Williams Jr., the Marshall Tucker Band, Travis Tritt, Steve Earle, Waylon, Eric Church, Cody Jinks, Jamey Johnson, John Anderson, his son Shooter Jennings, Sturgill Simpson, Charley Crockett and Hank Williams III. George Jones' 1985 single \"Who's Gonna Fill Their Shoes\" references Waylon Jennings with the line, \"Like the outlaw who walks through Jessi's dream\". \nLittlefield, Texas renamed one of its major roads, Tenth Street, to Waylon Jennings Boulevard.\nHe was inducted to the Texas Country Music Hall of Fame in 1999.\nPosthumous releases.\nStudio albums.\nIn 2008, the posthumous album \"Waylon Forever\" was released.\nIn 2012, \"\" was released, a set of 12 songs recorded by Jennings and steel guitarist Robby Turner, before Jennings' death in 2002. The songs initially featured only Jennings's guitar and vocals, with Turner on bass; further accompaniment was intended to be added later. Turner completed the recordings in 2012 with the help of the remaining former members of The Waylors. The Jennings family approved the release. In 2016, Turner would release another project entitled \"The Lost Nashville Sessions\", a series of demo recordings that he and The Waylors had originally done on July 13, 1970 recorded at Scotty Moore's Music City Recorders.\nIn June of 2024 Shooter revealed that more new Waylon music would be on the way in 2025. On June 15, 2025 it was announced the first of 3 studio albums would be released on October 3rd of that year, with the first being entitled \"Songbird\". The title track was a take on Fleetwood Mac's 1977 hit \"Songbird\". On August 15, 2025 the album's second single, \"The Cowboy (Small Texas Town)\", would be released. On September 26, a week before the first album would release, Shooter also revealed that in addition to the 3 studio albums by Waylon being released; there would be several other projects coming. Shooter would state there would be multiple live albums, side projects with Jessi Colter, as well as a full length studio album by The Waylors that was set to be released in the 1970s that never saw the light of day, and would be spread out over the next 5 years up into 2030.\nPhysical release only albums.\nBetween 2015 and 2017 two albums were released. The first, \"Live 55\", was a restored recording of Waylon on a radio broadcast at station KZZN where he was a DJ at the time in 1955. Only 1,000 copies of the album would be made. The other was \"New Stuff\" containing demos recorded in 1998, of which only 1,500 copies would be made.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39087", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39087", "title": "Black tie", "text": "Semi-formal Western dress code\nBlack tie is a semi-formal Western dress code for evening events, originating in British and North American conventions for attire in the 19th century. In British English, the dress code is often referred to synecdochically by its principal element for men, the dinner suit or dinner jacket. In American English, the equivalent term tuxedo (or tux) is common. The dinner suit is a black, midnight blue or white two- or three-piece suit, distinguished by satin or grosgrain jacket lapels and similar stripes along the outseam of the trousers. It is worn with a white dress shirt with standing or turndown collar and link cuffs, a black bow tie, sometimes an evening waistcoat or a cummerbund, and black patent leather dress shoes or court pumps. Accessories may include a semi-formal homburg, bowler, or boater hat. In Britain, some individuals may rebel from the formal dress code by wearing coloured socks or a bow tie that is not black, such as red. For women, an evening gown or other fashionable evening attire may be worn.\nThe first dinner jacket is traditionally traced to 1865 on the then Prince of Wales, later King Edward\u00a0VII (1841\u20131910). The late 19th century saw gradual introduction of the lounge jacket without tails as a less formal and more comfortable leisure alternative to the frock coat. Thus in many non-English languages, a dinner jacket is still known as the false friend \"smoking\". In American English, its synonym \"tuxedo\" was derived from the village of Tuxedo Park in New York State, where it was introduced in 1886 following the example of Europeans. Following the counterculture of the 1960s, black tie has increasingly replaced white tie for more formal settings in the United States, along with cultures influenced by American culture.\nTraditionally worn only for events after 6\u00a0p.m., black tie is less formal than white tie, but more formal than informal or business dress. As semi-formal, black tie is worn for dinner parties (public, fraternities, private) and sometimes even to balls and weddings, although etiquette experts discourage wearing of black tie for weddings. Traditional semi-formal day wear equivalent is black lounge suit. Supplementary semi-formal alternatives may be accepted for black tie: mess dress uniform, religious clothing (such as cassock), folk costumes (such as highland dress), etc.\nName.\n\"Dinner jacket\" in the context of menswear first appeared in the United Kingdom around 1887 and in the United States around 1889. In the 1960s it became associated in the United States with white or coloured jackets specifically. In modern British English, \"dinner jacket\" may be abbreviated to simply \"DJ\".\n\"Tuxedo\" in the context of menswear originated in the United States around 1888. It was named after Tuxedo Park, a Hudson Valley enclave for New York's social elite where it was often seen in its early years. The term was capitalized until the 1930s and traditionally referred only to a white jacket. When the jacket was later paired with its own unique trousers and accessories in the 1900s the term began to be associated with the entire suit. Sometimes it is shortened to \"tux\".\nIn a number of European and other languages the style is referred to by the pseudo-anglicism \"smoking\". This generic colloquialism comes from its similarity to the 19th century smoking jacket. In French the dress code may also be called \"cravate noire\", a term that is sometimes adopted directly into English.\nThe suit with accompanying accessories is sometimes nicknamed a \"monkey suit\" and, since 1918, \"soup and fish\" \u2013 a term derived from the sort of food thought to be served at black tie dinners.\nHistory.\nBritish origins in the 19th century.\nIn the 1860s, the increasing popularity of outdoor activities among the middle and upper classes of the UK led to a corresponding increase in the popularity of the then casual lounge suit as a country alternative to the more formal day wear frock coat that was traditionally worn in town. Men also sought a similar alternative to the formal evening tailcoat, then known as a \"dress coat\", worn every evening.\nThe earliest record of a tailless coat being worn with evening wear is an 1865 midnight blue smoking jacket in silk with matching trousers ordered by the Prince of Wales, later Edward VII of the United Kingdom, from Savile Row tailors Henry Poole &amp; Co. The smoking jacket was tailored for use at Sandringham, the British royal family's informal country estate. Henry Poole never saw his design become known as a dinner jacket or cross the Atlantic and be called a tuxedo over there; he died in 1876 leaving behind a well-respected business to be run by his cousin Samuel Cundey.\nOther accounts of the Prince's experimentation appear around 1885, referring variously to \"a garment of many colours, such as was worn by our ancestors\" and \"short garments coming down to the waist and made on the model of the military men's jackets\". The suit jacket with tailcoat finishes, as is most commonly known, was first described around the same time and often associated with Cowes, a seaside resort in southern England and centre of British yachting that was closely associated with the Prince. It was originally intended for warm weather use but soon spread to informal or stag winter occasions. As it was simply an evening tailcoat substitute, it was worn with all the same accoutrements as the tailcoat, including the trousers. As such, in these early days, black tie, in contrast to formal white tie, was considered informal wear.\nIn the following decades of the Victorian era, the style became known as a dinner jacket: a fashionable, formal alternative for the tailcoat which men of the upper classes wore every evening. Thus it was worn with the standard accompaniments for the evening tailcoat at the time: matching trousers, white or black waistcoat, white bow tie, white detachable wing-collar formal shirt, and black formal shoes. Lapels were often faced or edged in silk or satin in varying widths. In comparison with a full dress such as a cutaway tailcoat, etiquette guides declared dinner jacket inappropriate for wear in mixed company, meaning together with ladies.\nDuring the Edwardian era, the practice of wearing a black waistcoat and black bow tie with a dinner jacket became the convention, establishing the basis of the current black tie and white tie dress codes. The dinner jacket was also increasingly accepted at less formal evening occasions such as warm-weather gatherings or intimate dinners with friends.\nAfter World War I, the dinner jacket became established as a semi-formal evening wear, while the evening tailcoat was limited to the most formal or ceremonial occasions. During this interwar period, double-breasted jackets, turndown-collar shirts and cummerbunds became popular for black tie evenings as white jackets were experimented with in warm weather. Since then, black tie is often referred to as being semi-formal.\nIn the decades following the World War II, black tie became special occasion attire rather than standard evening wear. In the 1950s, some experimented with coloured and patterned jackets, cummerbunds and bow ties. The 1960s and 1970s saw the colour palette move from muted to bright day-glow and pastel, as well as ruffled-placket shirts as lapels got wider and piping was revived. The 1980s and 1990s saw a return to traditional styles, with black jackets and trousers again becoming nearly universal. Some insist the 21st century has seen increased variation and a relaxation of previous strict standards; midnight blue once again became popular and lapel facings were sometimes reduced to wide edging.\nIntroduction to the United States.\nThe earliest references to a dress coat substitute in America are from the summer and fall of 1886 and, like the British references from this time, vary between waist-length mess-jacket style and the conventional suit jacket style. The most famous reference originates from Tuxedo Park, an upstate New York countryside enclave for Manhattan's wealthiest citizens. A son of one of the community's founders, Griswold Lorillard, and his friends were widely reported in society columns for showing up at the club's first Autumn Ball in October 1886 wearing \"a tailless dress coat\". Although it is not known whether this garment was a mess jacket or a conventional dinner jacket, it has no doubt cemented the tailcoat substitute's association with Tuxedo Park in the mind of the public.\nAn essay in the Tuxedo Park archives attributes the jacket's importation to America to resident James Brown Potter, a merchant banker who had worked in London for Brown Brothers. However, this claim for Potter cannot be verified through independent sources. Period newspaper accounts indicate that at first the jacket was worn by young mavericks to gatherings considered strictly formal. This led the American establishment to reject it out of hand. It was only by 1888 that polite society accepted its role solely as summer and informal evening substitute, at which point it became very popular.\n20th century changes.\nThe earliest dinner jackets were of the same black material as the dress coat with one, two or no buttons, and a shawl collar faced in satin or ribbed silk. By the turn of the twentieth century, the peaked lapel was equally popular and the one-button model had become standard. When trousers were sold with the jacket they were of the same material. Edwardian dandies often opted for Oxford grey or a very dark blue for their evening wear.\nBy World War I, the grey option had fallen out of favour but the \"midnight blue\" alternative became increasingly popular and rivalled black by the mid-1930s. Notch lapels, imported from the ordinary business suit, were a brief vogue in the 1920s. A single stripe of braid covering the outseam on each leg was an occasional variation at first but became standard by the 1930s. At this time double-breasted jackets and white jackets became popular for wear in hot weather.\nColour, texture and pattern became increasingly popular in warm-weather jackets in the 1950s. In the 1960s, these variations became increasingly common regardless of season or climate. Notch lapels were once again a fad. By the 1970s, mass-market retailers began offering white and coloured versions of the entire suit to its rental customers. The 1980s vogue for nostalgic and retro styles returned evening wear to its black tone. Notch lapels returned for good in the 1980s, and in the 1990s dinner jackets increasingly took on other traits of the business suit, such as two- and three-button styling, flap pockets, and centre vents. These trends have continued into the early 21st century, and midnight blue is now once again a popular alternative.\nComposition.\nThe dinner suit's accompaniments have also evolved over time. The most traditional interpretations of these elements\u00a0\u2014 dress shirt, low cut waistcoat (in the \"V\" or \"U\" shape), black bow tie, oxford dress shoes\u00a0\u2014 are incorporated in the black tie dress code.\nUnlike white tie, which is very strictly regulated, black tie ensembles can display more variation. More extensively, the traditional components for men are:\nJacket.\nThe original and most formal model of dinner jacket is the single-breasted model. The typical black tie jacket is single-breasted with one button only, with jetted, or besom, pockets and is of black or midnight blue; usually of wool or a wool-mohair, or wool-polyester blend, although other materials, especially silk, are seen. Although other materials are used, the most appropriate and traditional for the dinner jacket are wool barathea or superfine herringbone. Double-breasted models have become less common, but are generally considered equally appropriate for most black tie occasions. Dinner jackets were commonly ventless before World War I, but in the 21st century come ventless, with side vents, or, less commonly, with centre vents. The ventless style is considered more formal, whilst the centre vent is the least formal. The lapels, traditionally pointed and shawl, are usually faced with silk in either a grosgrain or a satin weave, but can also be silk barathea. A notched lapel is usually considered more appropriate for a business suit than a dinner jacket but is commonly seen on inexpensive off the rack dinner jackets. According to the Black Tie Guide, the peaked lapel and shawl collar are equally authentic and correct, with the latter being slightly less formal. The buttons are covered in similarly coloured material to the main part of the jacket, which would typically be either self-faced or covered with the same material as the lapels. Some higher-end single-breasted jackets, both new and vintage, tend to be fastened with a link front closure which is visually similar to a cufflink; this traditional method of closure is common in the United Kingdom.\nBesom welts can be of self fabric or trimmed with the lapel's silk facing, though classic menswear scholar Nicholas Antongiavanni suggests that for the English this latter touch \"is a sure sign of hired clothes\". The dinner jacket also has a welt breast pocket to hold a pocket handkerchief, which is generally self-faced rather than covered with silk.\nEmily Post, a resident of Tuxedo Park, New York, stated in 1909 that \"[Tuxedos] can have lapels or be shawl-shaped, in either case they are to have facings of silk, satin or grosgrain\". She later republished this statement in her 1922 book \"Etiquette\", adding that only single-breasted jackets are appropriately called \"tuxedos\". There is a fashion movement suggesting that a man's appearance when wearing the wider and higher peak lapel is superior to the narrower notch lapel.\nWhite dinner jackets are often worn in warm climates. They are ivory in colour rather than pure white, and have self-faced lapels (i.e. made of the same fabric as the jacket) rather than silk-faced lapels. They are generally worn with the same types of shirts and accessories as black dinner jackets, though the turndown collar and cummerbund are preferred to the wing collar or waistcoat. Similarly, the shawl lapel is more common in white dinner jackets. In the United Kingdom, the 20th-century etiquette was that white dinner jackets were never worn, even on the hottest day of summer, but were reserved for wear abroad. In the 21st century, white dinner jackets are frequently seen at weddings, formal beach events, and high-school proms, in the United States and at some concerts, famously for instance the Last Night of the Proms, in the United Kingdom. In tropical climates, such as in Imperial Burma, the desert fawn was historically used as the less formal colour. At one time, the civilian mess jacket was also an option in warmer climates.\nIt is generally considered inappropriate for a man to remove his jacket during a formal social event, but when hot weather and humidity dictate, the ranking man of the royal family or the guest of honour may give men permission by noticeably taking off his jacket. In anticipated hot weather, Red Sea rig is specified in the invitation, although this dress is esoteric in civilian circles, and is particular to certain expatriate communities.\nBlack bow tie.\nTraditionally, the only neckwear appropriate is the black bow tie that is a self-tie and it always matches the lapel facing of the dinner jacket and braiding of the trouser seams. The bow tie is tied using a common shoelace knot, which is also called the bow knot for that reason.\nTrousers.\nBlack tie trousers traditionally have no turn-ups, also called cuffs in American English, or belt loops. The outer seams are usually decorated with a single braid of silk or a material that matches or complements the lapel facing. Traditionally, braces, called suspenders in US English, hidden by the waistcoat, are used to support the trousers. Belts are never worn with black tie trousers. Evening trousers may be flat-fronted or pleated, with pleats first coming into fashion in the 1930s. Whilst flat-fronted trousers have become more fashionable, pleated trousers may be considered more comfortable by men who have wider hips and a narrow waist.\nWaist coverings.\nA waist covering is generally worn as part of a black tie ensemble. Either a low cut waistcoat or cummerbund may be worn, but never both at the same time. Although the English authority Debrett's consider that wearing a waistcoat is smart, they no longer consider either waist covering to be essential. The American authority, The Emily Post Institute, considers them to be an essential component of proper black tie attire. Waist coverings are not matched to wedding theme colours.\nWaistcoat.\nA low cut waistcoat should be worn when wearing a single-breasted coat. The waistcoat plays an important part in black tie's refined minimalism by helping to conceal its working parts by discreetly covering the trousers' exposed waistband and the shirt bosom's bottom edge. Waistcoats come in the 'V' or rarer 'U' shape, in backless or fully backed versions, double- or single-breasted, with or without lapels. Single-breasted styles typically have three buttons, and double-breasted ones three or four rows. Before World War II, while black tie was still gaining acceptance, men would wear a white waistcoat, along with other details now associated primarily with white tie, such as stiff fronted shirts. However, this style, though increasingly viewed as an affectation, is still acceptable in the United States. The waistcoat may be made from either the same fabric as the dinner jacket, as is traditional, or the same silk as the jacket's lapels, which is more popular. When a waistcoat has lapels, they are faced in the same silk as those of the jacket; in this case it is considered more refined if the body is made from the same fabric as the jacket. The buttons may be self-faced or covered in the same silk as the lapels. Vintage waistcoats were sometimes closed with studs made from onyx or mother-of-pearl, which were often surrounded by a setting of silver or gold.\nA waistcoat is never worn with a double-breasted jacket. Since this style of jacket is never unbuttoned, the waist of the trousers is never exposed, and therefore does not need to be covered, though before World War II an edge of the waistcoat was often shown between the jacket and shirt.\nCummerbund.\nA cummerbund may be worn with a dinner jacket in lieu of a waistcoat and, although it is considered slightly less formal, it is equally correct. It looks especially well with a shawl collar dinner jacket but may be worn in conjunction with peak lapels. The material of the cummerbund should be silk satin, grosgrain, also called faille, or barathea to match that of the bow tie. It features upward-facing folds, which were originally used to store theatre or opera tickets, and are now considered to be more decorative than functional. Just like the waistcoat, cummerbunds are not worn with a double-breasted jacket.\nAs the cummerbund is seen as an extension of the trousers, traditionally it is the same colour (i.e. black). However, the \"Black Tie Guide\" endorses deep and rich colours as a tasteful way to introduce some colour into an outfit that is otherwise monochromatic. Bright colours, such as those often worn by members of wedding parties, should be avoided and the bow tie must remain black in any case. Some higher quality models feature a hidden pocket and an elastic loop to fasten to the trousers.\nShirt.\nDress shirts designed to be worn with black tie are sometimes called \"tuxedo shirts\" in American English. Traditionally, the shirt is white, has a bibbed front that is either marcella or pleated, a turndown collar, and double, or \"french\" cuffs. In the early-20th century, a piqu\u00e9 shirt with a detachable wing collar and single cuffs such as is worn with white tie was used, and in the 1960s and 1970s ruffled bibs were popular, but have since become uncommon. The wing collar originally disappeared in black tie after the 1920s when the appropriately semi-formal attached turndown collar shirt became preferred, but it has been popular with American men in a less substantial, attached form since the 1980s. However, many style authorities argue that the wing collar should remain the domain of white tie for aesthetic reasons. Etiquette maven Miss Manners is one of those who feel that while the bow tie's uncovered band is fine in a white-on-white scheme, \"gentlemen with their black ties exposed all-around their necks look silly\".\nAlthough some style authorities consider the wing collar to be an acceptable option for black tie shirts, they are not worn with double cuffs or a pleated bib, and are better suited to the more formal single-breasted peak lapel jacket. They may feature a bib that is either marcella or starched and include stiff single cuffs secured with cufflinks, made of the same fabric as the bib; this type of shirt is exactly the same as one worn with white tie attire. The collar in this case is tall and stiff, which may be attached or detachable. When a full dress shirt is worn in this fashion, it is accompanied by the white marcella waistcoat ordinarily associated with white tie. Wearing white tie accessories in this manner is considered by many to be an affectation. Debrett's do not endorse the wing collar as being compatible with the black tie dress code.\nThe more formal marcella version of the shirt fastens with matching shirt studs. These are most commonly in silver or gold settings, featuring onyx or mother-of-pearl; various geometrical shapes are worn (e.g. circles) which are most common for studs, octagons, or rectangles, which are most common for cufflinks. There has been no consistent fashion preference for gold or silver, but studs with mother-of-pearl are more formal and therefore often associated with white tie. The soft-front pleated version of the shirt should be fastened with mother-of-pearl buttons, typically supplied with the shirt on a separate strip of fabric. Alternatively, a fly-front shirt, appropriate with both the marcella and pleated bibs, conceals the placket for a more minimalistic look.\nThere are several types of cufflinks that may be worn with black tie. The most formal and decorative are the double-panel type, which dress both sides of the cuff and are connected by a chain or link of metal; this model conceals the mechanism by which the cuff is secured. The most common, and least decorative, are the swivel bar type; whilst these are acceptable, they leave the inner side of the cuffs and mechanism exposed which is incongruous with formal dress.\nFootwear.\nThe most formal and traditional shoes are patent leather opera pumps, also called court shoes, decorated with grosgrain bows. The more popular alternative is the black lace-up Oxford shoe, in patent leather or calfskin, with a rounded plain toe. Brogueing or any other decorative patterns should never be seen on black tie footwear. Matte finish pumps are also seen. Shoes are almost invariably black and patent leather is considered more formal than matte finishes while pumps are considered more formal than lace-ups. Generally considered too informal for black tie are shoes with open lacing, such as the Derby shoe, called \"bluchers\" in American English. Notable alternatives include the black button boot, primarily of historical interest only, and the monogrammed Albert slipper which was originally worn only at home. Hosiery is black socks made from fine wool or silk.\nAccessories.\nMost etiquette and fashion guides of the current decade recommend keeping colour touches and favouring a single colour, usually dark; muted reds, such as maroon, are a traditional choice.\nHandkerchief: A handkerchief in linen traditionally, or silk, or cotton is usually worn in the breast pocket. Although precedents for tasteful exceptions exist, pocket squares are normally white, and may not match the waist covering or bow tie.\nBoutonni\u00e8re: A flower may be worn. Red and white carnation, blue cornflower, and rosebud have all been popular at times. In France, the boutonni\u00e8re is usually a gardenia.\nOuterwear: Black tie events do not involve outerwear and coats and gloves are no longer considered part of the dress code. However, etiquette for what to wear in public in transit to and from black tie occasions was stiffer in earlier eras and remain an option: Matching overcoats are usually black, charcoal, or dark blue, and traditionally of the Chesterfield style, or Paletot. A guards coat was also once popular, and a lighter topcoat can be worn in summer. Historically, an Inverness coat was also worn. In the early eras there used to be a specific type of coat, called black tie overcoat: it basically was a below the knee-long chesterfield coat, but imitating a dinner jacket and made of course of heavier fabric. It came in black and was characterized by a one button-stance, in case of single-breasted style, or double-breasted, with pointed lapels: both the button and the lapels were covered in silk. Yet, it soon went out of fashion and had never been very popular: nowadays is nearly impossible to find. Until the mid-20th century, gloves and scarves were always worn, and are still occasionally seen in grey leather and white silk, respectively. White kid gloves, same as for white tie, are also considered a standard.\nHat: The 20th-century standard hat for black tie was a black or midnight blue Homburg in winter, or straw boater in spring and summer. Fedoras were originally regarded as too informal but have become more common. Top hats were originally worn with black tie, but had been reserved to white tie and morning dress from World War\u00a0I. In the 1960s, it became optional to wear a hat with black tie, while from the 1970s onwards hats became less common. \nDecorations and orders: Military, civil, and organizational decorations are usually worn only to full dress events, generally of formal governmental or diplomatic significance. Miniature orders and awards are typically worn on the left lapel of the jacket, and neck badges, breast stars, and sashes are worn according to country-specific or organizational regulations. Unlike in white tie, where decorations are always permitted, the dress code will usually give some indication when decorations are to be worn with black tie.\nTimepiece: Traditionally visible timepieces are not worn with formal evening dress, because timekeeping is not supposed to be considered a priority. Pocket watches are acceptable.\nWomen.\nWomen's dress for black tie occasions has varied greatly throughout the years; traditionally it was:\nOther fashionable evening attire may be worn. Unlike the men's standard, the specifics of black tie for women are linked to whatever evening wear is currently in fashion. Today ladies' dress for black tie occasions covers a much wider level of formality ranging from just below the white tie standard to something more informal such as a little black dress. Specifically it can also include:\nStill, while \"black tie\" dress code traditionally implies evening dress for women, in 1966 famous couturier Yves Saint Laurent proposed \"Le Smoking\", a dinner suit designed for women. Most initial reactions to the collection were negative. The designer took bits and pieces from both men's suit and women's clothing and combined it with new ideas. As this dinner suit was designed for women, it was different from the normal male dinner suit. The collar was more feminine, as the shape and curve were more subtle. The waistline of the blouse was narrowed to show the body shape, and pants were adjusted to help elongate the leg. It pioneered long, minimalist, androgynous styles for women, as well as the female use of power suits and the pantsuit in modern-day society. Some described Saint Laurent's initiative as empowerment of women by giving them the option to wear clothes that were normally worn by men with influence and power. Fashion photography echoes the influence of this suit in shoots that feature androgynous models with slicked-back hair in a mannish three-piece suit, a style that was first popularized in photographs by Helmut Newton. This suit has continued to influence fashion designers' collections through the 2000s.\nSocial occasions.\nIn traditional Western dress codes etiquette black tie is intended for men's evening wear. Traditionally in the 20th century black tie, in contrast to formal white tie, was considered informal. In the 21st century black tie is often referred to as being semi-formal.\nBlack tie is worn to private and public dinners, balls and parties. At the more formal end of the social spectrum, it has to a large extent replaced the more formal white tie. Once more common, white tie dress code is fairly rare, being reserved for only the most formal occasions. Black tie is traditionally worn only after six o'clock in the evening, or after sundown during winter months. Black tie's rough daytime equivalent is the stroller, which is less formal than morning dress because, as with black tie, it replaces the tailcoat with a lounge coat. Contrary to the trend seen in evening dress, the less formal stroller is now extraordinarily rare, whereas morning dress is still relatively common.\nThe most popular uses of the dinner suit in the United States in the early 21st century are for balls, galas, proms, cruise ship dinners and weddings. In these circumstances the dinner suit's styling and accessories are most commonly chosen according to the wearer's tastes. Less popular are black tie events, such as gala fundraisers, where men typically wear more traditional dinner suits and accessories as dictated by the dress code. They are also often worn by male musicians at concerts.\nAs a general rule, boys do not wear dinner jackets much before they are 15 or dress coats before they are about 18.\nAcademia.\nSome British university debating societies, such as at Oxford, Durham and University College London conduct at least some of their debates in black tie. Notably, the Cambridge Union abolished the long-standing mandatory wearing of black tie at debates in 2002. The Irish Times hosts an annual black tie debating competition.\nLearned societies, such as the Royal Aeronautical Society, may also follow a similar practice.\nBlack tie dinners and debates are held through the academic year by British university Conservative associations, such as those at Oxford, Cambridge, York, and Nottingham.\nOpera and ballet.\nHistorically, white tie was worn for the opera. Since the 20th century, however, black tie has been worn increasingly and today a dark lounge suit is generally acceptable. In the 21st century, many opera houses in the English-speaking world do not stipulate black tie. For example, neither the Royal Opera House nor the Sydney Opera House maintain a black tie dress code. Notwithstanding, black tie is customary at English country house operas, such as during the summer Festival at Glyndebourne.\nCruise ships.\nAt more formal dinners on cruise ships the dress code will typically be black tie, although a dark lounge suit may be worn as a substitute. In 2013 Cunard, noted for its adherence to formal dress codes, relaxed its dress standards. As of 2015,[ [update]] Cunard requires one of a dinner jacket, a dark suit, formal national dress or military uniform for gentlemen diners on formal evenings. Similarly, the luxury cruise liner, Seabourn, stipulates either a dinner suit or a dark business suit on formal evenings.\nWeddings.\nBlack tie has been increasingly seen in the United States at weddings in place of the traditional morning dress. However, etiquette and clothing experts see the wearing of black tie before 6 p.m. as out of the ordinary. Prior to the late 1930s, black tie was even discouraged as too informal for evening weddings, with Amy Vanderbilt arguing that \"no man should ever be caught in a church in a tuxedo\". Emily Post would continue to argue in preference of white tie at evening weddings into the 1950s.\nIn the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe, although a minority accepts black tie at evening wedding receptions, including some Jewish weddings, it is seldom worn at church weddings or civil ceremonies where morning dress or a lounge suit is normally favoured.\nOther than that, supplementary alternatives include local variations of white tie etiquette, such as highland dress in Scotland, if neither white tie nor black tie is preferred.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39088", "revid": "1292987874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39088", "title": "Richard Somers", "text": "Fire Ship 'Intrepid'\nRichard Somers (September 15, 1778 \u2013 September 4, 1804) was an officer of the United States Navy, killed during an assault on Tripoli during the First Barbary War.\nEarly career.\nBorn at Great Egg Harbor, New Jersey, he attended the Episcopal Academy in Philadelphia with future naval heroes Stephen Decatur and Charles Stewart. He was appointed midshipman on April 23, 1797, and served in the West Indies during the Quasi-War with France on the frigate \"United States\" with Decatur and Stewart, a ship commanded by Captain John Barry. He was promoted to lieutenant on May 21, 1799.\nIn 1800, Somers fought three duels on the same day with multiple opponents because they accused him of cowardice for failing to challenge Decatur over a joking insult they overheard. Somers was wounded in the first two duels and had to be supported during the third (by Decatur, who was acting as his second).\nSomers was detached from \"United States\" on June 13, 1801, and ordered to \"Boston\" on July 30, 1801. He served in the latter frigate in the Mediterranean. After \"Boston\" returned to Washington, DC, Somers was furloughed on November 11, 1802, to await orders.\nFirst Barbary War.\nOn May 5, 1803, Somers was ordered to Baltimore, Maryland, to man, fit out, and command , and when that schooner was ready for sea, to sail her to the Mediterranean. \"Nautilus\" got underway on 30 June, reached Gibraltar on July 27, and sailed four days later to Spain. He then returned to Gibraltar to meet Commodore Edward Preble, in \"Constitution\", who was bringing a new squadron for action against the Barbary pirates. \"Nautilus\" sailed with Preble on October 6 to Tangier where the display of American naval strength induced the Europeans of Morocco to renew the treaty of 1786. Thereafter, Tripoli became the focus of Preble's attention.\nSomers' service as commanding officer of \"Nautilus\" during operations against Tripoli won him promotion to master commandant on May 18, 1804. In the summer, he commanded a division of gunboats amidst five attacks on Tripoli, during the First Barbary War.\nOn September 4, 1804, Somers assumed command of the fire ship \"Intrepid\", which had been fitted out as a \"floating volcano\", alongside 12 members of a volunteer crew. \"Intrepid\" was to be sailed into Tripoli harbor and blown up in the midst of the corsair fleet close under the walls of the city. That night, she got underway into the harbor, but she exploded prematurely, killing Somers and his entire crew.\nLegacy.\nNews of Somers' death would take some months to arrive to the United States, with newspapers in New York and New Jersey reporting on the assault in January 1805. Some reports suggested the premature detonation to be a deliberate act by Somers to avoid capture by approaching sailors, an account which led to Somers' depiction as a martyr within the American Navy. However, the true reasons for the explosion remain unclear and no reliable account is known from the \"Intrepid\"'s final moments.\nSomers is buried in Tripoli, alongside the bodies of other sailors recovered from the explosion. In 2004, the New Jersey State Assembly passed two resolutions calling for the return of his remains. It was hoped that with the fall of Muammar Gaddafi's regime in Libya in August 2011 that the remains might finally be repatriated, but efforts by diplomatic staff and relatives of Somers in the United States remained unsuccessful as of 2015.\nSince 1804, six ships of the US Navy have successively been named the USS \"Somers\" in his honor.\nThe town of Somers, New York, located in Westchester County is named in his honor. Somers Point, New Jersey, is named after Richard's great-grandfather. Every year there is a Richard Somers Day celebration in Somers Point.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39089", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39089", "title": "USS Somers", "text": "USS \"Somers\" may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "39093", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39093", "title": "OS-9", "text": "Real-time operating system\nOS-9 is a family of real-time, process-based, multitasking, multi-user operating systems, developed in the 1980s, originally by Microware Systems Corporation for the Motorola 6809 microprocessor. It was purchased by Radisys Corp in 2001, and was purchased again in 2013 by its current owner Microware LP.\nThe OS-9 family was popular for general-purpose computing and remains in use in commercial embedded systems and amongst hobbyists. Today, OS-9 is a product name used by both a Motorola 68000-series machine language OS and a portable (PowerPC, x86, ARM, MIPS, SH4, etc.) version written in C, originally known as OS-9000.\nHistory.\nThe first version (\"OS-9 Level One\"), which dates back to 1979\u20131980, was written in assembly language for the Motorola 6809 CPU, and all of its processes ran within the 64KB address space of the CPU without a memory management unit. It was developed as a supporting operating system for the BASIC09 project, contracted for by Motorola as part of the 6809 development. A later 6809 version (\"Level Two\") takes advantage of memory mapping hardware, supported up to 2 MB of memory (ca. 1980) in most implementations, and included a GUI on some platforms.\nIn 1983, OS-9/6809 was ported to Motorola 68000 assembly language and extended (called OS-9/68K); and a still later (1989) version was rewritten mostly in C for further portability. The portable version was initially called OS-9000 and was released for 80386 PC systems around 1989, then ported to PowerPC around 1995. These later versions lack the memory mapping facilities of OS-9/6809 Level Two simply because they do not need them. They used a single flat address space that all processes share; memory mapping hardware, if present, is mostly used to ensure that processes access only memory they have the right to access. The 680x0 and 80386 (and later) MPUs all directly support far more than 1 MB of memory in any case.\nAs a consequence of early pervasive design decisions taking advantage of the easily used reentrant object code capabilities of the 6809 processor, programs intended for OS-9 are required to be reentrant; compilers produce reentrant code automatically and assemblers for OS-9 offer considerable support for it. OS-9 also uses position-independent code and data because the 6809 also supports it directly; compilers and assemblers support position independence. The OS-9 kernel loads programs (including shared code), and allocates data, wherever sufficient free space is available in the memory map. This allows the entire OS and all applications to be placed in ROM or Flash memory, and eases memory management requirements when programs are loaded into RAM and run. Programs, device drivers, and I/O managers under OS-9 are all 'modules' and can be dynamically loaded and unloaded (subject to link counts) as needed.\nOS-9/6809 runs on Motorola EXORbus systems using the Motorola 6809, SS-50 Bus and SS-50C bus systems from companies such as SWTPC, Tano, Gimix, Midwest Scientific, and Smoke Signal Broadcasting, STD-bus 6809 systems from several suppliers, personal computers such as the Fujitsu FM-11, FM-8, FM-7 and FM-77, Hitachi MB-S1, and many others.\nSystem Industries, a third-party provider of DEC compatible equipment, used a 68B09E processor running OS9 in its QIC (quarter-inch cartridge) tape backup controllers in VAX installations.\nThe best known hardware (due to its low price and broad distribution) was the TRS-80 Color Computer (CoCo) and the similar Dragon series. Even on the CoCo, a quite minimalist hardware platform, it was possible under OS-9/6809 Level One to have more than one interactive user running concurrently (for example, one on the console keyboard, another in the background, and perhaps a third interactively via a serial connection) as well as several other non-interactive processes. One system, the Positron 9000, was positioned as a multi-user system for educational use, offering Microware's BASIC and Pascal environments, fitted with 64\u00a0KB to 512\u00a0KB of RAM, and featuring four to twelve serial ports. Responsiveness was reportedly impacted by multi-user operations in the system's minimal configuration, however. A second processor implementation of OS-9 for the BBC Micro was produced by Cumana. It included on-board RAM, SCSI hard disk interface and a MC68008 processor.\nOS-9 was also ported to the Commodore SP-9000 or SuperPET, which had a 6809 in addition to the 6502 of the base 8032 model, as well as 64 KB more. The Toronto PET Users Group sponsored a HW/SW project which included a daughter board with an MMU as well as the OS-9 distribution disks. With two processors, 96 KB, a 25\u00d780 screen and serial, parallel and IEEE-488 ports and many peripherals this was one of the most capable OS-9 systems available.\nOS-9's multi-user and multi-tasking capabilities make it usable as a general-purpose interactive computer system. Many third-party interactive applications have been written for it, such as the Dynacalc spreadsheet, the VED text formatter, and the Stylograph and Screditor-3 WYSIWYG word processors. TSC's nroff emulating formatter was ported to OS-9 by MicroWay, as well.\nIn mid 1980s, OS-9 was selected for the CD-i operating system. Around the same time, Microsoft approached Microware for acquisition of the company primarily because it was attracted by CD-RTOS, the CD-i operating system. The negotiation failed and no deal was made; Microware decided to remain independent.\nIn late 1980s, Microware released OS-9000, a more portable version of the operating system. The vast majority of the operating system kernel was rewritten in C leaving a handful of hardware-dependent parts in assembly language. A few \"more advanced features\" were added such as tree-like kernel module name space. OS-9000 was initially ported to the Motorola 680x0 family CPUs, Intel 80386, and PowerPC. The OS-9000/680x0 was a marketing failure and withdrawn very quickly, probably because few customers wanted to try the fatter and slower operating system over the existing OS-9/680x0 proven record of stability. Microware later started calling all of its operating systems \u2014 including what had been originally called OS-9000 \u2014 simply OS-9, and started shifting its business interest towards portable consumer device markets such as cellphones, car navigation, and multimedia.\nIn late 1980s and early 1990s, the Character Generators computers used in Broadcast Systems used OS-9 and OS-9000 extensively. The now defunct Pesa Electronica used OS-9 on their CGs such as CG 4722 and CG4733.\nName conflicts and court decisions.\nIn 1999, nineteen years after the first release of OS-9, Apple Computer released Mac OS 9. Microware sued Apple that year for trademark infringement, although a judge ruled that there would be little chance for confusion between the two. Some Macintosh users who are unaware of Microware's lesser known OS-9 have posted to the comp.os.os9 newsgroup not realizing what OS-9 is.\nIn 2001, RadiSys purchased Microware to acquire the Intel IXP-1200 network processor resources. This acquisition infused Microware with capital and allowed Microware to continue OS-9 development and support.\nOn February 21, 2013, Microware LP (a partnership formed by Freestation of Japan, Microsys Electronics of Germany and RTSI LLC of the USA) announced that they signed an Asset Purchase Agreement to buy the rights to the names Microware, OS-9 and all assets from RadiSys.\nTechnology.\nModern and archaic design.\nOS-9 (especially the 68k version and thereafter) clearly distinguishes itself from the prior generation of embedded operating systems in many aspects.\nWhen compared with more modern operating systems:\nTask scheduling.\nOS-9's real-time kernel allows multiple independent applications to execute simultaneously through task switching and inter-process communication facilities. All OS-9 programs run as processes containing at least one lightweight process (thread) but may contain an effectively unlimited number of threads. Within a process, these lightweight processes share memory, I/O paths, and other resources in accordance with the POSIX threads specification and API. OS-9 schedules the threads using a fixed-priority preemptive scheduling algorithm with round-robin scheduling within each priority. Time slicing is supported. The priority levels can be divided into a range that supports aging and a higher-priority range that uses strict priority scheduling. Each process can access any system resource by issuing the appropriate OS-9 service request. At every scheduling point, OS-9 compares the priority of the thread at the head of the active queue to the priority of the current thread. It context switches to the thread on the active queue if its priority is higher than the current processes' priority. Aging artificially increases the effective priority of threads in the active queue as time passes. At defined intervals, time slicing returns the current thread to the active queue behind other threads at the same priority.\nCommands.\nThe following list of commands is supported by the OS-9 shell.\nShell built-in commands\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUtilities for operating system functions\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSystem management utilities\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeneral utilities\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nComparisons with Unix.\nOS-9's notion of processes and I/O paths is quite similar to that of Unix in nearly all respects, but there are some significant differences. Firstly, the file system is not a single tree, but instead is a forest with each tree corresponding to a device. Second, OS-9 does not have a Unix-style fork() system call\u2014instead it has a system call which creates a process running a specified program, performing much the same function as a fork-exec or a spawn. Additionally, OS-9 processes keep track of two \"current directories\" rather than just one; the \"current execution directory\" is where it will by default look first to load programs to run (which is similar to the use of PATH environment variable under UNIX). The other is the current data directory.\nAnother difference is that in OS-9, grandparent directories can be indicated by repeating periods three or more times, without any intervening slashes (a feature also found in 4DOS/4OS2/TC/4NT). For example, codice_1 in OS-9, is similar to codice_2 in Unix. But codice_3 and codice_4, with just one or two periods, each work the same in both OS-9 and Unix.\nOS-9 has had a modular design from the beginning, influenced by notions of the designers of the 6809 and how they expected software would be distributed in the future (see the three-part series of articles in January\u2013March 1979 \"Byte\" by Terry Ritter, et al. of Motorola who designed the CPU).\nThe module structure requires more explanation: OS-9 keeps a \"module directory\", a memory-resident list of all modules that are in memory either by having been loaded, or by having been found in ROM during an initial scan at boot time. When one types a command to the OS-9 shell, it will look first in the current module directory for a module of the specified name and will use it (and increase its link count) if found, or it will look on disk for an appropriately named file if not. In OS-9/6809 and OS-9/68000, the module directory is flat, but OS-9000 made the module directory tree-structured. The OS-9000 shell looks in one's alternative module directory for a MODPATH environment variable, analogous to the PATH variable in all versions, indicating the sequence of module directories in which to look for pre-loaded modules.\nModules are not only used to hold programs, but can also be created on the fly to hold data, and are the way in which OS-9 supports shared memory.\nOS-9/non-68000 supports POSIX threads. A single process can start any number of threads.\nStatus.\nOS-9 has faded from popular use, though Microware LP does still support it and it does run on modern architectures such as ARM and x86. The compiler provided, Ultra C/C++, supports C89, but supports neither C99 nor C++98. Ultra C++ does provide limited support for C++ templates. It is also supported by popular SSL/TLS libraries such as openSSL and OpenSSH. Recently CLANG/LLVM has been ported to OS-9 for PPC &amp; ARM architecture CPU's. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39094", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39094", "title": "Extension (metaphysics)", "text": "In metaphysics, extension signifies both 'stretching out' (Latin: \"extensio\") as well as later 'taking up space', and most recently, spreading one's internal mental cognition into the external world.\nThe history of thinking about \"extension\" can be traced back at least to Archytas' spear analogy for the infinity of space. How far can one's hand or spear stretch out until it reaches the edge of reality? \"If I arrived at the outermost edge of the heaven, could I extend my hand or staff into what is outside or not? It would be paradoxical [given our normal assumptions about the nature of space] not to be able to extend it.\"\nHistory.\nDescartes.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes defined extension as the property of existing in more than one dimension, a property that was later followed up in Grassmann's n-dimensional algebra. For Descartes, the primary characteristic of matter is extension (\"res extensa\"), just as the primary characteristic of mind is thought (\"res cogitans\").\nNewton.\nAfter rejecting Cartesian identification of body with extension, Newton turns to the question of what the nature of the \"immobile being\"\u2014space or extension itself, distinguished from body\u2014was. He raises three possible definitions for extension: as a kind of \"substance\"; or as a kind of \"accident\" (a standard philosophical term for \"attribute\": anything that can be predicated of substance); or \"simply nothing\" (a reference to atomism), all of which he repudiates. Instead he proposes that extension \"has a certain mode of existence of its own, which agrees neither with substances nor accidents.\" After struggling with this question, Newton provides perhaps one of the clearest definitions of extension\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"If we say with Descartes that extension is body, do we not manifestly offer a path to Atheism, both because extension is not a creature but has existed eternally, and because we have an absolute Idea of it without any relationship to God, and therefore we are able to conceive of it as existent while feigning the non-existence of God?\"\nwhich lead Stein to conclude Newton's conception of Space, the existence of space, or extension, \"follows from\" that of anything whatsoever; but extension does not require a subject in which it \"inheres\", as a property; and it can be conceived as existent without presupposing any \"particular\" thing, God included. On the other hand, it is an \"affection of every being.\"\nLocke.\nJohn Locke, in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", defined extension as \"only the Space that lies between the Extremities of those solid coherent Parts\" of a body. It is the space possessed by a body. Locke refers to the extension in conjunction with \"solidity\" and \"impenetrability,\" the other primary characteristics of matter.\nSpinoza.\nExtension also plays an important part in the philosophy of Baruch Spinoza, who says that substance (that which has extension) can be limited only by substance of the same sort, i.e. matter cannot be limited by ideas and vice versa. From this principle, he determines that substance is infinite. This infinite substance is what Spinoza calls God, or better yet nature, and it possesses both unlimited extension and unlimited consciousness.\nInfinite divisibility.\n\"Infinite divisibility\" refers to the idea that extension, or quantity, when divided and further divided infinitely, cannot reach the point of zero quantity. It can be divided into very small or negligible quantity but not zero or no quantity at all. Using a mathematical approach, specifically geometric models, Gottfried Leibniz and Descartes discussed the infinite divisibility of extension. Actual divisibility may be limited due to unavailability of cutting instruments, but its possibility of breaking into smaller pieces is infinite.\nCompenetration.\n\"Compenetration\" refers to two or more extensions occupying the same space at the same time. This, according to scholastic philosophers, is impossible; according to this view, only spirits or spiritualized matter can occupy a place occupied already by an entity (matter or spirit)\nExtended mind thesis.\nIn more recent work, philosophers David Chalmers and Andy Clark in 1998 published \"The Extended Mind.\" This has opened a wide channel of new research at the nexus of epistemology, philosophy of mind, cognitive and neuro-science, dynamic systems thinking, science, technology &amp; innovation studies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39095", "revid": "1316270230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39095", "title": "Extension (semantics)", "text": "In the context of semantics the extension of a concept, idea, or sign\nIn any of several fields of study that treat the use of signs \u2014 for example, in linguistics, logic, mathematics, semantics, semiotics, and philosophy of language \u2014 the extension of a concept, idea, or sign consists of the things to which it applies, in contrast with its comprehension or intension, which consists very roughly of the ideas, properties, or corresponding signs that are implied or suggested by the concept in question.\nIn philosophical semantics or the philosophy of language, the 'extension' of a concept or expression is the set of things it extends to, or applies to, if it is the sort of concept or expression that a single object by itself can satisfy. Concepts and expressions of this sort are monadic or \"one-place\" concepts and expressions.\nSo the extension of the word \"dog\" is the set of all (past, present and future) dogs in the world: the set includes Fido, Rover, Lassie, Rex, and so on. The extension of the phrase \"Wikipedia reader\" includes each person who has ever read Wikipedia, including \"you\".\nThe extension of a whole statement, as opposed to a word or phrase, is defined (since Gottlob Frege's \"On Sense and Reference\") as its truth value. So the extension of \"Lassie is famous\" is the logical value 'true', since Lassie is famous.\nSome concepts and expressions are such that they don't apply to objects individually, but rather serve to relate objects to objects. For example, the words \"before\" and \"after\" do not apply to objects individually\u2014it makes no sense to say \"Jim is before\" or \"Jim is after\"\u2014but to one thing in relation to another, as in \"The wedding is before the reception\" and \"The reception is after the wedding\". Such \"relational\" or \"polyadic\" (\"many-place\") concepts and expressions have, for their extension, the set of all sequences of objects that satisfy the concept or expression in question. So the extension of \"before\" is the set of all (ordered) pairs of objects such that the first one is before the second one.\nMathematics.\nIn mathematics, the 'extension' of a mathematical concept formula_1 is the set that is specified by formula_1. (That set might be empty, currently.) In terms of quantifiers, extension is formula_3 (for all), as opposed to intention which is formula_4 (there exists).\nFor example, the extension of a function is a set of ordered pairs that pair up the arguments and values of the function; in other words, the function's graph. The extension of an object in abstract algebra, such as a group, is the underlying set of the object. The extension of a set is the set itself. That a set can capture the notion of the extension of anything is the idea behind the axiom of extensionality in axiomatic set theory.\nThis kind of extension is used so constantly in contemporary mathematics based on set theory that it can be called an implicit assumption. A typical effort in mathematics evolves out of an observed mathematical object requiring description, the challenge being to find a characterization for which the object becomes the extension.\nComputer science.\nIn computer science, some database textbooks use the term 'intension' to refer to the schema of a database, and 'extension' to refer to particular instances of a database.\nMetaphysical implications.\nThere is an ongoing controversy in metaphysics about whether or not there are, in addition to actual, existing things, non-actual or nonexistent things. If there are\u2014if, for instance, there are possible but non-actual dogs (dogs of some non-actual but possible species, perhaps) or nonexistent beings (like Sherlock Holmes, perhaps)\u2014then these things might also figure in the extensions of various concepts and expressions. If not, only existing, actual things can be in the extension of a concept or expression. Note that \"actual\" may not mean the same as \"existing\". Perhaps there exist things that are merely possible, but not actual. (Maybe they exist in other universes, and these universes are other \"possible worlds\"\u2014possible alternatives to the actual world.) Perhaps some actual things are nonexistent. (Sherlock Holmes seems to be an \"actual\" example of a fictional character; one might think there are many other characters Arthur Conan Doyle \"might\" have invented, though he actually invented Holmes.)\nA similar problem arises for objects that no longer exist. The extension of the term \"Socrates\", for example, seems to be a (currently) non-existent object. Free logic is one attempt to avoid some of these problems.\nGeneral semantics.\nSome fundamental formulations in the field of general semantics rely heavily on a valuation of extension over intension. See for example extension, and the extensional devices."}
{"id": "39096", "revid": "929914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39096", "title": "Mary Martin", "text": "American singer and actress (1913\u20131990)\nMary Virginia Martin (December 1, 1913 \u2013 November 3, 1990) was an American actress and singer. A muse of Rodgers and Hammerstein, she originated many leading roles on stage over her career, including Nellie Forbush in \"South Pacific\" (1949), the title character in \"Peter Pan\" (1954), and Maria von Trapp in \"The Sound of Music\" (1959). Over the course of her career, she won four Tony Awards and an Emmy Award. She was named a Kennedy Center Honoree in 1989. She was the mother of actor Larry Hagman.\nEarly life.\nMartin was born in Weatherford, Texas. Her autobiography described her childhood as secure and happy. She had close relationships with both of her parents as well as her siblings. Her father, Preston Martin, was a lawyer, and her mother, Juanita Presley, was a violin teacher. Although the doctors told Juanita that she would risk her life if she attempted to have another baby, she was determined to have a boy. Instead, she had Mary, who became a tomboy. \nMartin's family had a barn and orchard that kept her entertained. She played with her elder sister Geraldine (whom she called \"Sister\"), climbing trees and riding ponies. Martin adored her father. \"He was tall, good-looking, silver-haired, with the kindest brown eyes. Mother was the disciplinarian, but it was Daddy who could turn me into an angel with just one look.\"19 Martin, who said \"I'd never understand the law\"19 began singing every Saturday night at a bandstand that was near the courtroom where her father worked. She sang in a trio with her sister and Marion Swofford, all three in bellhop costumes. \"Even in those days, without microphones, my high piping voice carried all over the square. I have always thought that I inherited my carrying voice from my father.\"19\nShe remembered having a photographic memory as a child. School tests were not a problem, and learning songs was easy. She had her first experience of singing solo at a fire hall, where she felt the crowd's appreciation. \"Sometimes I think that I cheated my own family and my closest friends by giving to audiences so much of the love I might have kept for them. But that's the way I was made; I truly don't think I could help it.\"20 Martin's craft was developed by seeing movies and becoming a mimic. She would win prizes for looking, acting and dancing like Ruby Keeler and singing exactly like Bing Crosby. \"Never, never, never can I say I had a frustrating childhood. It was all joy. Mother used to say she never had seen such a happy child \u2014 that I awakened each morning with a smile. I don't remember that, but I do remember that I never wanted to go to bed, to go to sleep, for fear I'd miss something.\"20\nMarriage.\nDuring high school, Martin dated Benjamin Hagman before she left to attend finishing school at Ward\u2013Belmont in Nashville, Tennessee. In Nashville she enjoyed imitating Fanny Brice at singing gigs, but she found school dull and felt confined by its strict rules. She was homesick for Weatherford, her family and Hagman. During a visit, Mary and Benjamin persuaded Mary's mother to allow them to marry.16 She was legally married on November 3, 1930, at Grace Episcopal Church (Hopkinsville, Kentucky). 10 months later, pregnant with her first child (Larry Hagman) she was forced to leave Ward\u2013Belmont. She was, however, happy to begin her new life, but she soon learned that this life as she would later say was nothing but \"role playing\".39\nTheir honeymoon was at her parents' house, and Martin's dream of life with a family and a white-picket fence faded. \"I was 17, a married woman without real responsibilities, miserable about my mixed-up emotions, afraid there was something awfully wrong with me because I didn't enjoy being a wife. Worst of all, I didn't have enough to do.\" (p.\u00a039) It was \"Sister\" who came to her rescue, suggesting that she should teach dance. \"Sister\" taught Martin her first real dance\u2014the waltz clog. Martin perfectly imitated her first dance move, and she opened a dance studio. Here, she created her own moves, imitated the famous dancers she watched in the movies and taught \"Sister's\" waltz clog. As she later recalled, \"I was doing something I wanted to do\u2014creating.\"44\nApprenticeship.\nWanting to learn more moves, Martin went to California to attend the dance school at the Franchon and Marco School of the Theatre and then opened her own dance studio in Mineral Wells, Texas. She was given a ballroom studio with the premise that she would sing in the lobby every Saturday. There, she learned how to sing into a microphone and how to phrase blues songs. One day at work, she accidentally walked into the wrong room, where auditions were being held. They asked her in what key she would like to sing \"How Red the Rose, How Blue the Sky\". Having absolutely no idea what her key was, she sang regardless and got the job. \nReturning to California, Martin was hired to sing \"How Red the Rose\" at the Fox Theater in San Francisco followed by a gig at the Paramount Theater in Los Angeles. There was one catch: she had to sing in the wings. She scored her first professional gig unaware that she would soon be center stage. \nSoon after, Martin learned that her studio in Texas had been burned down by a man who thought dancing was a sin.24 She began to express her unhappiness. Her father gave her advice, saying she was too young to be married. Martin left everything behind including her young son, Larry, and stayed in Los Angeles while her father handled her divorce from Benjamin Hagman for her. In Los Angeles, Martin plunged herself into auditions\u2014so many that she became known as \"Audition Mary\". Her first professional audition and job was on a national radio network. Among Martin's first auditions, she sang \"Indian Love Call\". After she finished the song, \"a tall, craggly man who looked like a mountain\" told Martin that he thought she had something special. It was Oscar Hammerstein II This marked the start of her career.\nRadio.\nMartin began her radio career in 1939 as the vocalist on a short-lived revival of \"The Tuesday Night Party\" on CBS. In 1940, she was a singer on NBC's \"Good News of 1940\", which was renamed \"Maxwell House Coffee Time\" during that year. In 1942, she joined the cast of Kraft Music Hall on NBC, replacing Connee Boswell. She was also one of the stars of \"Stage Door Canteen\" on CBS, 1942\u20131945.\nBroadway.\nMartin was cast in Cole Porter's \"Leave It to Me!\", making her Broadway debut in November 1938 in that production. She became popular on Broadway and received attention in the national media singing the spoof striptease song \"My Heart Belongs to Daddy\". With that one song in the second act, she became a star 'overnight'.41 Martin reprised the song in \"Night and Day\", a Hollywood film about Cole Porter, in which she played herself auditioning for Porter (Cary Grant). \"My Heart Belongs to Daddy\" catapulted her career and became very special to Martin\u2014she even sang it to her ailing father in his hospital bed while he was in a coma. Martin did not learn immediately that her father had died. Headlines read \"Daddy Girl Sings About Daddy as Daddy Dies\". Because of the show's demanding schedule, Martin was unable to attend her father's funeral.44\u201345 In 1943 she starred in the new Kurt Weill musical \"One Touch of Venus\" and then \"Lute Song\" in 1946.\nAs nurse Nellie Forbush, Martin opened on Broadway in \"South Pacific\" on April 7, 1949. Her performance was called \"memorable\u00a0... funny and poignant in turns\", and she earned a Tony Award.\nRichard Watts Jr. of the \"New York Post\" wrote: \"nothing I have ever seen her do prepared me for the loveliness, humor, gift for joyous characterization, and sheer lovableness of her portrayal of Nellie Forbush\u00a0... Hers is a completely irresistible performance.\" She opened in the West End production on November 1, 1951.\nHer next major success was in the role of Peter in the Broadway production of \"Peter Pan\" in October 1954 with Martin winning the Tony Award. \nMartin opened on Broadway in \"The Sound of Music\" as Maria on November 16, 1959, and stayed in the show until October 1961. She won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical. The musical gave Martin \"the chance to display her homespun charm\".\nIn 1966, she appeared on Broadway in the two-person musical \"I Do! I Do!\" with Robert Preston and was nominated for the Tony Award (Leading Actress in a Musical). A national tour with Preston began in March 1968 but was canceled early due to Martin's illness.\nAlthough she appeared in nine films between 1938 and 1943, she was generally passed over for the filmed version of the musical plays. She herself once explained that she did not enjoy making films because she did not have the connection with an audience that she had in live performances. The closest that she ever came to preserving her stage performances was her television appearances as \"Peter Pan\". The Broadway production from 1954 was subsequently performed on NBC television in RCA's compatible color in 1955, 1956, and 1960. Martin also preserved her 1957 stage performance as Annie Oakley in \"Annie Get Your Gun\" when NBC television broadcast the production live that year.\nWhile Martin did not enjoy making films, she frequently appeared on television. Her last feature film appearance was a cameo as herself in MGM's \"Main Street to Broadway\" in 1953. Martin made an appearance in 1980 in a Royal Variety Performance in London performing \"Honey Bun\" from \"South Pacific.\" Martin appeared in the play \"Legends\" with Carol Channing in a one-year US national tour opening in Dallas on January 9, 1986.\nAwards and honors.\nMartin was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame in 1973. She received the Kennedy Center Honors, an annual honor for career achievements, in 1989. She received the Donaldson Award in 1943 for \"One Touch of Venus\". A Special Tony Award was presented to her in 1948 while she appeared in the national touring company of \"Annie Get Your Gun\" for \"spreading theatre to the rest of the country while the originals perform in New York.\" In 1955 and 1956, she received, first, a Tony Award for \"Peter Pan\", and then an Emmy for appearing in the same role on television. She also received Tonys for \"South Pacific\" and in 1959 for \"The Sound of Music\".\nIn September 1963, a statue of Peter Pan dedicated to her was unveiled in Weatherford, donated by the Peter Pan Peanut Butter Company.\nPersonal life.\nAfter Martin's 1936 divorce from Benjamin Hagman, she married Richard Halliday in 1940. Early in their marriage, he worked as a drama critic for the \"New York World-Telegram\" and a movie critic for the \"New York Daily News\". Together they had one daughter, Heller Halliday, who was born on November 4, 1941. Eventually, Halliday became producer or co-producer of at least two of Martin's projects. In the early 1970s, the couple lived, according to his March 1973 obituary in the \"Connecticut Sunday Herald\", \"on a vast ranch they own near An\u00e1polis\" in the state of Goi\u00e1s, Brazil. The ranch was called \"Nossa Fazenda Halliday\" (Our Halliday Farm). Martin was called Dona Maria by people in the vicinity of the Brazilian ranch.\nCultural scholar Lillian Faderman wrote that Martin and actress Janet Gaynor often traveled together along with their husbands.\nGaynor and her husband discovered An\u00e1polis in 1950, soon after, Martin and her husband visited.&lt;ref name=\"washingtonpost/1979/girls-brazil\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Martin and Janet Gaynor had adjoining ranches near An\u00e1polis, Goi\u00e1s, Brazil.&lt;ref name=\"nytimes/1971/martin-brazil\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nOn the evening of September 5, 1982, Martin, Janet Gaynor, Gaynor's husband Paul Gregory, and Martin's manager Ben Washer were involved in a serious car crash in San Francisco.\nA van ran a red light at the corner of California and Franklin streets and crashed into the Luxor taxicab in which the group was riding, knocking it into a tree. Washer was killed, Martin sustained two broken ribs and a broken pelvis, and Gregory suffered two broken legs. Gaynor sustained several serious injuries. The driver of the van was arrested on two counts of felony drunk driving, reckless driving, speeding, running a red light, and vehicular homicide. On March 15, 1983, he was found guilty of drunk driving and vehicular homicide and was sentenced to three years in prison. Gaynor died two years later from complications from her injuries.\nMartin's sexuality has long been a topic of debate. In 1979, Patsy Kelly told Boze Hadleigh that Martin was a lesbian. In 2016, biographer David Kaufman stated that Halliday served as \"[Martin's] husband, her best friend, her gay/straight 'cover,'\" while in 2019, \"The Advocate\" stated that Martin \"simply [was the subject of] a lifetime of lavender rumors.\"\nDeath.\nMartin died of cancer at age 76 at her home in Rancho Mirage, California, on November 3, 1990.\nShe is buried in City Greenwood Cemetery in her native Weatherford, Texas.\nWork.\nStage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* \"Leave It to Me!\" (1938)\nFilm.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* \"The Shopworn Angel\" (1938) (dubbed singing voice of Margaret Sullavan)\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* \"America Applauds: An Evening for Richard Rodgers\" (1951)\nRecording.\nAlbums&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;Mary Martin in an Album of Cole Porter Songs (1940)&lt;br&gt;\nOne Touch of Venus (1944)&lt;br&gt;\nLute Song (1946)&lt;br&gt;\nMary Martin Sings for You (1949)&lt;br&gt;\nSouth Pacific (1949)&lt;br&gt;\nAnything Goes (1950)&lt;br&gt;\nThe Bandwagon (1950)&lt;br&gt;\nBabes in Arms (1951)&lt;br&gt;\nGirl Crazy (1952)&lt;br&gt;\nPeter Pan (1954)&lt;br&gt;\nAnnie Get Your Gun (1957)&lt;br&gt;\nWalt Disney\u2019s Story of Sleeping Beauty (1958)&lt;br&gt;\nMary Martin Sings \u2013 Richard Rodgers Plays (1958)&lt;br&gt;\nHi-Ho (1958)&lt;br&gt;\nMary Martin Sings a Musical Love Story (1959)&lt;br&gt;\nThe Sound of Music (1959)&lt;br&gt;\nRodgers and Hammerstein\u2019s Cinderella (1959)&lt;br&gt;\nThe Little Lame Lamb, A Christmas Story of St. Francis (1960)&lt;br&gt;\nGuideposts for Living (1962)&lt;br&gt;\nJennie \u2013 The Original Broadway Cast (1963)&lt;br&gt;\nHello, Dolly! (1965)&lt;br&gt;\nI Do! I Do! (1966)&lt;br&gt;\nMary Martin Tells the Story and Sings the Songs of Rodgers and Hammerstein\u2019s The Sound of Music (1966)\nHit singles &lt;br&gt;\nMy Heart Belongs to Daddy (1939, #2)&lt;br&gt;\nThe Waiter and the Porter and the Upstairs Maid (with Bing Crosby and Jack Teagarden, 1941, #23)&lt;br&gt;\nPound Your Table Polka (1942, #22)&lt;br&gt;\nI'll Walk Alone (1944, #6)&lt;br&gt;\nAlmost Like Being in Love (1947, #21)&lt;br&gt;\nGo to Sleep, Go to Sleep, Go to Sleep (with Arthur Godfrey, 1950. #8)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39098", "revid": "39842100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39098", "title": "Physical law", "text": ""}
{"id": "39102", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39102", "title": "Kidderminster", "text": "Civil parish and human settlement in England\nKidderminster is a market town and civil parish in Worcestershire, England, south-west of Birmingham and north of Worcester. Located north of the River Stour and east of the River Severn, in the 2021 census, it had a population of 57,400. The town is twinned with Husum, Germany.\nSituated in the far north of Worcestershire (and with its northern suburbs only 3 and 4 miles from the Staffordshire and Shropshire borders respectively), the town is the main administration centre for the wider Wyre Forest District, which includes the towns of Stourport-on-Severn and Bewdley, along with other outlying settlements.\nHistory.\nThe land around Kidderminster may have been first populated by the Husmerae, an Anglo-Saxon tribe first mentioned in the Ismere Diploma, a document in which Ethelbald of Mercia granted a \"parcel of land of ten hides\" to Cyneberht. This developed as the settlement of Stour-in-Usmere, which was later the subject of a territorial dispute settled by Offa of Mercia in 781, when he restored certain rights to Bishop Heathored. This allowed for the founding of a monastery or \"minstre\" in the area.\nThe earliest written form of the name Kidderminster was first documented in the Domesday Book of 1086, where it appears as \"Chideminstre\", meaning 'Cydda or Cydela's minster or monastery'. It was a large manor held by William the Conqueror, with 16 outlying settlements (Bristitune, Fastochesfeld, Franche, Habberley, Hurcott, Mitton, Oldington, Ribbesford, Sudwale, Sutton, Teulesberge, Trimpley, Wannerton and Wribbenhall). Various spellings were in use \u2013 \"Kedeleministre\" or \"Kideministre\" (in the 12th and 13th centuries), \"Kyderemunstre\" (13th\u201315th centuries) \u2013 until the name of the town was settled as Kidderminster by the 16th century. Between 1156 and 1162 Henry II granted the manor to his steward, Manasser Biset. By six decades later, the settlement grew and a fair (1228) and later a market (1240) were established there.\nTo the south by the River Stour, dating from the 15th century, is a single surviving tower of Caldwall (or Caldwell) Castle, a fortified manor house. \nKidderminster owes its growth to the early development of the cloth industry, which was aided by its position upon the River Stour, and its location at the confluence of four main roads to Birmingham, Dudley, Worcester, Bewdley and Bridgnorth. In a visit to the town sometime around 1540, King's Antiquary John Leland noted that Kidderminster \"standeth most by clothing\". Over the following centuries the town specialised in textile trades such as weaving, fulling, cloth working and milling, and was also home to numerous other trades including shoemaking, haberdashery, saddle making, dyers, tailors, tanners and glovers.\nKing Charles I granted the Borough of Kidderminster a Charter in 1636. the original charter can be viewed at Kidderminster Town Hall.\nKidderminster's location at the junction of several major roads made it strategically important during the English Civil War, with several skirmishes occurring in and around the town.\nIn 1670\u20131 Kidderminster's cloth industry obtained a guild by act of parliament and by 1677, the town had as many as 459 weavers and perhaps 3,000 spinners. Following King Louis XIV's revocation of the Edict of Nantes in October 1685 and the subsequent renewed persecution of French Protestants in France, many Huguenots emigrated to Britain. The immigration and settlement of waves of industrious Huguenots brought the benefits of skilled artisans, merchants and manufacturers to Britain. They contributed to a preexisting but basic cloth weaving industry in towns and cities throughout England, in some cases establishing new businesses. In Worcestershire, the Huguenots established themselves at Worcester, Evesham, Droitwich and Kidderminster.\nIn the early 18th century, carpet weaving was introduced to Kidderminster, and this rapidly became the staple trade of the town. Its growth was aided by the opening of the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal in 1771, and later the arrival of the railway to the town in 1852. The carpet industry went into decline in the 1970s, but still continues on a reduced scale.\nPoor trade conditions in 1828, when 2,000 looms were not working for an 18-week period, led to riots where \u00a33,000 of damage was done during one night.\nThe town's local government was reformed by the Municipal Reform Act 1835, which incorporated Kidderminster as a municipal borough. This superseded the charter of 1636, and divided the borough into three wards represented by six aldermen and eighteen councillors, the number of wards was doubled in the 1880s. The current Town Hall on Vicar Street was built in 1877.\nKidderminster has two Commissioners' churches. The first was St George's Church, on Radford Avenue. This was designed by Francis Goodwin and built in 1821\u20131824, finally being consecrated in April 1824. Its grant of just over \u00a317,000.00, was the third-largest given by the commission to any church outside London. The second church was St John's Church, on the Bewdley Road. This was built in 1843 and the architect was Matthew Steele; its grant was just over \u00a34,000.\nThe Shrubbery was converted into a military headquarters towards the end of the 19th century.\nIn 1974 the old borough of Kidderminster was abolished and merged into the new Wyre Forest District. In December 2015 Kidderminster was established as a civil parish with a new Town Council, following a public referendum.\nGeography.\nThe River Stour and the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal both flow through Kidderminster town centre.\nEconomy.\nThe modern carpet industry was founded in the area in 1785 by Brintons. The carpet industry became extremely important to the local economy, so much so that the local newspaper is still named \"The Shuttle\" after the shuttles used on the carpet looms. A type of carpet was known as Kidderminster carpet or, in the United States, Ingrain carpet: this was a reversible carpet with no pile, with the pattern showing in opposite colours on the two faces, and was popular from the 18th to early 20th centuries. By 1951 there were over thirty carpet manufacturers in the town, including, for example, Quayle &amp; Tranter (now defunct). They commissioned such notable artists as George Bain to create their traditional Celtic designs.\nAided by a 2004 grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund, a museum dedicated to the Kidderminster carpet industry was officially opened by Lord Cobham in 2012.\nPolitics.\nKidderminster Town is a civil parish within Wyre Forest District, with Kidderminster Town Council created in the early 21st century to take on the duties of a parish council, following a referendum in May 2015. Prior to this, Charter Trustees maintained the traditions of the town and elected a Mayor. At the 2019 local elections to Wyre Forest District Council, the Conservatives lost their majority and the council was taken over by a 'Progressive Alliance' formed of independents and councillors from other parties. However, in May 2022 Health Concern announced they would not be standing at the next election, instead favouring a unified independent offering. At the following election in 2023 the Conservatives regained majority control after a collapse in the independent and former Health Concern vote, one of only two council gains nationally.\nThe area (initially as Kidderminster, then after 1983 as the Wyre Forest constituency) has been represented by Conservative Members of Parliament (MPs) Gerald Nabarro 1950\u20131964, Tatton Brinton 1964\u20131974, Esmond Bulmer 1974\u20131987, Anthony Coombs 1987\u20131997, and Labour MP David Lock 1997\u20132001. In the 2001 United Kingdom general election, the town returned Dr Richard Taylor as an independent MP for the Wyre Forest parliamentary constituency. Taylor had fought the election to protest against the proposed reduction in services at Kidderminster Hospital. He held his seat at the 2005 election, the first independent MP to do so since 1949. Mark Garnier has held the seat of Wyre Forest since the 2010 election increasing his majority each time until the 2024 general election, which saw a Conservative majority of just 812 votes.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2011 census there were 55,530 residents in Kidderminster in 24,869 households, the median age of Kidderminster residents was 41.\nKidderminster's population at the 2011 census was predominantly White (96.8%). The largest non-white groups were Asian at 1.7%, and mixed race at 1.2%.\n67% of Kidderminster residents identified as Christian, with 24.7% stating they had no religion, and 6.6% not stating any religion. The largest non-Christian group were Muslims at 0.8%, followed by Buddhists at 0.2% and Hindus and Sikhs at 0.1% each, with others at 0.4%.\nArchitecture and landmarks.\nKidderminster's parish church of St Mary and All Saints' is a grade I listed building dating mostly from the 15th and 16th centuries. Another notable church is St John's Church, which is grade II listed, and dates from 1843. Other listed buildings of note in the town include the Town Hall of 1877. The Shrubbery, a 19th-century mansion, and the Kidderminster Register Office. Many of Kidderminster's historic buildings were lost from the 1960s onwards, this led to the creation of the Kidderminster Civic Society in 1993 to promote preservation of the town's heritage.\nThere are some former factory buildings of note in Kidderminster, which have mostly been converted to other uses. A notable one is the former Slingfield Mill, dating from 1864 to 1870, which is grade II listed, and has been converted for retail use.\nIn the 1968 \"Buildings of England\" volume on Worcestershire, Pevsner described the town as: \"uncommonly devoid of visual pleasure and architectural interest.\" Crown House, an early 1970s office block was particularly criticised, and was once rated among the top 10 ugliest buildings in Britain. Demolition was completed in April 2020, improving the Kidderminster skyline. In the 2007 revision of this volume, Alan Brooks wrote: \"the 19th century mill buildings, together with the churches, provide most of the architectural interest in a town otherwise uncommonly lacking in visual pleasures.\"\nTransport.\nTwo railway stations in the town share the same approach road and are located less than fifty metres apart. The main National Rail station, operated by West Midlands Trains, is Kidderminster, from where trains run to Birmingham and Worcester. The other station, Kidderminster Town, is the terminus of the preserved Heritage Railway line, Severn Valley Railway, from where trains run to Bridgnorth.\nSeveral major routes run through the town, including the A456 which runs from Birmingham to just south of Woofferton, Shropshire; the A451 which runs from Stourbridge to Abberley; the A442 which runs from Droitwich to Hodnet, Shropshire (a few miles north of Telford); the A449 which runs from Newport in south Wales to Stafford and crosses the A456 at the Land Oak; and the A448 road which starts in the town and goes to Studley in Warwickshire, via Bromsgrove and Redditch. A major change in the town centre road infrastructure was the construction of the ring road in the 1970s and 1980s. This relieved the town's growing congestion but diverted traffic outside the centre, drawing off customers for businesses. The final phase of the ring road was never completed, which results in the town having a ring road that does not form a complete ring.\nThe nearest motorway is the M5, which signs Kidderminster from junction 3 (Halesowen) with the A456, and junction 6 (Worcester North) with the A449.\nThe Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal passes through the town.\nThere are direct bus links with towns including Worcester, Halesowen, Bewdley, Stourport, Bridgnorth, Bromsgrove and Redditch. The majority of the services in Kidderminster are operated by Diamond West Midlands (previously First Midland Red) while the rest is operated by Select Bus Services (297), Finesse and Yarranton Brothers. Services 291 and 292 were operated by R &amp; B Travel prior to the company surrendering its licence in January 2020.\nServices 15A/C, S15, 294, 580 and 133were operated by Coniston Coaches prior to surrendering its licence in October 2020.\n15A/C, S15 &amp; 294 were passed onto Astons until 2021 and 2022. Service 297 was operated by Arriva Midlands until 4 September 2023 when Select won the contract for the service.\nDiamond Bus service 125 connects Kidderminster to Bridgnorth while service 25A connects Kidderminster with Dudley via Stourbridge and the Merry Hill Centre.\nEducation.\nAs part of educational restructuring in the Wyre Forest district, Kidderminster's schools were reorganised from a three-tier system of first, middle and high schools to the two-tier system more common in the UK as a whole, featuring primary schools and secondary schools. In this process, several first and middle schools were closed or merged into new primaries. The three high schools of King Charles I School, Wolverley C E Secondary School, and Baxter College (formerly Harry Cheshire High School) became secondary schools that included sixth forms.\nIndependent schools include Heathfield Knoll School in Wolverley. Formerly independent, Holy Trinity School became a state-funded free school in 2014. Kidderminster College is located in Market Street in the town centre, having moved from older premises in Hoo Road in 2003. Other local secondary schools include The Stourport High School &amp; VIth Form Centre and The Bewdley School.\nSport.\nCricket.\nKidderminster CC is a local cricket club at whose home ground of Chester Road North Ground Worcestershire County Cricket Club play occasional County Championship and county 2nd XI games.\nFootball.\nFormed in 1886, Kidderminster Harriers F.C. is the town's professional football club. Local rivals of the Harriers were traditionally Worcester City and Bromsgrove Rovers, and in recent years also Cheltenham Town and Hereford United. As of 2023 Cheltenham are in League One, two divisions above Kidderminster, with Hereford being the division below Kidderminster.\nIn 2005 the Harriers were relegated to the Conference Premier after five years in the Football League Two division. They had reached the Football League as Conference champions in 2000, and are Worcestershire's only representative in the league. They had won the title in 1994 but were denied promotion then as their stadium did not meet Football League capacity requirements. That same year they eliminated Birmingham City from the FA Cup; they eventually reached the fifth round of the competition (just missing the quarter-finals), where they hosted Premier League side West Ham United, narrowly losing 0\u20131. Prior to Lincoln City's run in the competition in 2017, Harriers were the last non-league side to reach round five of the FA Cup. Harriers were relegated to the National League North in 2016.\nIn recent years, Kidderminster have seen some success under manager and former Harriers player Russell Penn. A strong FA Cup run in the 2021\u20132022 season led to the Harriers facing Premier League side West Ham in, as they had done in 1994. The affair ended in a 1\u20132 defeat, yet the game led to major economic benefit for the club, with TV money and ticket sales generating large amounts of income. Harriers further went into the Play-Offs that same season, but were eliminated in their first game to Boston United. In the 2022\u20132023 season, Kidderminster again reached the Play-Offs, achieving the feat on the last game of the season after an excellent late run of league form. Harriers beat Alfreton, Kings Lynn and finally Brackley in the Play-Offs and regained promotion to the National League.\nThe Kidderminster &amp; District League has operated since 1984 and draws teams from Worcestershire and South Staffordshire.\nRugby.\nKidderminster Carolians RFC is a local rugby union club, currently playing at level 7 in Counties 1 Midlands West (North) at First XV Level and Counties 4 Midlands West (South) at 2nd XV level.\nRegularly putting out three senior teams including veterans, the club also has a thriving Colts (U18s) age group, a developing women's team since 2021, and a large minis and juniors section.\nHockey.\nKidderminster Hockey Club was founded in 1892. By 2010, there were five men's hockey teams, a women's team and a junior team. The club was dissolved in 2022.\nLocal attractions.\nLocated in Kidderminster is the Severn Valley Railway a heritage railway. The Museum of Carpet, opened in 2012, showcases the town's contribution to the carpet industry. Brinton Park is an urban park to the south of the town centre, comprising of land donated by John Brinton in the 1880s. Another green space is Wilden Marsh, a nature reserve covering to the south of Kidderminster.\nPlaces of interest near Kidderminster include the West Midlands Safari Park to the west of Kidderminster towards Bewdley. A few miles south of the town is Hartlebury Castle, which houses the Worcestershire County Museum. A few miles north are the Drakelow Tunnels, a former underground military complex, which has an attached museum.\nLocal media.\nThe local newspapers covering Kidderminster are \"The Shuttle\" and the \"Kidderminster Standard\".\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central. Television signals are received from the Sutton Coldfield and local relay transmitters.\n107.2 The Wyre was the town's first local commercial radio station; it began broadcasting on 12 September 2005 from studios in Kidderminster, and was closed in 2012. Other radio stations providing local coverage are Hits Radio Herefordshire &amp; Worcestershire, Sunshine Radio and BBC Hereford &amp; Worcester. Signal 107 was launched on 26 March 2012; it now broadcasts as Greatest Hits Radio Hereford &amp; Worcester.\nClimate.\nThe town is noted for its particularly high record lows. Despite an average July low of 11.7\u00a0\u00b0C, the temperature has never fallen below 5\u00a0\u00b0C in that month. The coldest and warmest July nights were both recorded in 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttp://"}
{"id": "39104", "revid": "23157987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39104", "title": "Chinese food therapy", "text": "Chinese dietary or food therapy\nChinese food therapy (, also called nutrition therapy and dietary therapy) is a mode of dieting rooted in Chinese beliefs concerning the effects of food on the human organism, and centered on concepts such as seasonal eating and in moderation. Its basic precepts are a mix of Taoist Wuxing and eight principle theory that are concepts drawn from the modern representation of traditional Chinese medicine. Food that conform to the mode are called \"yaoshan\" ().\nFood therapy has long been a common approach to health among Chinese people both in China and overseas, and was popularized for western readers in the 1990s with the publication of books like \"The Tao of Healthy Eating\" () and \"The Wisdom of the Chinese Kitchen\" ().\nOrigins.\nA number of ancient Chinese cookbooks and treatises on food (now lost) display an early Chinese interest in food, but no known focus on its medical value. The literature on \"nourishing life\" () integrated advice on food within broader advice on how to attain immortality. Such books, however, are only precursors of \"dietary therapy\", because they did not systematically describe the effect of individual food items. In the volume on \"Fermentations and Food Science\" of Joseph Needham's \"Science and Civilization in China\", H. T. Huang considers the \"Recipes for Fifty-Two Ailments\" (c. 200 BCE) and the \"Yellow Emperor's Inner Canon\" as precursors of the \"dietary therapy\" tradition, the former because it recommends food products as remedies for various illnesses, the latter because it discusses the impact of food on health. The \"materia medica\" literature, exemplified by the \"Shennong Bencao Jing\" (1st century CE), also discussed food products, but without specializing on them.\nThe earliest extant Chinese dietary text is a chapter of Sun Simiao's \"Prescriptions Worth a Thousand Gold\" (), which was completed in the 650s during the Tang dynasty. Sun's work contains the earliest known use of the term \"food (or dietary) therapy\" (\"shiliao\"). Sun stated that he wanted to present current knowledge about food so that people would first turn to food rather than drugs when suffering from an ailment. His chapter contains 154 entries divided into four sections \u2013 on fruits, vegetables, cereals, and meat \u2013 in which Sun explains the properties of individual foodstuffs with concepts borrowed from the \"Yellow Emperor's Inner Canon\": \"qi\", the viscera, and vital essence (), as well as correspondences between the Five Phases, the \"five flavors\" (sour, bitter, sweet, pungent, and salty), and the five grains. He also set a large number of \"dietary interdictions\" (), some based on calendrical notions (no water chestnuts in the 7th month), others on purported interactions between foods (no clear wine with horse meat) or between different flavors.\nSun Simiao's disciple Meng Shen (; 621\u2013713) compiled the first work entirely devoted to the therapeutic value of food: the \"Materia Dietetica\" (). This work has not survived, but it was quoted in later texts \u2013 like the 10th-century Japanese text Ishinp\u014d \u2013 and a fragment of it has been found among the Dunhuang manuscripts. Surviving excerpts show that Meng gave less importance to dietary prohibitions than Sun, and that he provided information on how to prepare foodstuffs rather than just describe their properties. The works of Sun Simiao and Meng Shen established the genre of \"materia dietetica\" and shaped its development in the following centuries.\nLater history.\nAn abundant literature developed in China around the medicinal uses of food. A mid-ninth-century work, now lost, called \"Candid Views of a Nutritionist-Physician\" () discussed how food could treat various disorders, while several works from the Song dynasty (960\u20131279) explained how to feed the elderly to extend their life.\nIn the early 14th century, Hu Sihui, who served as Grand Dietician () at the court of the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1260\u20131368), compiled a treatise called \"Yinshan zhengyao\", or \"Proper and Essential Things for the Emperor's Food and Drink\" (), which is still recognized in China as a classic of both \"materia medica\" and \"materia dietetica\". Influenced by the culinary and medical traditions of the Turko-Islamic world and integrating Mongol food stuffs like mutton into its recipes, Hu's treatise interpreted the effects of food according to the scheme of correspondences between the five phases that had recently been systematized by northern Chinese medical writers of the Jin dynasty (1115\u20131234) and Yuan eras. Before that period, food materials had not yet been comprehensively assigned to the five flavors systematically correlated with specific internal organs and therapeutic effects.\nChinese understandings of the therapeutic effects of food were influential in East Asia. Cited in Japanese works as early as the 10th century, Chinese dietary works shaped Korean literature on food well into the Joseon period (1392\u20131897). In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, the imperial court of the Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912) ordered several works on Chinese food therapy translated into Manchu.\nThe concept entered Japan in 1972 as \"ishokud\u014dgen\". By the late 1990s, the (\"yakuzen\") diet evolved into a simplified version where herbs are added to relatively balanced meals.\nMain tenets.\nAlthough the precepts of Chinese food therapy are neither systematic nor identical in all times and places, some basic concepts can be isolated. One central tenet is that \"medicine and food share a common origin\", and that food materials can therefore be used to prevent or treat medical disorders. Like medicinal drugs, food items are classified as \"heating\" () or \"cooling\" (). In popular understanding, \"heating\" food is typically \"high-calorie, subjected to high heat in cooking, spicy or bitter, or 'hot' in color (red, orange)\", and includes red meat, innards, baked and deep-fried goods, and alcohol. They are to be avoided in the summer and can be used to treat \"cold\" illnesses like excessive pallor, watery feces, fatigue, chills, and low body temperature caused by a number of possible causes, including anemia. Green vegetables are the most typical \"cooling\" or \"cold\" food, which is \"low-calorie, watery, soothing or sour in taste, or 'cool' in color (whitish, green)\". They are recommended for \"hot\" conditions: rashes, dryness or redness of skin, heartburns, and other \"symptoms similar to those of a burn\", but also sore throat, swollen gums, and constipation.\nIn more systematic understandings, each medicine or food item has one of five flavors: sour, sweet, bitter, pungent (or \"acrid\"), and salty. Besides describing the taste of food, each of these \"flavors\" purportedly has specific effects on particular viscera. The sour flavor, for instance, has \"constriction and emollient effects\" and \"can emolliate the liver and control diarrhea and perspiration\", whereas \"bitter\" food can \"purge the heart 'fire', reduce excessive fluids, induce diarrhea, and reinforce the heart 'Yin'\".\nOne common saying among proponents of Chinese food therapy is \"medicine and food, same origin\" (; Japanese: ), where certain food items are given medicinal properties, and where certain herbal medicines are deemed acceptable in food.\nScientific assessments.\nHistorically, there have been few studies in English literature about the practice of Chinese food therapy.\nRegulations.\nThe Chinese government has approved a number of herbs as food ingredients using the \"Traditionally Both Food and Chinese Medicinal Materials\" () lists. These are colloquially known as the \"Y\u00e0osh\u00ed T\u00f3ngyu\u00e1n Catalog\" () in Chinese. In addition, farm-grown ginseng and \"Cordyceps militaris\", two herbs known from TCM, are considered novel food ingredients.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39105", "revid": "46791144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39105", "title": "Boehm system", "text": "System of keywork for the flute\nThe Boehm system is a system of keywork for the flute, created by inventor and flautist Theobald Boehm between 1831 and 1847.\nHistory.\nImmediately prior to the development of the Boehm system, flutes were most commonly made of wood, with an inverse conical bore, eight keys, and tone holes (the openings where the fingers are placed to produce specific notes) that were small in size, and thus easily covered by the fingertips. Boehm's work was inspired by an 1831 concert in London, given by soloist Charles Nicholson, who, with his father in the 1820s, had introduced a flute constructed with larger tone holes than were used in previous designs. This large-holed instrument could produce greater volume of sound than other flutes, and Boehm set out to produce his own large-holed design.\nIn addition to large holes, Boehm provided his flute with \"full venting\", meaning that all keys were normally open (previously, several keys were normally closed, and opened only when the key was operated). Boehm also wanted to locate tone holes at acoustically optimal points on the body of the instrument, rather than locations conveniently covered by the player's fingers. To achieve these goals, Boehm adapted a system of axle-mounted keys with a series of \"open rings\" (called \"brille\", German for \"eyeglasses\", as they resembled the type of eyeglass frames common during the 19th century) that were fitted around other tone holes, such that the closure of one tone hole by a finger would also close a key placed over a second hole.\nIn 1832 Boehm introduced a new conical-bore flute, which achieved a fair degree of success. Boehm, however, continued to look for ways to improve the instrument. Finding that an increased volume of air produced a stronger and clearer tone, he replaced the conical bore with a cylindrical bore, finding that a parabolic contraction of the bore near the embouchure hole improved the instrument's low register. He also found that optimal tone was produced when the tone holes were too large to be covered by the fingertips, and he developed a system of finger plates to cover the holes. These new flutes were at first made of silver, although Boehm later produced wooden versions. \nThe cylindrical Boehm flute was introduced in 1847, with the instrument gradually being adopted almost universally by professional and amateur players in Europe and around the world during the second half of the 19th century. The instrument was adopted for the performance of orchestral and chamber music, opera and theater, wind ensembles (e.g., military and civic bands), and most other music which might be loosely described as relating to \"Western classical music\" (including, for example, jazz). Many further refinements have been made, and countless design variations are common among flutes today (the \"offset G\" key, addition of the low B foot, etc.) The concepts of the Boehm system have been applied across the range of flutes available, including piccolos, alto flutes, bass flutes, and so on, as well as other wind instruments. The material of the instrument may vary (many piccolos are made of wood, some very large flutes are wooden or even made of PVC).\nThe flute is perhaps the oldest musical instrument, other than the human voice itself. There are very many flutes, both traversely blown and end-blown \"fipple\" flutes, currently produced which are not built on the Boehm model.\nThe fingering system for the saxophone closely resembles the Boehm system. A key system inspired by Boehm's for the clarinet family is also known as the \"Boehm system\", although it was developed by Hyacinthe Klos\u00e9 and not Boehm himself. The Boehm system was also adapted for a small number of flageolets. Boehm did work on a system for the bassoon, and Boehm-inspired oboes have been made, but non-Boehm systems remain predominant for these instruments. The Albert system is another key system for the clarinet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39106", "revid": "218586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39106", "title": "Tandy 1000", "text": "IBM PC compatible home computer system\nThe Tandy 1000 is a family of IBM PC compatible home computers produced by the Tandy Corporation, and sold primarily through its Radio Shack and Radio Shack Computer Center stores. Introduced in November 1984, the original Tandy 1000 was conceived as a cost-effective alternative to IBM's PCjr, intended to provide an affordable yet capable platform for personal and educational computing. While maintaining compatibility with most IBM PC software, the system incorporated enhanced multimedia features\u2014such as improved graphics, three-voice sound, and built-in joystick ports.\nThe Tandy 1000 series remained in production until its discontinuation in 1993, coinciding with Tandy's gradual exit from the PC market. Over the course of nearly a decade, the line expanded to include more than a dozen models in various form factors, reflecting ongoing advancements in PC hardware and a gradual transition toward fully standardized IBM-compatible architectures. The series played a prominent role in popularizing multimedia-capable PCs in American households during the mid-to-late 1980s.\nOverview.\nIn December 1983, an executive with Tandy Corporation, maker of TRS-80 computers, said about the new IBM PCjr: \"I'm sure a lot of people will be coming out with PCjr look-alikes. The market is big.\" While preparing the Tandy 2000\u2014the company's first MS-DOS computer\u2014for release in November 1983, Tandy began designing the Tandy 1000, code named \"August\". Unlike the 2000 it would be PC compatible with the IBM PC, and support the PCjr graphics standard.\nReleased in November 1984, the $1,200 Tandy 1000 offers the same functionality as the PCjr, but with an improved keyboard and better expandability and compatibility. \"How could IBM have made that mistake with the PCjr?\" an amazed Tandy executive said regarding the IBM chiclet keyboard, and another stated that the 1000 \"is what the PCjr should have been\".\nThe Tandy 2000\u2014not completely PC compatible\u2014quickly failed. Since IBM discontinued the PCjr soon after the release of the 1000, Tandy quickly removed mentions of the PCjr in advertising while emphasizing its product's PC compatibility. The company said that it designed the 1000 for compatibility with both PC and PCjr, but emphasized the former when necessary, describing it as \"the first fully IBM PC-compatible computer available for less than $1000\". The 1000 has joystick ports like the PCjr, and its 16-color graphics and 3-voice sound, but not the PCjr ROM cartridge ports.\nAlthough the press saw the 1000 as former personal-computer leader Tandy admitting that it could no longer focus on proprietary products in a market the IBM PC dominated, the 1000 sold more units in the first month than any other Tandy product and by early 1985 was its best-selling computer. Although the company initially marketed the 1000 as a business computer like the IBM PC, \"InfoWorld\" stated in 1985 that Tandy \"produced a real home computer\". The 1000 helped the company obtain a 9.5% share of the US home-computer market in 1986, a year in which Tandy stated that half of its compatibles were purchased for the home. In 1988 CEO John Roach disagreed with Apple counterpart John Sculley's rejection of the home market: \"Let him deny it. He's the only other person that's well-represented in the home market, and if he wants to abandon it, it's all right with me\". Tandy also regained a significant share of the Apple-dominated educational market, which the two companies had once equally shared.\nThe 1000 and its many successors were successful unlike the PCjr. This was partly because it was sold in ubiquitous Radio Shack stores and partly because the computer was less costly, easier to expand, and almost entirely compatible with the IBM PC. The PCjr's enhanced graphics and sound standards became known as \"Tandy-compatible\". With its graphics, sound, and built-in joystick ports, the 1000 was the best computer for PC games until VGA graphics became popular in the 1990s. Software companies of the era advertised their support for the Tandy platform; 28 of 66 games that \"Computer Gaming World\" tested in 1989 supported Tandy graphics.\nDesign and architecture.\nTandy 1000 computers were some of the first IBM PC clones to incorporate a complete set of basic peripherals on the motherboard using proprietary ASICs, the forerunner of the chipset. Although the original Tandy 1000 comes in an IBM PC-like desktop case, some models, notably the 1000 EX and 1000 HX, use home-computer-style cases with the keyboard, motherboard and disk drives in one enclosure. This high level of integration made these machines a cost-effective alternative to larger and more complex IBM PC/XT and PC/AT-type systems, which require multiple add-in cards, often purchased separately, to implement a comparable feature-set to the Tandy 1000.\nBeing derived from IBM's PCjr architecture, the Tandy 1000 offers several important features that most IBM PC-compatibles of the time lacks, such as the PCjr's sound generator and extended CGA-compatible graphics controller. It also offers multiple built-in I/O ports, including a game port which was frequently a separate add-on card on non-Tandy machines.\nThe original line is equipped with the Intel 8088 CPU, which was later extended to faster clock speeds and also the 8086, 80286 and toward the end of the line with the RSX, 80386SX processors. Successors to the 1000 appended two or three letters to the name, after a space (e.g. Tandy 1000 EX and Tandy 1000 HX). In a few instances, after these letters a slash was appended, followed by either a number or additional letters (e.g. Tandy 1000 TL/2, Tandy 1000 RL/HD).\nRetirement.\nBy 1993, changes in the market made it increasingly difficult for Tandy Corporation to make a profit on its computer line. Tandy Corporation sold its computer manufacturing business to AST Computers, and all Tandy computer lines were terminated. Radio Shack stores then began selling computers made by other manufacturers, such as IBM and Compaq.\nReception.\nIn an article subtitled \"Junior meets his match\", John J. Anderson of \"Creative Computing\" called the original Tandy 1000 \"the machine IBM was too inept, incapable, or afraid to manufacture. It is sure to put a whopping dent not only into PCjr sales, but into sales of the PC 'senior' as well\". He favorably mentioned its low price, good PC-software compatibility, and bundled DeskMate (\"you might never need another software package for your computer\"). \"80 Micro\" approved of the 1000's PC compatibility and stated that the exterior design \"gives it a feeling of quality and confidence\". The magazine concluded that \"Tandy's machine closely emulates the most basic functions of an IBM PC, and it does so at an affordable price ... along with the security of Tandy's substantial support network\", but wondered if people would buy the 1000 if IBM lowered the price of the PC.\n\"InfoWorld\" highlighted the Tandy 1000's affordability, noting that it was \"fully one-third less than a comparably equipped IBM PC.\" The magazine suggested that the computer was primarily aimed at \"the elusive home computer market\" and speculated that \"in retrospect it might have been the PCjr's final straw.\" Describing the Tandy 1000 as \"almost as fully IBM PC compatible as a computer can get,\" \"InfoWorld\" gave a mixed review of the bundled DeskMate software and pointed out the system's limitation in not supporting full-length PC expansion cards. The review concluded that \"by making the 1000 inexpensive and adaptable\" and including DeskMate, \"Tandy produced a real home computer.\"\n\"BYTE\" called the 1000 \"a good, reasonably priced IBM PC clone that has most of the best features of the IBM PC and PCjr ... at current prices it is a very good alternative\". It approved of the 1000's use of the 2000's keyboard, and high level of software compatibility. The magazine stated that DeskMate was \"fairly good ... but a little extra programming work could have turned [it] into a much better program\", noting that\u2014for example\u2014the word processor did not have a Move command. \"BYTE\" also mentioned the computer's short slots. \"PC Magazine\" also noted the slots and criticized the Tandy 1000's fit and finish (\"not even close to the IBM standard\"), but acknowledged the computer's low price and bundled hardware features.\nTechnical details.\nAll Tandy 1000 computers feature built-in video hardware, enhanced sound hardware (based on one of several variants of the Texas Instruments SN76496 sound generator) and several peripheral interfaces, including game ports compatible with those on the TRS-80 Color Computer, an IBM-standard floppy-disk controller supporting two drives, and a parallel printer port, all integrated into the motherboard in addition to the hardware standard on the IBM PC/XT and, in later Tandy 1000 models, PC/AT motherboards.\nFor the original Tandy 1000, the designers omitted a direct memory access (DMA) controller because the PCjr does not have one, and they believed that those who needed it would add it with additional memory for the computer; they omitted the RS-232 port because all Tandy printers use the parallel port and, they believed, most customers would use internal modems. The earlier models of the Tandy 1000 have a composite video output, and can be used with a color or monochrome composite monitor, or a TV with an RF modulator. The original 1000 and SX has a light-pen port. Unlike most PC clones, several Tandy 1000 computers have MS-DOS built into ROM and can boot in a few seconds. Tandy bundled DeskMate, a graphical suite of consumer-oriented applications, with various Tandy 1000 models. \nEarly Tandy 1000 models use Phoenix BIOS. Common models of the machine include the Tandy 1000, 1000 EX, 1000 HX, 1000 SX, 1000 TX, 1000 SL, 1000 RL, and 1000 TL. With the exception of the RLX and RSX, the Tandy 1000 machines are XT-class machines, which cannot support extended memory despite some models using 80286 processors. The RLX is an oddity, as it is an XT-class machine that supports 384\u00a0KB of extended memory, and the RSX is a fully AT-class machine which can support up to 9\u00a0MB of extended memory.\nExpansion slots.\nWith the exception of the 1000 EX and HX, Tandy used industry standard 8-bit XT ISA slots in their desktop models, including the SX, TX, SL, and TL series, but the actual length is limited to 10.5 inches or shorter, rather than the industry standard XT length of 13 inches. While many 8-bit cards meet this length requirement, some cards such as hard cards, EMS memory cards, and multifunction cards that require the standard 13\" length do not fit in the 1000s case. The EX and HX utilize a PLUS-style connector, which is electronically identical to an 8-bit XT ISA slot, but has a 62-pin pin header instead of a card edge, rendering it incompatible with ISA cards without an adapter. The PLUS connector was designed for compactness in these models with built-in keyboards. The 1000 RSX features two 16-bit AT ISA slots.\nHard disk drives.\nAs hard disk drives at the time of the Tandy 1000's introduction were very expensive, Tandy 1000 systems are not usually equipped with hard drives. However, it is possible to add a hard drive to most Tandy 1000 computers. Most of the desktop-type Tandy 1000 units can accept regular 8-bit ISA bus MFM, RLL and SCSI controllers like typical XT-class machines; however, care has to be taken when configuring the cards so that they do not cause conflicts with the on-board Tandy-designed peripherals.\nFor most Tandy 1000 models (other than the compact EX and HX) that do not come equipped with a hard drive, Tandy offered hard disk options in the form of hardcards that are installed in one of the computer's expansion slots and consist of a controller and drive (typically a 3.5-inch MFM or RLL unit with a Western Digital controller) mounted together on a metal bracket. Their own 20 MB hard card was offered for $799, though compatible third-party units were available. Although this arrangement provides a neat physical coupling between the controller and the disk, single-sector internal transfers and dependence on the speed of the host machine to transfer data to memory means that a trial-and-error approach was still needed to set the disk interleave correctly to ensure optimum transfer rates. Furthermore, as the Tandy 1000's slots are only 10.5\" long and are 8-bit only, some units do not fit and/or operate correctly unless they are certified to be Tandy-compatible.\nStarting with the Tandy 1000 TL/2, XT IDE controllers are integrated onto the motherboard. However, these are incompatible with common AT IDE hard drives. The TL/2, TL/3, RL and RLX all use the XT IDE interface, where the later (and significantly upgraded) RSX is the only Tandy 1000 model computer to use a standard AT IDE interface. One option for modern users of these systems is to install and use XT ISA CompactFlash adapter; this is also the most practical way to install a hard drive into a Tandy 1000 EX or HX, using an adapter cable that adapts the male PLUS-style connector to an 8-bit ISA card-edge slot.\nI/O and ports.\nTandy 1000, SX, and TX use a proprietary 8-pin round DIN connector for the keyboard port that is compatible with the older TRS computers but not compatible with the IBM PC/AT or PS/2 standard. Some scan codes differ between the Tandy 1000 and IBM PC/XT and AT, resulting in software compatibility issues. The SL/TL and later use a more directly PC/XT-compatible keyboard protocol, and the 1000 RSX uses a PC/AT and PS/2-compatible protocol.\nTandy 1000 uses a proprietary 6-pin female round connector for the joystick port that on the SX/TX is adjacent to the keyboard port in the front of the computer. It is compatible with Color Computer joysticks, but not compatible with the IBM standard 15-pin male game port. Some DOS games do not work with these joystick ports, but those that support Tandy 1000 graphics and sound work.\nEarly Tandy 1000 models use the TRS-80 card-edge parallel printer port rather than industry standard DB-25 printer port, requiring a compatible printer cable to connect to a standard printer parallel port. This was later changed to a standard DB-25 connector on the 1000 RL.\nTandy 1000TX and beyond use a proprietary floppy drive cable port, that also powers the floppy drive. It requires a Tandy 1000-compatible floppy drive, though it may be possible to modify a floppy drive cable to make a standard floppy drive work.\nOperating systems and environments.\nTandy shipped PCs with their own customized version of MS-DOS, which are compatible with Tandy graphics and keyboard. The most current version of MS-DOS for Tandy 1000 is DOS 3.22. Tandy 1000s came shipped with one of several varieties of DeskMate, the company's own GUI productivity software suite.\nThere may be compatibility issues with later versions of DOS such as DOS 5 and DOS 6. Until the 1000 RLX, Tandy 1000s are typically limited to 640\u00a0KB main memory, and non-Tandy versions of DOS often reduce the memory available for applications and games. In addition, the hardware detection routine for the installer of Microsoft MS-DOS 6 can corrupt the serial EEPROM of Tandy 1000 HX machines.\nTandy 1000s can work with Windows 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 but not 3.1, with the exception of the RLX which can run Windows 3.1 in Standard mode, and the RSX which fully supports Windows 3.1 in 386 Enhanced mode.\nPeripherals.\nMonitors.\nTandy offered two color monitors specific for its Tandy 1000 computers: the CM-5, with a 0.64 millimeter dot pitch, and the Tandy CM-11 with a dot pitch of 0.42\u00a0mm. Both are 13-inch displays and have a power cable and a nine-pin RGB cable to attach to the Tandy CGA port. The more expensive CM-11 also supports a special proprietary Tandy-enhanced 225 scan line text display mode.\nTandy also offered monochrome monitors that support MDA and Hercules standard that also work with Tandy 1000. As it uses a CGA-compatible interface, non-Tandy monitors that support CGA should work.\nKeyboard.\nThe original Tandy 1000, SX, EX, TX, HX use a proprietary keyboard and keyboard layout that is not compatible with the PC/XT/AT standard. The layout of the keyboard prefigured the IBM Model M keyboard, with function keys arranged in a row at the top, instead of on the left as in the PC and PC XT/AT. Later models of the Tandy 1000 series, such as the 1000 SL, TL, and RL series use a keyboard more similar and compatible with the IBM PS/2 series keyboard connector and layout.\nMouse options.\nAs the Tandy 1000 uses the same game ports as the Tandy Color Computer series, the 26-3025 Color Mouse and 26-3125 Deluxe Mouse are compatible with the Tandy 1000, though not all DOS software and drivers recognize them. The Tandy Digi-Mouse requires a separate controller that was available in either ISA or PLUS format. Systems with RS-232C serial ports can use standard serial mice, and later systems, such as the 1000 RL, feature a PS/2 mouse connector.\nJoystick options.\nRadio Shack offered a two-button joystick with its proprietary 6-pin DIN joystick connector that is compatible with the older TRS-80 Color Computer but not standard 15-pin IBM PC game ports often found on sound cards and i/o multifunction ISA cards. It works with many games written to take advantage of Tandy graphics and sound.\nModem options.\nRadio Shack offered Tandy 1000 PLUS 300-Baud PC Modem that is compatible with the 1000EX/HX that used PLUS slots. Radio Shack also offered 2400-baud internal modem. Third party modems with speeds of 14k baud should work provided they are eight-bit ISA, and fit.\nPrinters.\nRadio Shack sold the Tandy DMP-130A dot matrix printers to go along with their Tandy 1000 line, along with compatible card-edged printer cable. This printer was sold at home budget prices. Radio Shack often offered a package bundle with a Tandy 1000 computer, CM-5 budget monitor and DMP-130A printer. Using specially designed aftermarket cables, it is possible to connect non-Tandy printers to the system.\nApple IIe compatibility.\nTandy wanted to compete in the education, school and home markets dominated by the Apple IIe. In 1987, the company partnered with Diamond and through Radio Shack sold the Diamond Trackstar 128 series Apple IIe compatibility board for $399, and offered free installation in their Tandy 1000 series. This peripheral is similar to the Apple IIe Card sold later for certain Macintosh models; it is a fully functional Apple IIe clone with 128KB RAM and 6502 CPU and double high-resolution graphics, which allows Tandy 1000 computers to run software written for the Apple IIe and IIc platform. It was also marketed to home users and businesses interested in having both MS-DOS and Apple II compatibility.\nThe board has a pass-through RGB cable and floppy drive cable, and requires an open 10-inch 8-bit ISA slot, and uses a boot disk to boot into Apple mode. The boot disk has both DOS and Apple software and is copy-protected. Compatibility is fairly good and allows Tandy 1000 owners to run most Apple II software on their Tandy 1000 machine for less than the cost of owning separate IBM PC and Apple II systems.\nMany Tandy 1000s sold to schools came with the Diamond Trackstar 128 installed, and home owners also purchased this for compatibility with both DOS and Apple II software.\nSelected models.\nTandy 1000.\nThe original Tandy 1000 is a large computer almost the size of the IBM PC, though with a plastic case over an aluminium lower chassis to reduce weight. \nIt came standard with one internal 5.25\" double-density floppy disk drive, with an additional exposed internal bay usable for the installation of a second 5.25\" disk drive (available as a kit from Radio Shack). The floppy drives use jumpers to select the drive number instead of the IBM cable twist. The standard memory is 128 KB, with the computer accepting up to 640 KB of total memory with the addition of expansion cards.\nMS-DOS 2.11, DeskMate 1.0, and a keyboard with the same layout as the Tandy 2000's are included with the computer. Like the PCjr, the Tandy 1000 motherboard does not supply DMA, but unlike that system, it can have DMA added with a memory expansion board. While the Tandy 1000 has three XT-compatible expansion slots, early Tandy memory upgrade boards take up two of the slots to get to 640 KB. Because the slots are &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;11+1\u20442 inches in length instead of the PC's 13 inches, full-length cards do not fit, but reviewers noted that the many built-in hardware features reduce the need for cards.\nA later revision of the original Tandy 1000 model is the Tandy 1000A. This revision fixed bugs, scans expansion cards for bootable ROMs, and adds a socket for an Intel 8087 math coprocessor.\nTandy 1000 HD.\nThe original Tandy 1000 (and many other models), like most home computers sold at the time, does not have a hard disk drive. The Tandy 1000 HD is essentially a Tandy 1000A with a hard disk option factory installed. The factory hard disk has a capacity on the order of 10 or 20 MB.\nTandy 1000 SX and TX.\nThe Tandy 1000 SX and TX are upgraded versions of the original Tandy 1000, utilizing a similar chassis. Two major upgrades over the original Tandy 1000 are the inclusion of a DMA controller, which improved the speed of diskette operations and IBM PC-compatibility of these systems, and the addition of two additional ISA expansion slots, to offer a total of five 8-bit ISA slots.\n1000 SX.\nThe Tandy 1000 SX uses a 7.16\u00a0MHz 8088-2 processor, has 384\u00a0KB of memory (upgradeable to 640\u00a0KB on the motherboard), comes with either one or two 5.25\" internal floppy disk drives, and has the light pen port (not a serial port) like the original Tandy 1000. An adjustable potentiometer inside the system controls the volume of the internal speaker. The Tandy AX is an SX rebadged for sale in Walmart stores. The 1000 SX comes with MS-DOS 3.2 and DeskMate II on 5.25\" 360\u00a0KB diskettes.\nThe SX is the first Tandy 1000 in which the built-in video circuitry can be disabled via the installation of an upgraded graphics card, typically an EGA or VGA card, in an expansion slot.\n1000 TX.\nThe Tandy 1000 TX is similar to the 1000 SX with its detached keyboard, unique parallel port edge connector, and XT-style architecture in a slightly modified case. The major difference is the 80286 CPU clocked at 8\u00a0MHz. It features a 16-bit-wide memory bus, although the on-board peripherals and ISA slots are 8 bits wide.\nThe TX has a 3.5\" internal floppy disk drive mounted in a 5.25\" bay with room for an optional second internal 3.5\" or 5.25\" floppy disk drive. The rear panel has the same ports as the 1000 SX, except that an RS-232C serial port replaces the light-pen port. The memory size is 640 KB, with sockets for an additional 128 KB devoted to the onboard video logic. This extra 128\u00a0KB can only be used for and by the on-board video controller, so it is impractical to expand the on-board memory beyond 640\u00a0KB if a VGA graphics card is installed. The computer comes bundled with Personal DeskMate 2.\nThe TX is the last 1000-series computer to use DIP switches to store the system configuration parameters. All later 1000s rely on serial EEPROM chips to store configuration settings.\nTandy 1000 EX and HX.\nThe Tandy 1000 EX and HX were designed as entry-level IBM-compatible personal computers, and marketed as starter systems for people new to computing. They were offered in a compact, all-in-one chassis that features a 7.16\u00a0MHz 8088 (capable of clocking down to 4.77\u00a0MHz), 256\u00a0KB of memory (expandable to 640\u00a0KB with a PLUS memory expansion board), PCjr- and CGA-compatible Tandy Video graphics controller, a keyboard and, depending on the model, either a single 5.25\" 360\u00a0KB floppy drive, or one to two 3.5\" 720\u00a0KB floppy drives.\nAn external floppy drive can be connected to a port on the back. The machine itself supplies power to the external drive, so only Tandy's floppy drive unit is usable with the EX and HX. The external drive is the standard 360\u00a0KB 5.25\" format; in 1988 a 720\u00a0KB 3.5\" model was offered.\nThe EX and HX are upgradable via Tandy PLUS cards, and these systems have bays for three cards. A PLUS card connector is electrically identical to an ISA slot connector, but uses a Berg-style 62-pin connector instead of a 62-contact ISA card-edge connector. Other PLUS cards can be installed to add serial ports, a 1200-baud modem, a clock/calendar and bus mouse board, or a proprietary Tandy network interface. Radio Shack later sold an adapter card allowing installation of a PLUS card into a standard ISA slot, such as those in the larger Tandy 1000 models.\nLike the original Tandy 1000, the EX and HX do not have a built-in DMA controller, though one can be added using the PLUS memory expansion board.\n1000 EX.\nThe Tandy 1000 EX features a 5.25\" floppy drive built into the right-hand side of computer casing. The EX sold for US$1,000 from Radio Shack in December 1986. The EX and, later, the HX were among the most popular of the Tandy 1000 line because of their low price.\nA useful feature for the EX and later systems is the ability to boot off either drive, as the drives can be logically swapped when the system booted, so that the drive that was normally drive B: becomes drive A:, and vice versa, and the drives remain swapped until the system is powered off or reset. (The SX and TX have this capability as well.)\nThe 1000 EX comes with MS-DOS 2.11 and Personal Deskmate on 5.25\" 360\u00a0KB diskettes. The MS-DOS is a version specialized for and only bootable on the Tandy 1000; it includes a version of BASICA (Microsoft's Advanced GW-BASIC) with support for the enhanced CGA graphics modes (a.k.a. Tandy Graphics or TGA) and three-voice sound hardware of the Tandy 1000.\n1000 HX.\nThe Tandy 1000 HX is an updated version of the EX, released in 1987. It utilizes the same architecture and PLUS cards as the EX, but with two 3.5\" bays on the front panel, occupied by one or two 720 KB 3.5\" floppy drives, as opposed to a single side-mounted 5.25\" bay and floppy drive. It also has Tandy MS-DOS 2.11R in ROM, which can be accessed by starting the computer with no bootable disk. Another improvement over the EX is the addition of a serial EEPROM to store configuration information, enabling similar functionality to later CMOS NVRAMs. By comparison, earlier Tandy 1000 models, like IBM PC and PC/XT systems, use DIP switches and jumpers for startup configuration settings.\nBy putting the basic elements of DOS in ROM and eliminating the memory test on startup, the HX boots quickly compared to other contemporary MS-DOS machines, despite having no immediate provisions for a hard disk drive.\nIn addition to Tandy MS-DOS 2.11R, the HX shipped with Personal Deskmate 2. Most versions of MS-DOS works with the 1000 HX, including DOS 3.x and some later versions; DOS 4.0 is incompatible, and the installer for MS-DOS 6 can corrupt the contents of the serial EEPROM.\nTandy 1000 SL and TL series.\nThe Tandy SL and TL series of computers are updates of the SX and TX, respectively. In addition to offering redesigned cases, the machines offer a more integrated motherboard with improved graphics and sound capabilities while dropping composite video output. The graphics controller supports 640 \u00d7 200 \u00d7 16 resolution as well as a Hercules Graphics Card-compatible, 720 \u00d7 350 mode for monochrome monitors. Sound capabilities now include an 8-bit monaural DAC/ADC similar in function to parallel port sound devices (such as the Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source) but extended to support DMA transfers, microphone input capability, and sampling rates up to 48\u00a0kHz. The SL/TL allow the on-board floppy controller, parallel port and serial ports to be disabled, which the earlier models do not.\nThe SL and TL were shipped with MS-DOS 3.3 and DeskMate 3 in ROM, and feature a serial EEPROM memory chip to store BIOS settings. The machines can also run generic MS-DOS 3.x, 5.x, and 6.x and Windows 2.x and 3.0 operating systems, although Windows is limited to real-mode operations. In common with many PC clones of the era, MS-DOS 4 is problematic and generally avoided.\n1000 SL and SL/2.\nThe Tandy 1000 SL and SL/2 feature an Intel 8086 processor running at 8\u00a0MHz. This is socketed, and thus upgradeable with an NEC V30. The SL comes with 384 KB of RAM preinstalled, whereas the SL/2 offers 512 KB. Both machines can be expanded to 640 KB, although the graphics controller reserves a portion of this memory, yielding only 608 KB to the operating system, even on systems using add-in ISA graphic cards. The SL line has the mic/earphone ports, volume knob, and reset button on a small satellite board. A jumper on the board allows the user to change the microphone input to a line-level output. The SL series offers five 8-bit XT-compatible ISA slots, and does not come with pre-installed real-time clock chips, making them optional upgrades in the form of the plug-in Dallas DS1216E SmartWatch.\nThe SL is the only machine in the line that offers an upper 5.25\" bay, and therefore the only model to offer two 5.25\" bays, where the other models, including the SL/2 and the entire TL range, feature two upper 3.5\" bays and one lower 5.25\" bay. As a result, fitting a hard drive to an SL that already has the upper and lower 5.25\" bays populated may require either the removal of one of the devices in those bays, or the installation of a hard disk card-style bracket which seats in one of the ISA slots.\n1000 TL, TL/2 and TL/3.\nThe Tandy 1000 TL and TL/2 uses 8\u00a0MHz Intel 80286 processors, whereas the TL/3 uses a 10\u00a0MHz 80286. The TLs has 640\u00a0KB of memory preinstalled, with an option for an extra 128\u00a0KB for video frame buffering just as in the 1000 TX. Unlike the SL series machines, the TL series comes with the SmartWatch real-time clock logic built-in, which is powered by a removable 3-volt CR2032 button-cell battery on the motherboard.\nThe TL offers five 8-bit XT-compatible ISA slots, while the TL/2 and TL/3 offer four slots and an on-board 8-bit, XT IDE-compatible hard disk interface, which is not compatible with standard AT IDE hard drives. The TL series offers two upper 3.5\" bays and one lower 5.25\" bay, and the TL/3 has a high-density floppy drive controller for 1.44 MB drives, though it comes with a double-density 3.5\" 720 KB drive.\nAs the processors on the TL-series are socketed, it is possible to install 386SX or Cyrix 486SLC-based processor upgrades, though the benefit of installing more advanced processors is limited beyond merely providing a speed increase due to the computers' XT-based architecture, and their resulting inability to access extended memory above 1 MB.\nTandy 1000 RL-series and RSX.\nThe Tandy 1000 RL/RLX/RSX are slim-line desktop home computers. They have a much more compact case, with at least 512\u00a0KB of memory pre-installed, smaller PS/2-style keyboard and mouse ports, and at least one ISA expansion slot. The RL-series and RSX include provisions for an internal hard disk drive, depending on the model: the RL-series features a built-in XT-IDE hard drive interface, while the RSX features an AT-compatible IDE interface. The keyboard connectors of the RL-series, while similar to and mechanically compatible with PS/2-style connectors, are not fully compatible with typical PS/2 keyboards, as the keyboard uses the XT keyboard protocol. The RSX, however, incorporates the AT keyboard protocol, making it the first 1000-series system to offer more complete compatibility with typical PS/2 keyboards, and AT keyboards using an adapter.\n1000 RL and RL/HD.\nThe RL and RL/HD features a surface-mounted 9.54 MHz 8086 processor, 512\u00a0KB of RAM (expandable to 768\u00a0KB to provide 128\u00a0KB for video and 640\u00a0KB conventional memory), a DB-25 unidirectional parallel port instead of the edge-connector ports, and the SL's enhanced graphics and sound. A single half-size 8-bit expansion slot is available. The RL/HD has a battery-backed real-time clock chip to store date and time information. The RL lacks this and requires a plug-in Smartwatch chip. These models also have MS-DOS and a portion of DeskMate in ROM, and can therefore boot much faster than many other computers on the market. The RL/HD comes with a 20MB drive preinstalled.\n1000 RLX.\nThe RLX is the 'mid-range' offering of the RL line. It has a 10\u00a0MHz 286 (surface-mounted) and 512 KB of RAM, and unlike other 286-based Tandy 1000 models, it supports 384\u00a0KB of extended memory when RAM is expanded to the maximum 1 MB. However, it is not a full AT-class machine, as it still has an 8-bit ISA bus (as with the RL, one half-size expansion slot) and only 8 IRQs and 4 DMA channels. While the three-voice sound chip and DAC are still present, Tandy video was dropped in favor of an AcuMos VGA controller offering 256 KB of video memory and standard VGA graphics resolutions. The parallel port is bidirectional, a first for the Tandy 1000 series. The RLX has one 1.44 MB 3.5\" floppy drive; an empty drive bay can host a second such drive. The hard disk RLX/HD comes with a 20\u00a0MB hard disk and 1 MB RAM preinstalled. The hard disk occupies the empty drive bay, so this version supports only a single floppy drive.\n1000 RSX.\nA more upscale offering, the RSX offers a 25\u00a0MHz 80386SX processor, 1 MB RAM, two 16-bit ISA slots, AcuMos SVGA video, a bidirectional parallel port, and standard PS/2 keyboard and mouse ports. It is a full 386-class PC and can run Microsoft Windows 3.x. Two sockets for SIMM memory cards are available. Only 1 MB or 4 MB SIMMs of the 9-chip type are supported, and if two are installed they have to be of like capacity. With two 4 MB SIMMs installed, the 1000 RSX can be expanded to 9 MB RAM without using an ISA slot. The RSX/HD variant comes with a 52 MB hard drive using an AT-compatible IDE interface; replacement hard drives up to 504 MB can be substituted. Because of the slimline case, only one hard drive can be installed alongside the 1.44 MB 3.5\" floppy drive.\nThe motherboard has a socket for the 80387SX math coprocessor. The RSX still retains the Tandy 1000 3-voice sound hardware and DAC, though the I/O address for the 3-voice sound chip was moved, rendering many games compatible with it unable to play music unless modified. The DAC can be used to emulate the Covox Speech Thing via MS-DOS device drivers for limited sound support. This works with \"Chuck Yeager's Air Combat\".\nWindows 3.xx sound device drivers are available that work in Windows 95 (with full 9MB RAM) on Tandy 1000 RSX.\nThe ACUMOS VGA graphics can be software-updated with Cirrus Logic BIOS (via MS-DOS driver) to allow VESA/SVGA to function in Windows 95, as the Windows 3.xx Tandy VGA drivers are insufficient for Windows 95.\nSelected Tandy 1000-enhanced software.\nMajor software publishers and makers of game and educational software, such as Sierra and Broderbund, offered software titles that support Tandy's 16-color graphics, 3-voice sound, and other Tandy-specific hardware features. These enhancements offer a superior graphics and sound experience for Tandy 1000 owners over CGA graphics or PC speaker sound widely used on most DOS PCs. Software that supported Tandy's graphics are typically labelled on the package as being Tandy 1000/PCjr compatible.\nAlthough the Tandy 1000 can run most DOS software, the below programs are known to specifically support Tandy 1000 enhanced features. These programs require DOS to run. Tandy shipped its own version of DOS. The 1000 uses the main memory for graphics, so most programs require 640k or 768k to run. The enhanced graphics and sound often tax the processor, so an 80286 processor or faster is often recommended for best results.\nThere are also games and educational software that supports second-generation Tandy 1000 graphics and sound, which offers 640 by 200 by 16 colors, and 8-bit DACs, found only on the 1000 SL/TL series. Examples of such software include \"Mario Teaches Typing\", \"Star Trek\", \"\", and \"Sargon\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39108", "revid": "49876876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39108", "title": "McLean Hospital", "text": "McLean Hospital () (formerly known as Somerville Asylum and Charlestown Asylum) is a psychiatric hospital in Belmont, Massachusetts. McLean maintains the world's largest neuroscientific and psychiatric research program in a private hospital. It is the largest psychiatric facility of Harvard Medical School, an affiliate of Massachusetts General Hospital, and part of Mass General Brigham, which also includes Brigham and Women's Hospital.\nHistory.\nMcLean was founded in 1811 in a section of Charlestown, Massachusetts which is now part of Somerville, Massachusetts. Originally named Asylum for the Insane, it was the first institution organized by a group of prominent Bostonians who were concerned about homeless mentally ill persons \"abounding on the streets and by-ways in and about Boston\". The effort was organized by Rev. John Bartlett, chaplain of the Boston Almshouse. The hospital was built around a Charles Bulfinch mansion, which became the hospital's administrative building; most of the other hospital buildings were completed by 1818.\nThe institution was later given the name The McLean Asylum for the Insane in honor of one of its earliest benefactors, John McLean, who granted enough money to build several such hospitals. A portrait of McLean now hangs in the present Administration Building, along with other paintings that were once displayed in the original hospital. In 1892, the facility was renamed McLean Hospital in recognition of broader views on the treatment of mental illness.\nIn 1895 the campus moved to Waverley Oaks Hill in Belmont, Massachusetts. Joseph Curtis (civil engineer) and Frederick Law Olmsted (the renowned landscape architect who also conceptualized the Emerald Necklace public spaces of Boston, Manhattan's Central Park, and Hartford's Institute of Living) were consulted on the selection of the hospital site. The move was necessitated by changes in Charlestown, including new rail lines and other distracting development. Olmsted himself was eventually treated at McLean, but there is no evidence that he was responsible for the design of the grounds. Once hospital construction began, Curtis was hired by the hospital, and supervised the landscape work for many years.\nIn the 1990s, facing falling revenue in a changing health care industry, the hospital drafted a plan to sell a portion of its grounds for development in the Town of Belmont. The proposed sale of the land caused a divisive and somewhat baroque political debate in the town during the late 1990s. Ultimately a plan to preserve some of Olmsted's original open space and to allow the town to develop mixed residential and commercial real estate prevailed over a plan to create only high-end residential development. The deal was finalized in 2005, and land development was well under way by the end of the year. Most of the Belmont campus (more than ) had been listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003.\nCurrent work.\nMcLean is known widely for its treatment of adolescents, most specifically its treatment of borderline personality disorder using dialectical behavioral therapy developed by Marsha M. Linehan. As of 2020[ [update]], McLean is led by Scott L. Rauch, president and psychiatrist in chief, who is known for his innovative work using brain imaging methods to study psychiatric dysfunction.\nAs one of the teaching hospitals of Harvard Medical School, McLean is differentiated from its New England peers (such as The Institute of Living and the Brattleboro Retreat) by its combination of teaching, treatment, and research; most other facilities focus on only one of these priorities. It is home to the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center, the largest \"brain bank\" collection of research specimens in the world. The hospital developed and implemented national health screening methods for alcohol, depression, and memory disorders. The Cole Resource Center, a mental health consumer resource and advocacy center, is located at the hospital.\nAdditional Locations.\nIn addition to the main Belmont campus, there are four additional locations. The Arlington, Cambridge, and SouthEast (in Middleborough) provide outpatient services, and the SouthEast at Oak Street (in Middleborough) provides inpatient services. Note that the Arlington and Cambridge offices only provide child and adolescent services, while the SouthEast provide services to all ages. \nFormer patients.\nMathematician John Nash; musicians James Taylor and Ray Charles; poets Sylvia Plath, Robert Lowell and Anne Sexton; Massachusetts politician and Civil War general Nathaniel P. Banks; authors Susanna Kaysen and David Foster Wallace; criminal Michelle Carter; and actress and singer Selena Gomez have been treated at McLean Hospital.\nIn books and media.\nA story about the facility from 1853 describes the work underway and provides some statistics about the capacity and treatment outcomes.\nOne popular and anecdotal history of McLean is Alex Beam's \"Gracefully Insane: Life and Death Inside America's Premier Mental Hospital\". More-factual and scholarly accounts of the history are recorded in the Little and Sutton books listed in \"Further reading\".\nMemoirs of time spent within McLean's walls include Sylvia Plath's novel \"The Bell Jar\", and Susanna Kaysen's \"Girl, Interrupted\", which was made into a film of the same name starring Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie. Samuel Shem's roman \u00e0 clef \"Mount Misery\" tells a story inspired at least in part by the author's experiences at McLean. The 1994 \"Under Observation: Life Inside A Mental Hospital\" by Lisa Berger and Alexander Vuckovic uses some fictional techniques (composite characters, etc.) to describe some of the typical events at McLean. James Taylor's song \"Knockin' 'Round the Zoo\" recalls his stay at McLean as a teenager. \"Poems of Boston and Just Beyond: From the Back Bay to the Back Ward\" by Doug Holder are based on his more than three decades working there, and are archived at the poetry room at the Lamont Library at Harvard University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39109", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39109", "title": "Ferdinand", "text": "Ferdinand is a Germanic name composed of the elements 'journey, travel', Proto-Germanic , abstract noun from root 'to fare, travel' (PIE 'to lead, pass over'), and 'courage' or 'ready, prepared' related to Old High German 'to risk, venture'.\nThe name was adopted in Romance languages from its use in the Visigothic Kingdom. It is reconstructed as either Gothic or . It became popular in German-speaking Europe only from the 16th century, with Habsburg rule over Spain. Variants of the name include , , , and in Spanish, in Catalan, and and in Portuguese. The French forms are , \"Fernand\", and , and it is \"Ferdinando\" and \"Fernando\" in Italian. In Hungarian both and are used equally. The Dutch forms are and \"Ferry\".\nThere are numerous short forms in many languages, such as the Finnish . There is a feminine Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian form, (in Italian also ).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "39112", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39112", "title": "Road bicycle", "text": "Bicycles designed for traveling at speed on paved roads\nThe term road bicycle is used to describe bicycles built for traveling at speed on paved roads. Some sources use the term to mean racing bicycle. Other sources specifically exclude racing bicycles from the definition, using the term to mean a bicycle of a similar style but built more for endurance and less the fast bursts of speed desired in a racing bicycle; as such, they usually have more gear combinations and fewer hi-tech racing features. Certain of these bicycles have been referred to as 'sportive' bicycles to distinguish them from racing bicycles.\nCompared to other styles of bicycle, road bicycles share common features:\nThe term \"road bicycle\" can also describe any type of bike used primarily on paved roads, in contrast to bikes primarily intended for off-road use, such as mountain bikes. Several variations of road bikes include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39113", "revid": "30243347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39113", "title": "Tesla coil", "text": "Electrical resonant transformer circuit invented by Nikola Tesla\nA Tesla coil is an electrical resonant transformer device designed by inventor Nikola Tesla in 1891. It is used to produce high voltage, low current, high frequency alternating current. Tesla experimented with a number of different configurations consisting of two, or sometimes three, coupled resonant electric circuits.\nTesla used these devices to conduct innovative experiments in electrical lighting, phosphorescence, X-ray generation, high-frequency alternating current phenomena, electrotherapy, and the wireless transmission of electrical energy. Tesla coil circuits were used commercially in spark-gap transmitters for wireless telegraphy until the 1920s, and in medical equipment such as electrotherapy and violet ray devices. Today, their main usage is for entertainment and educational displays, although small coils are still used as leak detectors for high-vacuum systems.\nOriginally, Tesla coils used fixed spark gaps or rotary spark gaps to provide intermittent excitation of the resonant circuit; more recently, electronic devices are used to provide the switching action required.\nOperation.\nA Tesla coil is a high-frequency, air-cored resonant transformer, which can be used to produce very high voltages. In Tesla\u2019s early designs, a simple spark gap was used to set up the oscillations in a tuned, radio-frequency transformer. \nTesla coils can produce output voltages from 50\u00a0kilovolts to several million volts for large coils. The alternating current output is in the low radio frequency range, usually between 50\u00a0kHz and 1\u00a0MHz.\nThe original, spark-excited Tesla coil circuit, shown below, consists of these components:\nResonant transformer.\nThe specialized transformer used in the Tesla coil circuit \"(L1,L2)\", called a resonant transformer or radio-frequency (RF) transformer, functions on different principles to transformers used in AC power circuits. While an iron-cored transformer is designed to \"transfer\" energy efficiently from primary to secondary winding, the resonant transformer is designed to \"temporarily store and transfer\" high frequency currents. A primary winding is in parallel with a capacitor, while the secondary winding has a \"parasitic' capacitance with its inductor, as illustrated by the diagram. The inductors and capacitors together function as two LC circuits, \"tuned\" so they have the same resonant frequency, and each spark briefly completes a circuit on the primary side, producing oscillation back and forth between the primary and secondary. This is analogous to the way a tuning fork stores vibrational mechanical energy.\nThe primary coil \"(L1)\" consists of relatively few turns of heavy copper wire or tubing, and is wired in parallel to a capacitor \"(C1)\". Current flows through the spark gap (SG) with each spark, and repetitively energizes the primary side LC circuit. The secondary coil \"(L2)\" consists of hundreds to thousands of turns of wire on a hollow cylindrical form, and the primary is coupled to it by being wound on an insulating former outside it. \nThe inductance of \"(L2)\" resonates with stray capacitance \"(C2)\" and the capacitance of the toroid's metal electrode attached to the high-voltage terminal. \nThe peculiar design of the coil is dictated by the need to achieve low resistive energy losses (high Q factor) at high frequencies, which results in the largest secondary voltages:\nThe output circuit can have two forms:\nOperation cycle.\nThe circuit operates in a rapidly repeating cycle in which the supply transformer \"(T)\" charges the primary capacitor \"(C1)\" up, which then discharges in a spark through the spark gap, creating a brief pulse of oscillating current in the primary circuit which excites a high oscillating voltage across the secondary:\nThis entire cycle takes place very rapidly, the oscillations dying out in a time of the order of a millisecond. Each spark across the spark gap produces a pulse of damped sinusoidal high voltage at the output terminal of the coil. Each pulse dies out before the next spark occurs, so the coil generates a string of damped waves, not a continuous sinusoidal voltage. The high voltage from the supply transformer that charges the capacitor is a 50 or 60\u00a0Hz sine wave. Depending on how the spark gap is set, usually one or two sparks occur at the peak of each half-cycle of the mains current, so there are more than a hundred sparks per second. Thus the spark at the spark gap appears continuous, as do the high-voltage streamers from the top of the coil.\nThe supply transformer \"(T)\" secondary winding is connected across the primary tuned circuit. It might seem that the transformer would be a leakage path for the RF current, damping the oscillations. However its large inductance gives it a very high impedance at the resonant frequency, so it acts as an open circuit to the oscillating current. If the supply transformer has inadequate short-circuit inductance, radio frequency chokes are placed in its secondary leads to block the RF current.\nOscillation frequency.\nTo produce the largest output voltage, the primary and secondary tuned circuits are adjusted to resonance with each other. The resonant frequencies of the primary and secondary circuits, formula_1 and formula_2, are determined by the inductance and capacitance in each circuit:\nformula_3\nGenerally the secondary is not adjustable, so the primary circuit is tuned, usually by a moveable tap on the primary coil L1, until it resonates at the same frequency as the secondary:\nformula_4\nThus the condition for resonance between primary and secondary is:\nformula_5\nThe resonant frequency of Tesla coils is in the low radio frequency (RF) range, usually between 50\u00a0kHz and 1\u00a0MHz. However, because of the impulsive nature of the spark they produce broadband radio noise, and without shielding can be a significant source of RFI, interfering with nearby radio and television reception.\nOutput voltage.\nIn a resonant transformer the high voltage is produced by resonance; the output voltage is not proportional to the turns ratio, as in an ordinary transformer. It can be calculated approximately from conservation of energy. At the beginning of the cycle, when the spark starts, all of the energy in the primary circuit formula_6 is stored in the primary capacitor formula_7. If formula_8 is the voltage at which the spark gap breaks down, which is usually close to the peak output voltage of the supply transformer \"T\", this energy is\nformula_9\nDuring the \"ring up\" this energy is transferred to the secondary circuit. Although some is lost as heat in the spark and other resistances, in modern coils, over 85% of the energy ends up in the secondary. At the peak (formula_10) of the secondary sinusoidal voltage waveform, all the energy in the secondary formula_11 is stored in the capacitance formula_12 between the ends of the secondary coil\nformula_13\nAssuming no energy losses, formula_14. Substituting into this equation and simplifying, the peak secondary voltage is\nformula_15\nThe second formula above is derived from the first using the resonance condition formula_16. Since the capacitance of the secondary coil is very small compared to the primary capacitor, the primary voltage is stepped up to a high value.\nThe above peak voltage is only achieved in coils in which air discharges do not occur; in coils which produce sparks, like entertainment coils, the peak voltage on the terminal is limited to the voltage at which the air breaks down and becomes conductive. As the output voltage increases during each voltage pulse, it reaches the point where the air next to the high-voltage terminal ionizes and corona, brush discharges, and streamer arcs break out from the terminal. This happens when the electric field strength exceeds the dielectric strength of the air, about 30\u00a0kV per centimeter. Since the electric field is greatest at sharp points and edges, air discharges start at these points on the high-voltage terminal. The voltage on the high-voltage terminal cannot increase above the air breakdown voltage, because additional electric charge pumped into the terminal from the secondary winding just escapes into the air. The output voltage of open-air Tesla coils is limited to a few million volts by air breakdown, but higher voltages can be achieved by coils immersed in pressurized tanks of insulating oil.\nTop electrode.\nSome Tesla coil designs have a smooth spherical or toroidal metal electrode on the high-voltage terminal. The electrode serves as one plate of a capacitor, with the Earth as the other plate, increasing the secondary capacitance. The large diameter curved surface reduces the electric field at the high-voltage terminal, increasing the voltage threshold at which air discharges. Suppressing premature air breakdown and energy loss allows the voltage to build to higher values, creating longer, more energetic discharges.\nIf the top electrode is too large and smooth, the electric field at its surface may not be high enough cause air breakdown. Some entertainment coils have a sharp \"spark point\" projecting from the electrode to start discharges.\nTypes.\nThe term \"Tesla coil\" is applied to a number of high-voltage resonant transformer circuits.\nExcitation.\nTesla coil circuits can be classified by the type of \"excitation\" they use, what type of circuit is used to apply current to the primary winding of the resonant transformer:\nNumber of coils.\nTesla circuits can also be classified by how many resonant coils (inductors) they contain:\nHistory.\nElectrical oscillation and resonant air-core transformer circuits had been explored before Tesla. Resonant circuits using Leyden jars were invented beginning in 1826 by Felix Savary, Joseph Henry, William Thomson, and Oliver Lodge. and Henry Rowland built a resonant transformer in 1889. Elihu Thomson invented the Tesla coil circuit independently at the same time Tesla did. Tesla patented his Tesla coil circuit April 25, 1891. and first publicly demonstrated it May 20, 1891, in his lecture \"Experiments with Alternate Currents of Very High Frequency and Their Application to Methods of Artificial Illumination\" before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers at Columbia College, New York. Although Tesla patented many similar circuits during this period, this was the first that contained all the elements of the Tesla coil: high-voltage primary transformer, capacitor, spark gap, and air core \"oscillation transformer\".\nModern-day Tesla coils.\nModern high-voltage enthusiasts usually build Tesla coils similar to some of Tesla's \"later\" 2-coil air-core designs. These typically consist of a primary tank circuit, a series LC (inductance-capacitance) circuit composed of a high-voltage capacitor, spark gap, and primary coil; and the secondary LC circuit, a series-resonant circuit consisting of the secondary coil plus a terminal capacitance or \"top load\". In Tesla's more advanced (magnifier) design, a third coil is added. The secondary LC circuit is composed of a tightly coupled air-core transformer secondary coil driving the bottom of a separate third coil helical resonator. Modern 2-coil systems use a single secondary coil. The top of the secondary is then connected to a topload terminal, which forms one 'plate' of a capacitor, the other 'plate' being the earth (or \"ground\"). The primary LC circuit is tuned so that it resonates at the same frequency as the secondary LC circuit. The primary and secondary coils are magnetically coupled, creating a dual-tuned resonant air-core transformer. Earlier oil-insulated Tesla coils needed large and long insulators at their high-voltage terminals to prevent discharge in air. Later Tesla coils spread their electric fields over larger distances to prevent high electrical stresses in the first place, thereby allowing operation in free air. Most modern Tesla coils also use toroid-shaped output terminals. These are often fabricated from spun metal or flexible aluminum ducting. The toroidal shape helps to control the high electric field near the top of the secondary by directing sparks outward and away from the primary and secondary windings.\nA more complex version of a Tesla coil, termed a \"magnifier\" by Tesla, uses a more tightly coupled air-core resonance \"driver\" transformer (or \"master oscillator\") and a smaller, remotely located output coil (called the \"extra coil\" or simply the resonator) that has a large number of turns on a relatively small coil form. The bottom of the driver's secondary winding is connected to ground. The opposite end is connected to the bottom of the extra coil through an insulated conductor that is sometimes called the transmission line. Since the transmission line operates at relatively high RF voltages, it is typically made of 1\" diameter metal tubing to reduce corona losses. Since the third coil is located some distance away from the driver, it is not magnetically coupled to it. RF energy is instead directly coupled from the output of the driver into the bottom of the third coil, causing it to \"ring up\" to very high voltages. The combination of the two-coil driver and third coil resonator adds another degree of freedom to the system, making tuning considerably more complex than that of a 2-coil system. The transient response for multiple resonance networks (of which the Tesla magnifier is a sub-set) has only recently been solved. It is now known that a variety of useful tuning \"modes\" are available, and in most operating modes the extra coil will ring at a different frequency than the master oscillator.\nPrimary switching.\nModern transistor or vacuum tube Tesla coils do not use a primary spark gap. Instead, the transistor(s) or vacuum tube(s) provide the switching or amplifying function necessary to generate RF power for the primary circuit. Solid-state Tesla coils use the lowest primary operating voltage, typically between 155 and 800 volts, and drive the primary winding using either a single, half-bridge, or full-bridge arrangement of bipolar junction transistors, MOSFETs, or IGBTs to switch the primary current. Vacuum tube coils typically operate with plate voltages between 1500 and 6000 volts, while most spark gap coils operate with primary voltages of 6,000 to 25,000 volts. The primary winding of a traditional transistor Tesla coil is wound around only the bottom portion of the secondary coil. This configuration illustrates operation of the secondary as a pumped resonator. The primary 'induces' alternating voltage into the bottom-most portion of the secondary, providing regular 'pushes' (similar to providing properly timed pushes to a playground swing). Additional energy is transferred from the primary to the secondary inductance and top-load capacitance during each \"push\", and secondary output voltage builds (called 'ring-up'). An electronic feedback circuit is usually used to adaptively synchronize the primary oscillator to the growing resonance in the secondary, and this is the only tuning consideration beyond the initial choice of a reasonable top-load.\nIn a dual resonant solid-state Tesla coil (DRSSTC), the electronic switching of the solid-state Tesla coil is combined with the resonant primary circuit of a spark-gap Tesla coil. The resonant primary circuit is formed by connecting a capacitor in series with the primary winding of the coil, so that the combination forms a series tank circuit with a resonant frequency near that of the secondary circuit. Because of the additional resonant circuit, one manual and one adaptive tuning adjustment are necessary. Also, an interrupter is usually used to reduce the duty cycle of the switching bridge, to improve peak power capabilities; similarly, IGBTs are more popular in this application than bipolar junction transistors or MOSFETs, due to their superior power handling characteristics. A current-limiting circuit is usually used to limit maximum primary tank current (which must be switched by the IGBTs) to a safe level. Performance of a DRSSTC can be comparable to a medium-power spark-gap Tesla coil, and efficiency (as measured by spark length versus input power) can be significantly greater than a spark-gap Tesla coil operating at the same input power.\nPractical aspects of design.\nHigh voltage production.\nA large Tesla coil of more modern design often operates at very high peak power levels, up to many megawatts (millions of watts, equivalent to thousands of horsepower). It is therefore adjusted and operated carefully, not only for efficiency and economy, but also for safety. If, due to improper tuning, the maximum voltage point occurs below the terminal, along the secondary coil, a discharge (spark) may break out and damage or destroy the coil wire, supports, or nearby objects.\nTesla experimented with these, and many other, circuit configurations (see right). The Tesla coil primary winding, spark gap and tank capacitor are connected in series. In each circuit, the AC supply transformer charges the tank capacitor until its voltage is sufficient to break down the spark gap. The gap suddenly fires, allowing the charged tank capacitor to discharge into the primary winding. Once the gap fires, the electrical behavior of either circuit is identical. Experiments have shown that neither circuit offers any marked performance advantage over the other.\nHowever, in the typical circuit, the spark gap's short circuiting action prevents high-frequency oscillations from 'backing up' into the supply transformer. In the alternate circuit, high amplitude high-frequency oscillations that appear across the capacitor also are applied to the supply transformer's winding. This can induce corona discharges between turns that weaken and eventually destroy the transformer's insulation. Experienced Tesla coil builders almost exclusively use the top circuit, often augmenting it with low pass filters (resistor and capacitor (RC) networks) between the supply transformer and spark gap to help protect the supply transformer. This is especially important when using transformers with fragile high-voltage windings, such as neon sign transformers (NSTs). Regardless of which configuration is used, the HV transformer must be of a type that self-limits its secondary current by means of internal short-circuit inductance. A normal (low Short-circuit inductance) high-voltage transformer must use an external limiter (sometimes called a ballast) to limit current. NSTs are designed to have high Short-circuit inductance to limit their short circuit current to a safe level.\nTuning.\nThe primary coil's resonant frequency is tuned to that of the secondary, by using low-power oscillations, then increasing the power (and retuning if necessary) until the system operates properly at maximum power. While tuning, a small projection (called a \"breakout bump\") is often added to the top terminal in order to stimulate corona and spark discharges (sometimes called streamers) into the surrounding air. Tuning can then be adjusted so as to achieve the longest streamers at a given power level, corresponding to a frequency match between the primary and secondary coil. Capacitive \"loading\" by the streamers tends to lower the resonant frequency of a Tesla coil operating under full power. A toroidal topload is often preferred to other shapes, such as a sphere. A toroid with a major diameter that is much larger than the secondary diameter provides improved shaping of the electric field at the topload. This provides better protection of the secondary winding (from damaging streamer strikes) than a sphere of similar diameter. And, a toroid permits fairly independent control of topload capacitance versus spark breakout voltage. A toroid's capacitance is mainly a function of its major diameter, while the spark breakout voltage is mainly a function of its minor diameter. A grid dip oscillator (GDO) is sometimes used to help facilitate initial tuning and aid in design. The resonant frequency of the secondary can be difficult to determine except by using a GDO or other experimental method, whereas the physical properties of the primary more closely represent lumped approximations of RF tank design. In this schema the secondary is built somewhat arbitrarily in imitation of other successful designs, or entirely so with supplies on hand, its resonant frequency is measured and the primary designed to suit.\nAir discharges.\nIn coils that produce air discharges, such as those built for entertainment, electrical energy from the secondary and toroid is transferred to the surrounding air as electrical charge, heat, light, and sound. The process is similar to charging or discharging a capacitor, except that a Tesla coil uses AC instead of DC. The current that arises from shifting charges within a capacitor is called a displacement current. Tesla coil discharges are formed as a result of displacement currents as pulses of electrical charge are rapidly transferred between the high-voltage toroid and nearby regions within the air (called space charge regions). Although the space charge regions around the toroid are invisible, they play a profound role in the appearance and location of Tesla coil discharges.\nWhen the spark gap fires, the charged capacitor discharges into the primary winding, causing the primary circuit to oscillate. The oscillating primary current creates an oscillating magnetic field that couples to the secondary winding, transferring energy into the secondary side of the transformer and causing it to oscillate with the toroid capacitance to ground. Energy transfer occurs over a number of cycles, until most of the energy that was originally in the primary side is transferred to the secondary side. The greater the magnetic coupling between windings, the shorter the time required to complete the energy transfer. As energy builds within the oscillating secondary circuit, the amplitude of the toroid's RF voltage rapidly increases, and the air surrounding the toroid begins to undergo dielectric breakdown, forming a corona discharge.\nAs the secondary coil's energy (and output voltage) continue to increase, larger pulses of displacement current further ionize and heat the air at the point of initial breakdown. This forms a very electrically conductive \"root\" of hotter plasma, called a leader, that projects outward from the toroid. The plasma within the leader is considerably hotter than a corona discharge, and is considerably more conductive. In fact, its properties are similar to an electric arc. The leader tapers and branches into thousands of thinner, cooler, hair-like discharges (called streamers). The streamers look like a bluish 'haze' at the ends of the more luminous leaders. The streamers transfer charge between the leaders and toroid to nearby space charge regions. The displacement currents from countless streamers all feed into the leader, helping to keep it hot and electrically conductive.\nThe primary break rate of sparking Tesla coils is slow compared to the resonant frequency of the resonator-topload assembly. When the switch closes, energy is transferred from the primary LC circuit to the resonator where the voltage rings up over a short period of time up culminating in the electrical discharge. In a spark gap Tesla coil, the primary-to-secondary energy transfer process happens repetitively at typical pulsing rates of 50\u2013500 times per second, depending on the frequency of the input line voltage. At these rates, previously-formed leader channels do not get a chance to fully cool down between pulses. So, on successive pulses, newer discharges can build upon the hot pathways left by their predecessors. This causes incremental growth of the leader from one pulse to the next, lengthening the entire discharge on each successive pulse. Repetitive pulsing causes the discharges to grow until the average energy available from the Tesla coil during each pulse balances the average energy being lost in the discharges (mostly as heat). At this point, dynamic equilibrium is reached, and the discharges have reached their maximum length for the Tesla coil's output power level. The unique combination of a rising high-voltage radio frequency envelope and repetitive pulsing seem to be ideally suited to creating long, branching discharges that are considerably longer than would be otherwise expected by output voltage considerations alone. High-voltage, low-energy discharges create filamentary multibranched discharges which are purplish-blue in colour. High-voltage, high-energy discharges create thicker discharges with fewer branches, are pale and luminous, almost white, and are much longer than low-energy discharges, because of increased ionisation. A strong smell of ozone and nitrogen oxides will occur in the area. The important factors for maximum discharge length appear to be voltage, energy, and still air of low to moderate humidity. There are comparatively few scientific studies about the initiation and growth of pulsed lower-frequency RF discharges, so some aspects of Tesla coil air discharges are not as well understood when compared to DC, power-frequency AC, HV impulse, and lightning discharges.\nApplications.\nToday, although small Tesla coils are used as leak detectors in scientific high-vacuum systems and igniters in arc welders, their main use is entertainment and educational displays.\nEducation and entertainment.\nTesla coils are displayed as attractions at science museums and electronics fairs, and are used to demonstrate principles of high-frequency electricity in science classes in schools and colleges.\nSince they are simple enough for an amateur to make, Tesla coils are a popular student science fair project, and are homemade by a large worldwide community of hobbyists. Builders of Tesla coils as a hobby are called \"coilers\". They attend \"coiling\" conventions where they display their home-made Tesla coils and other high-voltage devices. Low-power Tesla coils are also sometimes used as a high-voltage source for Kirlian photography.\nThe current world's largest Tesla coil is a 130,000-watt unit built by Greg Leyh and Eric Orr, part of a sculpture titled \"Electrum\" owned by Alan Gibbs and currently residing in a private sculpture park at Kakanui Point near Auckland, New Zealand. Another very large Tesla coil, designed and built by Syd Klinge, is shown every year at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in Coachella, California.\nTesla coils can also be used to generate sounds, including music, by modulating the system's effective \"break rate\" (i.e., the rate and duration of high power RF bursts) via MIDI data and a control unit. The actual MIDI data is interpreted by a microcontroller which converts the MIDI data into a PWM output which can be sent to the Tesla coil via a fiber optic interface. An extensive outdoor musical concert has demonstrated using Tesla coils during the Engineering Open House (EOH) at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. The Icelandic artist Bj\u00f6rk used a Tesla coil in her song \"Thunderbolt\" as the main instrument in the song. The musical group ArcAttack uses modulated Tesla coils and a man in a chain-link suit to play music.\nVacuum system leak detectors.\nScientists working with high-vacuum systems test for the presence of tiny pin holes in the apparatus (especially a newly blown piece of glassware) using high-voltage discharges produced by a small handheld Tesla coil. When the system is evacuated the high-voltage electrode of the coil is played over the outside of the apparatus. At low pressures, air is more easily ionized and thus conducts electricity better than atmospheric-pressure air. Therefore, the discharge travels through any pin hole immediately below it, producing a corona discharge inside the evacuated space which illuminates the hole, indicating points that need to be annealed or reblown before they can be used in an experiment.\nTeslaphoresis.\nIn 2016, Rice University scientists used the field of a Tesla coil to remotely align tiny carbon nanotubes into a circuit, a process they dubbed \"teslaphoresis\".\nHealth issues.\nThe high-voltage radio frequency (RF) discharges from the output terminal of a Tesla coil pose a unique hazard not found in other high-voltage equipment: when passed through the body, they often do not cause the painful sensation and muscle contraction of electric shock, as lower frequency currents do. The nervous system is insensitive to currents with frequencies over 10\u201320\u00a0kHz. It is thought that the reason for this is that a certain minimum number of ions must be driven across a nerve cell's membrane by the imposed voltage to trigger the nerve cell to depolarize and transmit an impulse. At radio frequencies, there is insufficient time during a half-cycle for enough ions to cross the membrane before the alternating voltage reverses. The danger is that since no pain is felt, experimenters often assume the currents are harmless. Teachers and hobbyists demonstrating small Tesla coils often impress their audience by touching the high-voltage terminal or allowing the streamer arcs to pass through their body.\nIf the arcs from the high-voltage terminal strike the bare skin, they can cause deep-seated burns called \"RF burns\". This is often avoided by allowing the arcs to strike a piece of metal held in the hand, or a thimble on a finger, instead. The current passes from the metal into the person's hand through a wide enough surface area to avoid causing burns. Often no sensation is felt, or just a warmth or tingling.\nHowever, this does not mean the current is harmless. Even a small Tesla coil produces many times the electrical energy necessary to stop the heart, if the frequency happens to be low enough to cause ventricular fibrillation. A minor misadjustment of the coil could result in electrocution. In addition, the RF current heats the tissues it passes through. Carefully controlled Tesla coil currents, applied directly to the skin by electrodes, were used in the early 20th century for deep body tissue heating in the medical field of longwave \"diathermy\". The amount of heating depends on the current density, which depends on the power output of the Tesla coil and the cross-sectional area of the path the current takes through the body to ground. Particularly if it passes through narrow structures such as blood vessels or joints it may raise the local tissue temperature to hyperthermic levels, \"cooking\" internal organs or causing other injuries. International ICNIRP safety standards for RF current in the body in the Tesla coil frequency range of 0.1\u20131\u00a0MHz specify a maximum current density of 0.2\u00a0mA per square centimeter and a maximum power absorption rate (SAR) in tissue of 4\u00a0W/kg in limbs and 0.8\u00a0W/kg average over the body. Even low power Tesla coils could exceed these limits, and it is generally impossible to determine the threshold current where bodily injury begins. Being struck by arcs from a high power (&gt; 1000 Watt) Tesla coil is likely to be fatal.\nAnother reported hazard of this practice is that arcs from the high-voltage terminal often strike the primary winding of the coil. This momentarily creates a conductive path for the lethal 50 or 60 Hz primary current from the supply transformer to reach the output terminal. If a person is connected to the output terminal at the time, either by touching it or allowing arcs from the terminal to strike the person's body, then the high primary current could pass through the conductive ionized air path, through the body to ground, causing electrocution.\nSkin-effect myth.\nAn erroneous explanation for the absence of electric shock that has persisted among Tesla coil hobbyists is that the high-frequency currents travel through the body close to the surface, and thus do not penetrate to vital organs or nerves, due to an electromagnetic phenomenon called \"skin effect\".\nThis theory is false. RF current does tend to flow on the surface of conductors due to skin effect, but the depth to which it penetrates, called \"skin depth\", depends on the resistivity and permeability of the material as well as the frequency. Although skin effect limits currents of Tesla coil frequencies to the outer fraction of a millimeter in metal conductors, the skin depth of the current in body tissue is much deeper due to its higher resistivity. The depth of penetration of currents of Tesla frequency (0.1\u00a0\u2013 1\u00a0MHz) in human tissues is roughly 24\u201372\u00a0centimeters (9\u201328\u00a0inches). Since even the deepest tissues are closer than this to the surface, skin effect has little influence on the path of the current through the body; it tends to take the path of minimum electrical impedance to ground, and can easily pass through the core of the body. In the medical therapy called longwave diathermy, carefully controlled RF current of Tesla frequencies was used for decades for deep tissue warming, including heating internal organs such as the lungs. Modern shortwave diathermy machines use a higher frequency of 27\u00a0MHz, which would have a correspondingly smaller skin depth, yet these frequencies are still able to penetrate deep body tissues.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39116", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39116", "title": "La Scala", "text": "Opera house in Milan, Italy\nLa Scala (, , ; officially , lit.\u2009'Theatre at the Scala') is a historic opera house in Milan, Italy. The theatre was inaugurated on 3 August 1778 and was originally known as (lit.\u2009'the New Royal Ducal Theatre at the Scala', which previously was a church). The premiere performance was Antonio Salieri's \"Europa riconosciuta\".\nMost of Italy's greatest operatic artists, and many of the finest singers from around the world, have appeared at La Scala. The theatre is regarded as being one of the leading opera and ballet theatres globally. It is home to the La Scala Theatre Chorus, La Scala Theatre Ballet, La Scala Theatre Orchestra, and the Filarmonica della Scala orchestra. The theatre also has an associate school, known as the La Scala Theatre Academy (), which offers professional training in music, dance, stagecraft, and stage management.\nOverview.\nLa Scala's season opens on 7 December, Saint Ambrose's Day, the feast day of Milan's patron saint. All performances must end before midnight and long operas start earlier in the evening when necessary.\nThe Museo Teatrale alla Scala (La Scala Theatre Museum), accessible from the theatre's foyer and a part of the house, contains a collection of paintings, drafts, statues, costumes, and other documents regarding the history of La Scala and of opera in general. La Scala also hosts the Accademia d'Arti e Mestieri dello Spettacolo (Academy for the Performing Arts). Its goal is to train a new generation of young musicians, technical staff, and dancers (at the Scuola di Ballo del Teatro alla Scala, one of the academy's divisions).\nAbove the boxes, La Scala has a gallery\u2014called the \"loggione\"\u2014where the less wealthy can watch the performances. The gallery is typically crowded with the most critical opera aficionados, known as the loggionisti, who can be ecstatic or merciless towards singers' perceived successes or failures. For their failures, artists receive a \"baptism of fire\" from these aficionados, and fiascos are long remembered. For example, in 2006, tenor Roberto Alagna left the stage after being booed during a performance of \"Aida\", forcing his understudy, Antonello Palombi, to quickly replace him mid-scene without time to change into a costume. Alagna did not return to the production.\nHistory.\nA fire destroyed the previous theatre, the Teatro Regio Ducale, on 25 February 1776, after a carnival gala. A group of ninety wealthy Milanese, who owned private boxes in the theatre, wrote to Archduke Ferdinand of Austria-Este asking for a new theatre and a provisional one to be used while completing the new one. The neoclassical architect Giuseppe Piermarini produced an initial design. However, it was rejected by Count Firmian (the governor of the then Austrian Lombardy).\nA second plan was accepted in 1776 by Empress Maria Theresa. The new theatre was built on the former location of the church of Santa Maria della Scala, from which the theatre gets its name. The church was deconsecrated and demolished. Over a period of two years, the theatre was completed by Pietro Marliani, Pietro Nosetti, and Antonio and Giuseppe Fe. The theatre had a total of \"3,000 or so\" seats organized into 678 pit-stalls, arranged in six tiers of boxes above which is the 'loggione' or two galleries. Its stage is one of the largest in Italy (16.15m d x 20.4m w x 26m h).\nBuilding expenses were covered by the sale of boxes, which were lavishly decorated by their owners, impressing observers such as Stendhal. La Scala (as it came to be known) soon became the preeminent meeting place for noble and wealthy Milanese people. In the tradition of the times, the main floor had no chairs, and spectators watched the shows standing up. The orchestra was in full sight, as the orchestra pit had not yet been built. As with most of the theatres at that time, La Scala was also a casino, with gamblers sitting in the foyer. Conditions in the auditorium, too, could be frustrating for the opera lover, as Mary Shelley discovered in September 1840:\nAt the Opera they were giving Otto Nicolai's \"Templario\". Unfortunately, as is well known, the theatre of La Scala serves, not only as the universal drawing-room for all the society of Milan but every sort of trading transaction, from horse-dealing to stock-jobbing, is carried on in the pit; so that brief and far between are the snatches of melody one can catch.\nLa Scala was originally illuminated with 84 oil lamps mounted on the stage and another thousand in the rest of the theatre. To reduce the risks of fire, several rooms were filled with hundreds of water buckets. In time, oil lamps were replaced by gas lamps; these, in turn, were replaced by electric lights in 1883.\nThe original structure was renovated in 1907 when it was given its current layout with 1,987 seats. In 1943, during World War II, La Scala was severely damaged by bombing. It was rebuilt and reopened on 11 May 1946, with a memorable concert conducted by Arturo Toscanini\u2014twice La Scala's principal conductor and an associate of the composers Giuseppe Verdi and Giacomo Puccini\u2014with a soprano solo by Renata Tebaldi, which created a sensation.\nLa Scala hosted the first productions of many famous operas and had a special relationship with Verdi. However, for several years, Verdi did not allow his work to be played here, as some of his music had been modified (he said \"corrupted\") by the orchestra. This dispute originated in a disagreement over the production of his \"Giovanna d'Arco\" in 1845; however, the composer later conducted his \"Requiem\" there on 25 May 1874. He announced in 1886 that La Scala would host the premiere of what was to become his penultimate opera, \"Otello\". The premiere of his last opera, \"Falstaff\" was also given in the theatre.\nFilarmonica della Scala.\nIn 1982, the Filarmonica della Scala orchestra was established to develop a symphonic repertoire to add to La Scala's operatic tradition, the orchestra drawing its members from the larger pool of musicians that comprise the Orchestra della Scala. The Filarmonica was conducted first by Carlo Maria Giulini, then by Riccardo Muti, plus many collaborative relations with some of the greatest conductors of the time.\nRecent developments.\n1950s.\nAs early as 1958 R. Vermeulen of Philips Electronics experimented with \"loudspeakers for stereo reverberation\" at La Scala, which were \"concealed in the cove along the ceiling\".\nMajor renovation, 2002 to 2004.\nThe theatre underwent a major renovation from early 2002 to late 2004. The theatre closed following the traditional 7 December 2001 season-opening performances of \"Otello\", which ran through December. From 19 January 2002 to November 2004, the opera company transferred to the new Teatro degli Arcimboldi, built in the Pirelli-Bicocca industrial area from the city center.\nThe renovation by architect Mario Botta proved controversial, as preservationists feared that historic details would be lost. However, the opera company was satisfied with the improvements to the structure and the sound quality, which was enhanced when the heavy red carpets in the hall were removed. The stage was entirely rebuilt, and an enlarged backstage allows more sets to be stored, permitting more productions.\nSeats now include monitors for the electronic libretto system provided by Radio Marconi, an Italian company, allowing audiences to follow opera libretti in English and Italian in addition to the original language. The opera house re-opened on 7 December 2004 with a production, conducted by Riccardo Muti, of Salieri's \"Europa riconosciuta\", the opera performed at La Scala's inauguration in 1778. Tickets for the re-opening fetched up to \u20ac2,000.\nThe renovations cost a reported \u20ac61\u00a0million and left a budget shortfall that the opera house overcame in 2006.\n2005 onward.\nCarlo Fontana, the general manager of La Scala since 1990, was dismissed in February 2005 by the board of governors over differences with the music director, Riccardo Muti. The resulting staff backlash caused serious disruptions and staff strikes. In a statement, the theatre's board said it was \"urgent to unify the theatre's management\". On 16 March 2005, the La Scala orchestra and other staff overwhelmingly approved a no-confidence motion against Muti. They demanded the resignation of Fontana's replacement, Mauro Meli. Muti had already been forced to cancel a concert a few days earlier because of the disagreements. Italy's culture minister, Giuliano Urbani, supported the conductor but called for urgent action by management to safeguard the smooth operation and prestige of La Scala. On 2 April 2005, Muti resigned from La Scala, citing \"hostility\" from staff members. \nIn May 2005, St\u00e9phane Lissner, formerly head of the Aix-en-Provence Festival, was appointed General Manager and artistic director of La Scala, becoming the first non-Italian in its history to hold the office. On 15 May 2006, Daniel Barenboim was named \"Maestro Scaligero\", or \"de facto\" principal guest conductor of the company. In October 2011, Barenboim was appointed the next music director of La Scala, effective December 2011, with an initial contract of 5 years. In December 2013, management named Riccardo Chailly the next music director of La Scala, effective 1 January 2015.\nSt\u00e9phane Lissner left La Scala for the Paris Opera. His successor Alexander Pereira, formerly director of the Salzburg Festival, began his tenure on 1 October 2014. In June 2019 it was announced that Pereira will leave in 2020 and will be replaced by Dominique Meyer. La Scala was originally selected to host the opening ceremony of the 134th IOC Session in 2019, but the event was moved to Lausanne, Switzerland after Milan submitted a joint bid with Cortina d'Ampezzo for the 2026 Winter Olympics.\nPrincipal conductors or music directors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"See: \"\nPremieres.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39117", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39117", "title": "A child's history of England", "text": ""}
{"id": "39119", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39119", "title": "NVIDIA Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "39120", "revid": "51067141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39120", "title": "Nvidia", "text": "American multinational technology company\nNvidia Corporation ( ) is an American technology company headquartered in Santa Clara, California. Founded in 1993 by Jensen Huang, Chris Malachowsky, and Curtis Priem, it develops graphics processing units (GPUs), systems on chips (SoCs), and application programming interfaces (APIs) for data science, high-performance computing, and mobile and automotive applications. Nvidia has been described as a Big Tech company.\nOriginally focused on GPUs for video gaming, Nvidia broadened their use into other markets, including artificial intelligence (AI), professional visualization, and supercomputing. The company's product lines include GeForce GPUs for gaming and creative workloads, and professional GPUs for edge computing, scientific research, and industrial applications. As of the first quarter of 2025, Nvidia held a 92% share of the discrete desktop and laptop GPU market.\nIn the early 2000s, the company invested over a billion dollars to develop CUDA, a software platform and API that enabled GPUs to run massively parallel programs for a broad range of compute-intensive applications. As a result, as of 2025, Nvidia controlled more than 80% of the market for GPUs used in training and deploying AI models, and provided chips for over 75% of the world's TOP500 supercomputers. The company has also expanded into gaming hardware and services, with products such as the Shield Portable, Shield Tablet, and Shield TV, and operates the GeForce Now cloud gaming service. Furthermore, it has developed the Tegra line of mobile processors for smartphones, tablets, and automotive infotainment systems. \nIn 2023, Nvidia became the seventh U.S. company to reach a US$1 trillion valuation. It became the first company in the world to surpass US$4 trillion and US$5 trillion milestones in market capitalization in 2025, driven by rising global demand for data center hardware in the midst of the AI boom. For its strength, size and market capitalization, Nvidia has been selected to be one of Bloomberg's \"Magnificent Seven\", the seven biggest companies on the stock market in these regards.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nNvidia was founded on April 5, 1993, by Jensen Huang, a Taiwanese-American electrical engineer who was previously the director of CoreWare at LSI Logic and a microprocessor designer at AMD; Chris Malachowsky, an engineer who worked at Sun Microsystems; and Curtis Priem, who was previously a senior staff engineer and graphics chip designer at IBM and Sun Microsystems. In late 1992, the three men agreed to start the company in a meeting at a Denny's roadside diner on Berryessa Road in East San Jose.\nAt the time, Malachowsky and Priem were frustrated with Sun's management and were looking to leave, but Huang was on \"firmer ground\", in that he was already running his own division at LSI. The three co-founders discussed a vision of the future which was so compelling that Huang decided to leave LSI and become the chief executive officer of their new startup.\nThe three co-founders envisioned graphics-based processing as the best trajectory for tackling challenges that had eluded general-purpose computing methods. As Huang later explained: \"We also observed that video games were simultaneously one of the most computationally challenging problems and would have incredibly high sales volume. Those two conditions don't happen very often. Video games was our killer app \u2014 a flywheel to reach large markets funding huge R&amp;D to solve massive computational problems.\"\nThe first problem was who would quit first. Huang's wife, Lori, did not want him to resign from LSI unless Malachowsky resigned from Sun at the same time, and Malachowsky's wife, Melody, felt the same way about Huang. Priem broke that deadlock by resigning first from Sun, effective December 31, 1992. According to Priem, this put pressure on Huang and Malachowsky to not leave him to \"flail alone\", so they gave notice too. Huang left LSI and \"officially joined Priem on February 17\", which was also Huang's 30th birthday, while Malachowsky left Sun in early March. In early 1993, the three founders began working together on their new startup in Priem's townhouse in Fremont, California.\nWith $40,000 in the bank, the company was born. The company subsequently received $20 million of venture capital funding from Sequoia Capital, Sutter Hill Ventures, and others.\nDuring the late 1990s, Nvidia was one of 70 startup companies pursuing the idea that graphics acceleration for video games was the path to the future. Only two survived: Nvidia and ATI Technologies, the latter of which merged into AMD.\nNvidia initially had no name. Priem's first idea was \"Primal Graphics\", a syllabic abbreviation of two of the founders' last names, but that left out Huang. They soon discovered it was impossible to create a workable name with syllables from all three founders' names, after considering \"Huaprimal\", \"Prihuamal\", \"Malluapri\", etc. The next idea came from Priem's idea for the name of Nvidia's first product. Priem originally wanted to call it the \"GXNV\", as in the \"next version\" of the GX graphics chips which he had worked on at Sun. Then Huang told Priem to \"drop the GX\", resulting in the name \"NV\". Priem made a list of words with the letters \"NV\" in them. At one point, Malachowsky and Priem wanted to call the company NVision, but that name was already taken by a manufacturer of toilet paper. Both Priem and Huang have taken credit for coming up with the name Nvidia, from \"invidia\", the Latin word for \"envy\".\nAfter the company outgrew Priem's townhouse, its original headquarters office was in Sunnyvale, California.\nFirst graphics accelerator.\nNvidia's first graphics accelerator, the NV1, was designed to process quadrilateral primitives (forward texture mapping), a feature that set it apart from competitors, who preferred triangle primitives. However, when Microsoft introduced the DirectX platform, it chose not to support any other graphics software and announced that its Direct3D API would exclusively support triangles. As a result, the NV1 failed to gain traction in the market.\nNvidia had also entered into a partnership with Sega to supply the graphics chip for the Dreamcast console and worked on the project for about a year. However, Nvidia's technology was already lagging behind competitors. This placed the company in a difficult position: continue working on a chip that was likely doomed to fail or abandon the project, risking financial collapse.\nIn a pivotal moment, Sega's president, Shoichiro Irimajiri, visited Huang in person to inform him that Sega had decided to choose another vendor for the Dreamcast. However, Irimajiri believed in Nvidia's potential and persuaded Sega's management to invest $5 million into the company. Huang later reflected that this funding was all that kept Nvidia afloat, and that Irimajiri's \"understanding and generosity gave us six months to live\".\nIn 1996, Huang laid off more than half of Nvidia's employees\u2014thereby reducing headcount from 100 to 40\u2014and focused the company's remaining resources on developing a graphics accelerator product optimized for processing triangle primitives: the RIVA 128. By the time the RIVA 128 was released in August 1997, Nvidia had only enough money left for one month's payroll. The sense of impending failure became so pervasive that it gave rise to Nvidia's unofficial company motto: \"Our company is thirty days from going out of business.\" Huang began internal presentations to Nvidia staff with those words for many years.\nNvidia sold about a million RIVA 128 units within four months, and used the revenue to fund development of its next generation of products. In 1998, the release of the RIVA TNT helped solidify Nvidia's reputation as a leader in graphics technology.\nPublic company.\nNvidia went public on January 22, 1999. Investing in Nvidia after it had already failed to deliver on its contract turned out to be Irimajiri's best decision as Sega's president. After Irimajiri left Sega in 2000, Sega sold its Nvidia stock for $15 million.\nIn late 1999, Nvidia released the GeForce 256 (NV10), its first product expressly marketed as a GPU, which was most notable for introducing onboard transformation and lighting (T&amp;L) to consumer-level 3D hardware. Running at 120\u00a0MHz and featuring four-pixel pipelines, it implemented advanced video acceleration, motion compensation, and hardware sub-picture alpha blending. The GeForce outperformed existing products by a wide margin.\nDue to the success of its products, Nvidia won the contract to develop the graphics hardware for Microsoft's Xbox game console, which earned Nvidia a $200 million advance. However, the project took many of its best engineers away from other projects. In the short term this did not matter, and the GeForce 2 GTS shipped in the summer of 2000. In December 2000, Nvidia reached an agreement to acquire the intellectual assets of its one-time rival 3dfx, a pioneer in consumer 3D graphics technology leading the field from the mid-1990s until 2000. The acquisition process was finalized in April 2002.\nIn 2001, Standard &amp; Poor's selected Nvidia to replace the departing Enron in the S&amp;P 500 stock index, meaning that index funds would need to hold Nvidia shares going forward.\nIn July 2002, Nvidia acquired Exluna for an undisclosed sum. Exluna made software-rendering tools and the personnel were merged into the Cg project. In August 2003, Nvidia acquired MediaQ for approximately US$70 million. It launched GoForce the following year. On April 22, 2004, Nvidia acquired iReady, also a provider of high-performance TCP offload engines and iSCSI controllers. In December 2004, it was announced that Nvidia would assist Sony with the design of the graphics processor (RSX) for the PlayStation 3 game console. On December 14, 2005, Nvidia acquired ULI Electronics, which at the time supplied third-party southbridge parts for chipsets to ATI, Nvidia's competitor. In March 2006, Nvidia acquired Hybrid Graphics. In December 2006, Nvidia, along with its main rival in the graphics industry AMD (which had acquired ATI), received subpoenas from the U.S. Department of Justice regarding possible antitrust violations in the graphics card industry.\n2007\u20132014.\n\"Forbes\" named Nvidia its \"Company of the Year\" for 2007, citing the accomplishments it made during the said period as well as during the previous five years. On January 5, 2007, Nvidia announced that it had completed the acquisition of PortalPlayer, Inc. In February 2008, Nvidia acquired Ageia, developer of PhysX, a physics engine and physics processing unit. Nvidia announced that it planned to integrate the PhysX technology into its future GPU products.\nIn July 2008, Nvidia took a write-down of approximately $200 million on its first-quarter revenue, after reporting that certain mobile chipsets and GPUs produced by the company had \"abnormal failure rates\" due to manufacturing defects. Nvidia, however, did not reveal the affected products. In September 2008, Nvidia became the subject of a class action lawsuit over the defects, claiming that the faulty GPUs had been incorporated into certain laptop models manufactured by Apple Inc., Dell, and HP. In September 2010, Nvidia reached a settlement, in which it would reimburse owners of the affected laptops for repairs or, in some cases, replacement. On January 10, 2011, Nvidia signed a six-year, $1.5 billion cross-licensing agreement with Intel, ending all litigation between the two companies.\nIn November 2011, after initially unveiling it at Mobile World Congress, Nvidia released its ARM-based system on a chip for mobile devices, Tegra 3. Nvidia claimed that the chip featured the first-ever quad-core mobile CPU. In May 2011, it was announced that Nvidia had agreed to acquire Icera, a baseband chip making company in the UK, for $367 million. In January 2013, Nvidia unveiled the Tegra 4, as well as the Nvidia Shield, an Android-based handheld game console powered by the new system on a chip. On July 29, 2013, Nvidia announced that they acquired PGI from STMicroelectronics.\nIn February 2013, Nvidia announced its plans to build a new headquarters in the form of two giant triangle-shaped buildings on the other side of San Tomas Expressway (to the west of its existing headquarters complex). The company selected triangles as its design theme. As Huang explained in a blog post, the triangle is \"the fundamental building block of computer graphics\".\nIn 2014, Nvidia ported the Valve games \"Portal\" and \"Half Life 2\" to its Nvidia Shield Tablet as Lightspeed Studio. Since 2014, Nvidia has diversified its business focusing on three markets: gaming, automotive electronics, and mobile devices.\nThat same year, Nvidia also prevailed in litigation brought by the trustee of 3dfx's bankruptcy estate to challenge its 2000 acquisition of 3dfx's intellectual assets. On November 6, 2014, in an unpublished memorandum order, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the \"district court's judgment affirming the bankruptcy court's determination that [Nvidia] did not pay less than fair market value for assets purchased from 3dfx shortly before 3dfx filed for bankruptcy\".\n2016\u20132018.\nOn May 6, 2016, Nvidia unveiled the first GPUs of the GeForce 10 series, the GTX 1080 and 1070, based on the company's new Pascal microarchitecture. Nvidia claimed that both models outperformed its Maxwell-based Titan X model; the models incorporate GDDR5X and GDDR5 memory respectively, and use a 16\u00a0nm manufacturing process. The architecture also supports a new hardware feature known as simultaneous multi-projection (SMP), which is designed to improve the quality of multi-monitor and virtual reality (VR) rendering. Laptops that include these GPUs and are sufficiently thin\u00a0\u2013 as of late 2017, under \u00a0\u2013 have been designated as meeting Nvidia's \"Max-Q\" design standard.\nIn July 2016, Nvidia agreed to a settlement for a false advertising lawsuit regarding its GTX 970 model, as the models were unable to use all of their advertised 4\u00a0GB of VRAM due to limitations brought by the design of its hardware. In May 2017, Nvidia announced a partnership with Toyota which would use Nvidia's Drive PX-series artificial intelligence platform for its autonomous vehicles. In July 2017, Nvidia and Chinese search giant Baidu announced a far-reaching AI partnership that includes cloud computing, autonomous driving, consumer devices, and Baidu's open-source AI framework PaddlePaddle. Baidu unveiled that Nvidia's Drive PX 2 AI will be the foundation of its autonomous-vehicle platform.\nNvidia released the Titan V on December 7, 2017.\nNvidia released the Nvidia Quadro GV100 on March 27, 2018. Nvidia released the RTX 2080 GPUs on September 27, 2018. In 2018, Google announced that Nvidia's Tesla P4 graphic cards would be integrated into Google Cloud service's artificial intelligence.\nIn May 2018, on the Nvidia user forum, a thread was started asking the company to update users when they would release web drivers for its cards installed on legacy Mac Pro machines up to mid-2012 5,1 running the macOS Mojave operating system 10.14. Web drivers are required to enable graphics acceleration and multiple display monitor capabilities of the GPU. On its Mojave update info website, Apple stated that macOS Mojave would run on legacy machines with 'Metal compatible' graphics cards and listed Metal compatible GPUs, including some manufactured by Nvidia. However, this list did not include Metal compatible cards that currently work in macOS High Sierra using Nvidia-developed web drivers. In September, Nvidia responded, \"Apple fully controls drivers for macOS. But if Apple allows, our engineers are ready and eager to help Apple deliver great drivers for macOS 10.14 (Mojave).\" In October, Nvidia followed this up with another public announcement, \"Apple fully controls drivers for macOS. Unfortunately, Nvidia currently cannot release a driver unless it is approved by Apple,\" suggesting a possible rift between the two companies. By January 2019, with still no sign of the enabling web drivers, Apple Insider weighed into the controversy with a claim that Apple management \"doesn't want Nvidia support in macOS\". The following month, Apple Insider followed this up with another claim that Nvidia support was abandoned because of \"relational issues in the past\", and that Apple was developing its own GPU technology. Without Apple-approved Nvidia web drivers, Apple users are faced with replacing their Nvidia cards with a competing supported brand, such as AMD Radeon from the list recommended by Apple.\n2019 acquisition of Mellanox Technologies.\nOn March 11, 2019, Nvidia announced a deal to buy Mellanox Technologies for $6.9 billion to substantially expand its footprint in the high-performance computing market. In May 2019, Nvidia announced new RTX Studio laptops. The creators say that the new laptop is going to be seven times faster than a top-end MacBook Pro with a Core i9 and AMD's Radeon Pro Vega 20 graphics in apps like Maya and RedCine-X Pro. In August 2019, Nvidia announced \"Minecraft RTX\", an official Nvidia-developed patch for the game \"Minecraft\" adding real-time DXR ray tracing exclusively to the Windows 10 version of the game. The whole game is, in Nvidia's words, \"refit\" with path tracing, which dramatically affects the way light, reflections, and shadows work inside the engine.\n2020\u20132023.\nIn May 2020, Nvidia announced it was acquiring Cumulus Networks. Post acquisition the company was absorbed into Nvidia's networking business unit, along with Mellanox.\nIn May 2020, Nvidia developed an open-source ventilator to address the shortage resulting from the global coronavirus pandemic. On May 14, 2020, Nvidia officially announced their Ampere GPU microarchitecture and the Nvidia A100 GPU accelerator. In July 2020, it was reported that Nvidia was in talks with SoftBank to buy Arm, a UK-based chip designer, for $32 billion.\nOn September 1, 2020, Nvidia officially announced the GeForce 30 series based on the company's new Ampere microarchitecture.\nOn September 13, 2020, Nvidia announced that they would buy Arm from SoftBank Group for $40 billion, subject to the usual scrutiny, with the latter retaining a 10% share of Nvidia.\nIn October 2020, Nvidia announced its plan to build the most powerful computer in Cambridge, England. The computer, called Cambridge-1, launched in July 2021 with a $100 million investment and will employ AI to support healthcare research. According to Jensen Huang, \"The Cambridge-1 supercomputer will serve as a hub of innovation for the UK, and further the groundbreaking work being done by the nation's researchers in critical healthcare and drug discovery.\"\nAlso in October 2020, along with the release of the Nvidia RTX A6000, Nvidia announced it is retiring its workstation GPU brand Quadro, shifting its product name to Nvidia RTX for future products and the manufacturing to be Nvidia Ampere architecture-based.\nIn August 2021, the proposed takeover of Arm was stalled after the UK's Competition and Markets Authority raised \"significant competition concerns\". In October 2021, the European Commission opened a competition investigation into the takeover. The Commission stated that Nvidia's acquisition could restrict competitors' access to Arm's products and provide Nvidia with too much internal information on its competitors due to their deals with Arm. SoftBank (the parent company of Arm) and Nvidia announced in early February 2022 that they \"had agreed not to move forward with the transaction 'because of significant regulatory challenges'\". The investigation was set to end on March 15, 2022. That same month, Nvidia was reportedly compromised by a cyberattack. This would have been the largest semiconductor acquisition in history.\nIn March 2022, Nvidia's CEO Jensen Huang mentioned that they were open to having Intel manufacture their chips in the future. This was the first time the company mentioned that they would work together with Intel's upcoming foundry services.\nIn April 2022, it was reported that Nvidia planned to open a new research center in Yerevan, Armenia.\nIn May 2022, Nvidia opened Voyager, the second of the two giant buildings at its new headquarters complex to the west of the old one. Unlike its smaller and older sibling Endeavor, the triangle theming is used more \"sparingly\" in Voyager.\nIn September 2022, Nvidia announced its next-generation automotive-grade chip, Drive Thor.\nIn September 2022, Nvidia announced a collaboration with the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard related to the entire suite of Nvidia's AI-powered healthcare software suite called Clara, that includes Parabricks and MONAI.\nFollowing U.S. Department of Commerce regulations which placed an embargo on exports to China of advanced microchips, which went into effect in October 2022, Nvidia saw its data center chip added to the export control list. The next month, the company unveiled a new advanced chip in China, called the A800 GPU, that met the export control rules.\nIn September 2023, Getty Images announced that it was partnering with Nvidia to launch Generative AI by Getty Images, a new tool that lets people create images using Getty's library of licensed photos. Getty will use Nvidia's Edify model, which is available on Nvidia's generative AI model library Picasso.\nOn September 26, 2023, Denny's CEO Kelli Valade joined Huang in East San Jose to celebrate the founding of Nvidia at Denny's on Berryessa Road, where a plaque was installed to mark the relevant corner booth as the birthplace of a $1 trillion company. By then, Nvidia's H100 GPUs were in such demand that even other tech giants were beholden to how Nvidia allocated supply. Larry Ellison of Oracle Corporation said that month that during a dinner with Huang at Nobu in Palo Alto, he and Elon Musk of Tesla, Inc. and xAI \"were begging\" for H100s, \"I guess is the best way to describe it. An hour of sushi and begging\".\nIn October 2023, it was reported that Nvidia had quietly begun designing ARM-based central processing units (CPUs) for Microsoft's Windows operating system with a target to start selling them in 2025.\n2024\u20132025.\nIn January 2024, \"Forbes\" reported that Nvidia has increased its lobbying presence in Washington, D.C. as American lawmakers consider proposals to regulate artificial intelligence. From 2023 to 2024, the company reportedly hired at least four government affairs with professional backgrounds at agencies including the United States Department of State and the Department of the Treasury. It was noted that the $350,000 spent by the company on lobbying in 2023 was small compared to a number of major tech companies in the artificial intelligence space.\nIn January 2024, Raymond James Financial analysts estimated that Nvidia was selling the H100 GPU in the price range of $25,000 to $30,000 each, while on eBay, individual H100s cost over $40,000. Several major technology companies were purchasing tens or hundreds of thousands of GPUs for their data centers to run generative artificial intelligence projects; simple arithmetic implied that they were committing to billions of dollars in capital expenditures.\nIn February 2024, it was reported that Nvidia was the \"hot employer\" in Silicon Valley because it was offering interesting work and good pay at a time when other tech employers were downsizing. Half of Nvidia employees earned over $228,000 in 2023. By then, Nvidia GPUs had become so valuable that they needed special security while in transit to data centers. Cisco chief information officer Fletcher Previn explained at a CIO summit: \"Those GPUs arrive by armored car\".\nOn March 1, 2024, Nvidia became the third company in the history of the United States to close with a market capitalization in excess of $2 trillion. Nvidia needed only 180 days to get to $2 trillion from $1 trillion, while the first two companies, Apple and Microsoft, each took over 500 days. On March 18, Nvidia announced its new AI chip and microarchitecture Blackwell, named after mathematician David Blackwell.\nIn April 2024, Reuters reported that China had allegedly acquired banned Nvidia chips and servers from Supermicro and Dell via tenders.\nIn June 2024, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Justice Department (DOJ) began antitrust investigations into Nvidia, Microsoft and OpenAI, focusing on their influence in the AI industry. The FTC led the investigations into Microsoft and OpenAI, while the DOJ handled Nvidia. The probes centered on the companies' conduct rather than mergers. This development followed an open letter from OpenAI employees expressing concerns about the rapid AI advancements and lack of oversight.\nThe company became the world's most valuable, surpassing Microsoft and Apple, on June 18, 2024, after its market capitalization exceeded $3.3 trillion.\nIn June 2024, Trend Micro announced a partnership with Nvidia to develop AI-driven security tools, notably to protect the data centers where AI workloads are processed. This collaboration integrates Nvidia NIM and Nvidia Morpheus with Trend Vision One and its Sovereign and Private Cloud solutions to improve data privacy, real-time analysis, and rapid threat mitigation.\nIn October 2024, Nvidia introduced a family of open-source multimodal large language models called NVLM 1.0, which features a flagship version with 72\u00a0billion parameters, designed to improve text-only performance after multimodal training.\nIn November 2024, the company was added to the Dow Jones Industrial Average.\nIn November 2024, Morgan Stanley reported that \"the entire 2025 production\" of all of Nvidia's Blackwell chips was \"already sold out\".\nAlso in November 2024, the company bought 1.2 million shares of Nebius Group.\nNvidia was ranked #3 on Forbes' \"Best Places to Work\" list in 2024.\nAs of January 7, 2025, Nvidia's $3.66 trillion market cap was worth more than double of the combined value of AMD, ARM, Broadcom, and Intel.\nIn January 2025, Nvidia saw the largest one-day loss in market capitalization for a U.S. company in history at $600 billion. This was due to DeepSeek, a Chinese AI startup that developed an advanced AI model at a lower cost and computing power. DeepSeek's AI assistant, using the V3 model, surpassed ChatGPT as the highest-rated free app in the U.S. on Apple's App Store.\nOn April 7, 2025, Nvidia released the Llama-3.1-Nemotron-Ultra-253B-v1 reasoning large language model, under the Nvidia Open Model License. It comes in three sizes: Nano, Super and Ultra.\nOn May 28, 2025, Nvidia's second-quarter revenue forecast fell short of market estimates due to U.S. export restrictions impacting AI chip sales to China, yet the company's stock rose 5% as investors remained optimistic about long-term AI demand.\nIn July 2025, it was announced that Nvidia had acquired CentL, a Canadian-based AI firm.\nOn July 10, 2025, Nvidia closed for the first time with a market cap above $4 trillion, after its market cap briefly touched and then retreated from that number during the previous day. Nvidia became the first company to reach a market cap of $4 trillion. At that point, Nvidia was worth more than the combined value of all publicly traded companies in the United Kingdom.\nOn July 29, 2025, Nvidia ordered 300,000 H20 AI chips from Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) due to strong demand from Chinese tech firms like Tencent and Alibaba.\nIn August 2025, Nvidia and competitor Advanced Micro Devices agreed to pay 15% of the revenues from certain chip sales in China as part of an arrangement to obtain export licenses. Nvidia will pay only for sales of the H20 chips.\nOn September 17, 2025, Nvidia chief executive Jensen Huang said he was \u201cdisappointed\u201d after the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC) ordered companies including TikTok parent company ByteDance and Alibaba not to purchase the RTX Pro 6000D, a graphics chip made specifically for the Chinese market. China\u2019s internet regulator banned the country\u2019s largest technology companies from buying Nvidia\u2019s artificial intelligence chips as part of efforts to strengthen the domestic industry and compete with the United States. The CAC instructed companies this week to end both testing and orders of the RTX Pro 6000D, which Nvidia had designed as a tailor-made product for China, according to three people with knowledge of the matter.\nOn September 18, 2025, Nvidia announced it would invest $5 billion in Intel, backing the struggling U.S. chipmaker just weeks after the White House arranged a deal for the federal government to take a major stake in the company. The investment will give Nvidia an immediate holding of about 4% in Intel once new shares are issued to finalize the agreement. Nvidia\u2019s move provides Intel with fresh support following years of unsuccessful turnaround efforts and will allow Nvidia to offer its powerful GB300 data center servers based on Blackwell GPUs on Intel's X86 architecture.\nOn September 22, 2025, Nvidia and OpenAI announced a partnership wherein Nvidia would invest $100 billion into OpenAI, and OpenAI would use Nvidia chips and systems in new data centers. OpenAI will build new AI data centers using Nvidia systems, amounting to at least 10 gigawatts system power, which is the equivalent of energy produced by more than four Hoover Dams. The deal is a circular arrangement where OpenAI will pay back Nvidia's investment through the purchase of Nvidia's chips, which is a model common in AI partnerships. This \"circularity\" is estimated at $35 billion in new Nvidia chips bought by OpenAI, for every $10 billion Nvidia invests in OpenAI.\nIn October 2025, a coalition of Nvidia, nonprofit Electric Power Research Institute and PJM Interconnection announced that the first commercial application of software\u2014developed by startup Emerald AI (in which Nvidia invests), that adjusts the energy draw on a power grid in real time was to be deployed at a new data center under construction in Virginia. Dubbed \"Aurora\", the facility is expected to set a new flexible power standard.\nA server farm dedicated to autonomous AI was also announced in October 2025, as a collaboration between SDS Sch\u00f6nfeld, a data services firm owned by UC Sch\u00f6nfeld, and VAST Data, an Israeli company specializing in AI storage management that collaborates closely with Nvidia. Reports indicate that approximately $30 billion has been secured for the Bet Yehoshua server farm. It is expected to feature \"tens of petabytes of data infrastructure powered by VAST, along with thousands of Nvidia Blackwell GPUs and Nvidia network processors.\"\nOn October 29, 2025, Nvidia became the first company to reach a market capitalization of $5 trillion.\nhttps:// fell by 2% on 11 November 2025 as the SoftBank Group dumped its entire Nvidia portfolio worth $5.8 billion, redirecting the capital towards OpenAI instead. \nFabrication.\nNvidia uses external suppliers for all phases of manufacturing, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing, and packaging. Nvidia thus avoids most of the investment and production costs and risks associated with chip manufacturing, although it does sometimes directly procure some components and materials used in the production of its products (e.g., memory and substrates). Nvidia focuses its own resources on product design, quality assurance, marketing, and customer support.\nCorporate affairs.\nLeadership.\nNvidia's key management as of March 2024 consists of:\nBoard of directors.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], the company's board consisted of the following directors:\nFinances.\nFor the fiscal year 2020, Nvidia reported earnings of US$2.796 billion, with an annual revenue of US$10.918 billion, a decline of 6.8% over the previous fiscal cycle. Nvidia's shares traded at over $531 per share, and its market capitalization was valued at over US$328.7 billion in January 2021.\nFor the Q2 of 2020, Nvidia reported sales of $3.87 billion, which was a 50% rise from the same period in 2019. The surge in sales and people's higher demand for computer technology. According to the financial chief of the company, Colette Kress, the effects of the pandemic will \"likely reflect this evolution in enterprise workforce trends with a greater focus on technologies, such as Nvidia laptops and virtual workstations, that enable remote work and virtual collaboration.\" In May 2023, Nvidia crossed $1 trillion in market valuation during trading hours, and grew to $1.2 trillion by the following November. \nOwnership.\nThe 10 largest shareholders of Nvidia in early 2024 were:\nGPU Technology Conference.\nNvidia's GPU Technology Conference (GTC) is a series of technical conferences held around the world. It originated in 2009 in San Jose, California, with an initial focus on the potential for solving computing challenges through GPUs. In recent years, the conference's focus has shifted to various applications of artificial intelligence and deep learning; including self-driving cars, healthcare, high-performance computing, and Nvidia Deep Learning Institute (DLI) training. GTC 2018 attracted over 8400 attendees. GTC 2020 was converted to a digital event and drew roughly 59,000 registrants. After several years of remote-only events, GTC in March 2024 returned to an in-person format in San Jose, California.\nAt GTC 2025, Nvidia unveiled its next-generation AI hardware, the Blackwell Ultra and Vera Rubin chips, signaling a leap toward agentic AI and reasoning-capable computing. Huang projected that AI-driven infrastructure would drive Nvidia's data center revenue to $1 trillion by 2028. The announcement also introduced Isaac GR00T N1 (humanoid robotics model), Cosmos (synthetic training data AI), and the Newton physics engine, developed in collaboration with DeepMind and Disney Research.\nProduct families.\nNvidia's product families include graphics processing units, wireless communication devices, and automotive hardware and software, such as:\nOpen-source software support.\nUntil September 23, 2013, Nvidia had not published any documentation for its advanced hardware, meaning that programmers could not write free and open-source device drivers for its products without resorting to reverse engineering.\nInstead, Nvidia provides its own binary GeForce graphics drivers for X.Org and an open-source library that interfaces with the Linux, FreeBSD or Solaris kernels and the proprietary graphics software. Nvidia also provided but stopped supporting an obfuscated open-source driver that only supports two-dimensional hardware acceleration and ships with the X.Org distribution.\nThe proprietary nature of Nvidia's drivers has generated dissatisfaction within free-software communities. In a 2012 talk, Linus Torvalds gave a middle-finger gesture and criticized Nvidia\u2019s stance toward Linux. Some Linux and BSD users insist on using only open-source drivers and regard Nvidia's insistence on providing nothing more than a binary-only driver as inadequate, given that competing manufacturers such as Intel offer support and documentation for open-source developers, and others like AMD release partial documentation and provide some active development.\nNvidia only provides x86/x64 and ARMv7-A versions of their proprietary driver; as a result, features like CUDA are unavailable on other platforms. Some users claim that Nvidia's Linux drivers impose artificial restrictions, like limiting the number of monitors that can be used at the same time, but the company has not commented on these accusations.\nIn 2014, with its Maxwell GPUs, Nvidia started to require firmware by them to unlock all features of its graphics cards.\nOn May 12, 2022, Nvidia announced that they are opensourcing their GPU kernel modules. Support for Nvidia's firmware was implemented in nouveau in 2023, which allows proper power management and GPU reclocking for Turing and newer graphics card generations.\nIn July 21, 2025, Nvidia announce to extend CUDA support to RISC-V.\nDeep learning.\nNvidia GPUs are used in deep learning, and accelerated analytics due to Nvidia's CUDA software platform and API which allows programmers to utilize the higher number of cores present in GPUs to parallelize BLAS operations which are extensively used in machine learning algorithms. They were included in many Tesla, Inc. vehicles before Musk announced at Tesla Autonomy Day in 2019 that the company developed its own SoC and full self-driving computer now and would stop using Nvidia hardware for their vehicles. These GPUs are used by researchers, laboratories, tech companies and enterprise companies. In 2009, Nvidia was involved in what was called the \"big bang\" of deep learning, \"as deep-learning neural networks were combined with Nvidia graphics processing units (GPUs)\". That year, the Google Brain team used Nvidia GPUs to create deep neural networks capable of machine learning, where Andrew Ng determined that GPUs could increase the speed of deep learning systems by about 100 times.\nDGX.\nDGX is a line of supercomputers by Nvidia.\nIn April 2016, Nvidia produced the DGX-1 based on an 8 GPU cluster, to improve the ability of users to use deep learning by combining GPUs with integrated deep learning software. Nvidia gifted its first DGX-1 to OpenAI in August 2016 to help it train larger and more complex AI models with the capability of reducing processing time from six days to two hours. It also developed Nvidia Tesla K80 and P100 GPU-based virtual machines, which are available through Google Cloud, which Google installed in November 2016. Microsoft added GPU servers in a preview offering of its N series based on Nvidia's Tesla K80s, each containing 4992 processing cores. Later that year, AWS's P2 instance was produced using up to 16 Nvidia Tesla K80 GPUs. That month Nvidia also partnered with IBM to create a software kit that boosts the AI capabilities of Watson, called IBM PowerAI. Nvidia also offers its own Nvidia Deep Learning software development kit. In 2017, the GPUs were also brought online at the Riken Center for Advanced Intelligence Project for Fujitsu. The company's deep learning technology led to a boost in its 2017 earnings.\nIn 2018, Nvidia researchers demonstrated imitation-learning techniques for industrial robots. They have created a system that, after a short revision and testing, can already be used to control the universal robots of the next generation. In addition to GPU manufacturing, Nvidia provides parallel processing capabilities to researchers and scientists that allow them to efficiently run high-performance applications.\nRobotics.\nIn 2020, Nvidia unveiled \"Omniverse\", a virtual environment designed for engineers. Nvidia also open-sourced Isaac Sim, which makes use of this Omniverse to train robots through simulations that mimic the physics of the robots and the real world.\nIn 2024, Huang oriented Nvidia's focus towards humanoid robots and self-driving cars, which he expects to gain widespread adoption.\nIn 2025, Nvidia announced Isaac GR00T N1, an open-source foundation model \"designed to expedite the development and capabilities of humanoid robots\". Neura Robotics, 1X Technologies and Vention are among the first companies to use the model.\nInception Program.\nNvidia's Inception Program was created to support startups making exceptional advances in the fields of artificial intelligence and data science. Award winners are announced at Nvidia's GTC Conference. In May 2017, the program had 1,300 companies. As of March 2018, there were 2,800 startups in the Inception Program. As of August 2021, the program has over 8,500 members in 90 countries, with cumulative funding of US$60 billion.\nControversies.\nGTX 970 hardware specifications advertising dispute.\nIssues with the GeForce GTX 970's specifications were first brought up by users when they found out that the cards, while featuring 4\u00a0GB of memory, rarely accessed memory over the 3.5\u00a0GB boundary. Further testing and investigation eventually led to Nvidia issuing a statement that the card's initially announced specifications had been altered without notice before the card was made commercially available, and that the card took a performance hit once memory over the 3.5\u00a0GB limit were put into use.\nThe card's back-end hardware specifications, initially announced as being identical to those of the GeForce GTX 980, differed in the amount of L2 cache (1.75\u00a0MB versus 2\u00a0MB in the GeForce GTX 980) and the number of ROPs (56 versus 64 in the 980). Additionally, it was revealed that the card was designed to access its memory as a 3.5\u00a0GB section, plus a 0.5\u00a0GB one, access to the latter being 7 times slower than the first one. The company then went on to promise a specific driver modification to alleviate the performance issues produced by the cutbacks suffered by the card. However, Nvidia later clarified that the promise had been a miscommunication and there would be no specific driver update for the GTX 970. Nvidia claimed that it would assist customers who wanted refunds in obtaining them. On February 26, 2015, Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang went on record in Nvidia's official blog to apologize for the incident. In February 2015 a class-action lawsuit alleging false advertising was filed against Nvidia and Gigabyte Technology in the U.S. District Court for Northern California.\nNvidia revealed that it is able to disable individual units, each containing 256\u00a0KB of L2 cache and 8 ROPs, without disabling whole memory controllers. This comes at the cost of dividing the memory bus into high speed and low speed segments that cannot be accessed at the same time unless one segment is reading while the other segment is writing because the L2/ROP unit managing both of the GDDR5 controllers shares the read return channel and the write data bus between the two GDDR5 controllers and itself. This is used in the GeForce GTX 970, which therefore can be described as having 3.5 GB in its high speed segment on a 224-bit bus and 0.5 GB in a low speed segment on a 32-bit bus.\nOn July 27, 2016, Nvidia agreed to a preliminary settlement of the U.S. class action lawsuit, offering a $30 refund on GTX 970 purchases. The agreed upon refund represents the portion of the cost of the storage and performance capabilities the consumers assumed they were obtaining when they purchased the card.\nGeForce Partner Program.\nThe Nvidia GeForce Partner Program was a marketing program designed to provide partnering companies with benefits such as public relations support, video game bundling, and marketing development funds. The program proved to be controversial, with complaints about it possibly being an anti-competitive practice.\nFirst announced in a blog post on March 1, 2018, it was canceled on May 4, 2018.\nHardware Unboxed.\nOn December 10, 2020, Nvidia told YouTube tech reviewer Steven Walton of Hardware Unboxed that it would no longer supply him with GeForce Founders Edition graphics card review units. In a Twitter message, Hardware Unboxed said, \"Nvidia have officially decided to ban us from receiving GeForce Founders Edition GPU review samples. Their reasoning is that we are focusing on rasterization instead of ray tracing. They have said they will revisit this 'should your editorial direction change.'\"\nIn emails that were disclosed by Walton from Nvidia Senior PR Manager Bryan Del Rizzo, Nvidia had said:...your GPU reviews and recommendations have continued to focus singularly on rasterization performance, and you have largely discounted all of the other technologies we offer gamers. It is very clear from your community commentary that you do not see things the same way that we, gamers, and the rest of the industry do.TechSpot, partner site of Hardware Unboxed, said, \"this and other related incidents raise serious questions around journalistic independence and what they are expecting of reviewers when they are sent products for an unbiased opinion.\"\nA number of technology reviewers came out strongly against Nvidia's move. Linus Sebastian, of Linus Tech Tips, titled the episode of his weekly WAN Show, \"NVIDIA might ACTUALLY be EVIL...\" and was highly critical of the company's move to dictate specific outcomes of technology reviews. The review site Gamers Nexus said it was, \"Nvidia's latest decision to shoot both its feet: They've now made it so that any reviewers covering RT will become subject to scrutiny from untrusting viewers who will suspect subversion by the company. Shortsighted self-own from NVIDIA.\"\nTwo days later, Nvidia reversed their stance. Hardware Unboxed sent out a Twitter message, \"I just received an email from Nvidia apologizing for the previous email &amp; they've now walked everything back.\" On December 14, Hardware Unboxed released a video explaining the controversy from their viewpoint. Via Twitter, they also shared a second apology sent by Nvidia's Del Rizzo that said \"to withhold samples because I didn't agree with your commentary is simply inexcusable and crossed the line.\"\nImproper disclosures about cryptomining.\nIn 2018, Nvidia's chips became popular for cryptomining, the process of obtaining crypto rewards in exchange for verifying transactions on distributed ledgers, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) said. However, the company failed to disclose that it was a \"significant element\" of its revenue growth from sales of chips designed for gaming, the SEC further added in a statement and charging order. Those omissions misled investors and analysts who were interested in understanding the impact of cryptomining on Nvidia's business, the SEC emphasized. Nvidia, which did not admit or deny the findings, has agreed to pay $5.5 million to settle civil charges, according to a statement made by the SEC in May 2022.\nFrench Competition Authority Investigation.\nOn September 26, 2023, Nvidia's French offices were searched by the French Competition Authority. The raid, authorized by a judge, was part of an investigation into suspected anti-competitive practices in the graphics card sector. Nvidia has not publicly commented on the incident.\nAI regulation dispute with Anthropic.\nIn July 2025, a public dispute emerged between Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang and Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei over AI regulation and industry practices. The conflict escalated when Amodei vehemently denied Huang's allegations that he sought to control the AI industry through safety concerns, calling Huang's claims an \"outrageous lie.\" The dispute centered on differing philosophies regarding AI development, with Amodei advocating for stronger regulatory oversight and \"responsible scaling policies\", while Huang promoted open-source development and criticized what Nvidia characterized as \"regulatory capture\". Nvidia responded by stating that \"lobbying for regulatory capture against open source will only stifle innovation, make AI less safe and secure, and less democratic.\" The controversy highlighted broader tensions within the AI industry between companies favoring rapid development and those emphasizing safety measures and regulation.\nProposed Shanghai facility.\nIn May 2025, U.S. senators Jim Banks and Elizabeth Warren criticized a proposed Nvidia facility in Shanghai, saying that it \"raises significant national security and economic security issues that warrant serious review.\"\nH20 production halt (2025).\nIn August 2025, Nvidia ordered suppliers to halt production of its H20 AI chip following Chinese government directives warning domestic companies against purchasing the processor due to security concerns. The company directed suppliers including Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, Samsung Electronics, and Amkor Technology to suspend work on the China-focused processor.\nThe H20 was developed in late 2023 specifically for the Chinese market to comply with U.S. export restrictions, featuring 96GB of HBM3 memory and 4.0 TB/s memory bandwidth\u2014higher than the H100\u2014but with significantly reduced computational power at 296 TFLOPs compared to the H100's 1979 TFLOPs. Despite lower raw performance, the H20 demonstrated over 20% faster performance than the H100 in large language model inference tasks due to architectural optimizations.\nPrior to the production halt, Nvidia had placed substantial orders for the H20, including 300,000 units from TSMC in July 2025, driven by strong demand from Chinese technology companies. CEO Jensen Huang denied allegations that the H20 contained security backdoors, stating the chips were designed solely for commercial use. The production suspension occurred as Nvidia was developing the B30A, a new chip based on its Blackwell architecture intended to succeed the H20 in the Chinese market.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39121", "revid": "6046894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39121", "title": "Holy Innocents", "text": ""}
{"id": "39122", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39122", "title": "Z/OS", "text": "64-bit operating system for IBM mainframes\nz/OS is a 64-bit operating system for IBM z/Architecture mainframes, introduced by IBM in October 2000. It derives from and is the successor to OS/390, which in turn was preceded by a string of MVS versions. Like OS/390, z/OS combines a number of formerly separate, related products, some of which are still optional. z/OS has the attributes of modern operating systems but also retains much of the older functionality that originated in the 1960s and is still in regular use\u2014z/OS is designed for backward compatibility.\nMajor characteristics.\nz/OS supports stable mainframe facilities such as CICS, COBOL, IMS, PL/I, IBM Db2, RACF, SNA, IBM MQ, record-oriented data access methods, REXX, CLIST, SMP/E, JCL, TSO/E, and ISPF, among others.\nz/OS also ships with a 64-bit Java runtime, C/C++ compiler based on the LLVM open-source Clang infrastructure, and UNIX (Single UNIX Specification) APIs and applications through UNIX System Services\u00a0\u2013 The Open Group certifies z/OS as a compliant UNIX operating system\u00a0\u2013 with UNIX/Linux-style hierarchical HFS and zFS file systems. These compatibilities make z/OS capable of running a range of commercial and open-source software. z/OS can communicate directly via TCP/IP, including IPv6, and includes standard HTTP servers (one from Lotus, the other Apache-derived) along with other common services such as SSH, FTP, NFS, and CIFS/SMB. z/OS is designed for high quality of service (QoS), even within a single operating system instance, and has built-in Parallel Sysplex clustering capability.\nz/OS has a Workload Manager (WLM) and dispatcher which automatically manages numerous concurrently hosted units of work running in separate key-protected address spaces according to dynamically adjustable goals. This capability inherently supports multi-tenancy within a single operating system image. However, modern IBM mainframes also offer two additional levels of virtualization: LPARs and (optionally) z/VM.\nFrom its inception z/OS has had tri-modal addressing (24-bit, 31-bit, and 64-bit). Up through Version 1.5, z/OS itself could start in either 31-bit ESA/390 or 64-bit z/Architecture mode, so it could function on older hardware, albeit without the ability to run 64-bit applications on those machines. (Only the newer z/Architecture hardware manufactured starting in the year 2000 can run 64-bit code.) IBM support for z/OS 1.5 ended on March 31, 2007, and since then, z/OS is supported only on z/Architecture mainframes and runs exclusively in 64-bit mode. Application programmers can still use any addressing mode: all applications, regardless of their addressing mode(s), can coexist without modification, and IBM maintains a commitment to tri-modal backward compatibility. However, increasing numbers of middleware products and applications, such as DB2 Version 8 and above, now require and exploit 64-bit addressing.\nIBM markets z/OS as its flagship operating system, suited for continuous, high-volume operation with high security and stability.\nz/OS is available under standard license pricing and via IBM Z New Application License Charges (zNALC) and \"IBM Z Solution Edition\", two lower-priced offerings aimed at supporting newer applications (\"new workloads\"). U.S. standard commercial z/OS pricing starts at about US$125 per month, including support, for the smallest zNALC installation running the base z/OS product plus a typical set of optional z/OS features.\nz/OS introduced Variable Workload License Charges (VWLC) and Entry Workload License Charges (EWLC) which are sub-capacity billing options. VWLC and EWLC customers only pay for peak monthly z/OS usage, not for full machine capacity as with the previous OS/390 operating system. VWLC and EWLC are also available for most IBM software products running on z/OS, and their peaks are separately calculated but can never exceed the z/OS peak. To be eligible for sub-capacity licensing, a z/OS customer must be running in 64-bit mode (which requires z/Architecture hardware), must have eliminated OS/390 from the system, and must e-mail IBM monthly sub-capacity reports. Sub-capacity billing substantially reduces software charges for most IBM mainframe customers. Advanced Workload License Charges (AWLC) is the successor to VWLC on mainframe models starting with the zEnterprise 196, and EAWLC is an option on zEnterprise 114 models. AWLC and EAWLC offer further sub-capacity discounts.\nOther features.\n64-bit memory support.\nz/OS supports 64-bit addresses for both virtual and real addresses.\nWithin each address space, z/OS initially permitted the placement of only data, not code, above the \"bar\". z/OS enforced this distinction primarily for compatibility reasons. There are no architectural impediments to allowing more than of application code per address space; Linux on IBM Z supports it, for example. IBM has started to allow Java code running on z/OS to execute above the \"bar\", for performance reasons.\nStarting with z/OS Version 2 Release 3, code may be placed and executed above the \"bar\". However, very few z/OS services may be invoked from above the \"bar\".\nMemory above the \"bar\" is obtained as \"Large Memory Objects\" in multiples of (with the expectation that applications and middleware will manage memory allocation within these large pieces). There are three types of large memory objects:\nz/OS Encryption Readiness Technology (zERT).\nz/OS Encryption Readiness Technology (zERT) monitors, records, and reports details of z/OS cryptographic network protection. It is a feature of z/OS V2R3 (and later releases) Communications Server component.\nzERT discovery.\nWith zERT, the TCP/IP stack acts as a focal point in collecting and reporting the cryptographic security attributes of IPv4 and IPv6 application traffic that is protected using the TLS/SSL, SSH and IPSec cryptographic network security protocols. The collected connection level data is written to SMF in new SMF 119 subtype 11 records for analysis.\nzERT aggregation.\nIn certain environments, the volume of SMF 119 subtype 11 records can be large. The zERT aggregation function provides an alternative SMF view of the collected security session data. This alternate view is written in the form of new SMF 119 subtype 12 records that summarize the use of security sessions by many application connections over time and which are written at the end of each SMF interval. This alternate view condenses the volume of SMF record data while still providing all the critical security information.\nIBM zERT Network Analyzer.\nz/OS Management Facility (z/OSMF) is enhanced to provide a plug-in named IBM zERT Network Analyzer. IBM zERT Network Analyzer is a web-based graphical user interface that z/OS network security administrators can use to analyze and report on data reported in zERT Summary records. With the zERT Network Analyzer, a z/OS network security administrator (typically a systems programmer with responsibility over z/OS Communications Server) can import SMF zERT summary records into a Db2 for z/OS database and then build and run custom queries against that data.\nOperational data collection and analysis.\nOperational data is data that z/OS system produces when it runs. This data indicates the health of the system and can be used to identify sources of performance and availability issues in the system. IBM Z Operational Log and Data Analytics and IBM Z Anomaly Analytics with Watson collect IT operational data from z/OS systems, analyze and provide insights about the operational data.\nIBM Z Operational Log and Data Analytics collects IT operational data from z/OS systems, transforms it to a consumable format, and streams it to third-party enterprise analytics platforms like the Elastic Stack and Splunk, or to the included operational data analysis platform. The included insights can help to visualize and search operational data to help identify the cause of operational issues.\nIBM Z Anomaly Analytics with Watson collects IT operational data from z/OS systems, uses historical IBM Z metric and log data to build a model of normal operational behavior, then analyzes real-time operational data through comparison with the model of normal operations to detect anomalous behavior, and notifies IT operations of the anomalous behavior to identify incidents that might lead to business disruption.\nOperational data types.\nIBM Z Operational Log and Data Analytics collects and analyzes both structured and unstructured data, including the following types of operational data:\nIBM Z Anomaly Analytics with Watson collects data from multiple IBM Z systems and subsystems, including IBM Db2 for z/OS, IBM CICS Transaction Server for z/OS and IBM MQ for z/OS. The following types of operational data are collected: \nz/OS Releases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Introduction to z/OS and storage concepts, TSO/E, ISPF, JCL, SDSF, and z/OS delivery and installation\n z/OS implementation and daily maintenance, defining subsystems, IBM Job Entry Subsystem 2 (JES2) and JES3, link pack area (LPA), LNKLST, authorized libraries, System Modification Program/Extended (SMP/E), and IBM Language Environment\u00ae\n Introduction to Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (DFSMS), dataset basics, storage management hardware and software, catalogs, and DFSMSTransactional Virtual Storage Access Method (VSAM), or DFSMStvs\n z/OS Communications Server, Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol(TCP/IP), and IBM Virtual Telecommunications Access Method (IBM VTAM\u00ae)\n Base and IBM Parallel Sysplex\u00ae, z/OS System Logger, Resource RecoveryServices (RRS), Global Resource Serialization (GRS), z/OS system operations, z/OSAutomatic Restart Manager (ARM), IBM Geographically Dispersed Parallel Sysplex\u007f(IBM GDPS\u00ae)\naccess-date = November 12, 2025\n Introduction to security, IBM Resource Access Control Facility (IBM RACF\u00ae), Digital certificates and public key infrastructure (PKI), Kerberos, cryptography and IBMeServer\u007f z990 integrated cryptography, zSeries firewall technologies, LightweightDire\n Printing in a z/OS environment, Infoprint Server, and Infoprint Central\n An introduction to z/OS problem diagnosis\n z/OS UNIX System Services\n Introduction to IBM z/Architecture\u00ae, zSeries processor design, zSeriesconnectivity, LPAR concepts, HCD, and IBM DS8000\u00ae\n Capacity planning, IBM Performance Management, z/OS Workload Manager(WLM), IBM Resource Management Facility (IBM RMF\u007f), and IBM System ManagementFacility (SMF)\n Workload Manager (WLM)\n JES3\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39124", "revid": "13314572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39124", "title": "Aloysius Lilius", "text": "Italian astronomer (c. 1510\u20131576)\nAloysius Lilius (c. 1510 \u2013 1576), also variously referred to as Luigi Lilio or Luigi Giglio, was an Italian physician, astronomer, philosopher and chronologist, and also the \"primary author\" who provided the proposal that (after modifications) became the basis of the Gregorian Calendar reform of 1582.\nThe crater Lilius on the Moon is named after him, as is the asteroid 2346 Lilio. In computer science, the Lilian date is the number of days since the adoption of the Gregorian calendar on 15 October 1582.\nLife and work.\nNot much is known about the early life of Lilius/Lilio/Giglio. It is known that he came from the comune of Cir\u00f2 in the province of Crotone, in the Calabria region of Italy. He studied medicine and astronomy in Naples, after which he served Count Carafa. He settled in Verona and died in 1576. Although he was still alive at the time when his proposal was presented at Rome, it does not seem that he made the presentation; it was handled by his brother Antonio, also a physician and astronomer.\nHe is primarily known as the inventor of the Gregorian Calendar: he wrote the proposal on which (after modifications) the calendar reform was based. Lilio's brother Antonio presented the manuscript to Pope Gregory XIII; it was passed to the calendar reform commission in 1575. The commission issued a printed summary entitled (Compendium of a New Plan for the Restitution of the Calendar), printed in 1577 and circulated within the Roman Catholic world in early 1578 as a consultation document. Lilio's manuscript itself is not known to have survived; the printed \"Compendium\" is the nearest known source for the details it contained.\nThe processes of consultation and deliberation meant that the reform to the calendar did not occur until 1582, six years after the death of Luigi Lilio in 1576. The reform had by then received some modifications in points of detail by the reform commission, in which one of the leading members was Christopher Clavius, who afterwards wrote defences and an explanation of the reformed calendar, including an emphatic acknowledgement of Lilio's work, especially for his provision of a useful reform for the lunar cycle: \"We owe much gratitude and praise to Luigi Giglio who contrived such an ingenious Cycle of Epacts which, inserted in the calendar, always shows the new moon and so can be easily adapted to any length of the year, if only at the right moments the due adjustment is applied.\" The papal bull () was issued on 24 February 1582 (year 1581 in Florentine Easter-based reckoning), ordering Catholic clergy to adopt the new calendar, and exhorting all Catholic sovereigns to do the same.\nThe year 2010 was the 500th year since the Lilius' birth; several activities were organized by Italian astronomers in order to recognize the great work performed by him. In particular, in Torretta di Crucoli (Crotone, Italy), a new astronomical group was created and dedicated to Luigi Lilio.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39126", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39126", "title": "OxyContin", "text": ""}
{"id": "39127", "revid": "19339494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39127", "title": "The Times", "text": "British daily newspaper\nThe Times is a British daily national newspaper based in London. It began in 1785 under the title The Daily Universal Register, adopting its modern name on 1 January 1788. \"The Times\" and its sister paper \"The Sunday Times\" (founded in 1821), are published by Times Media, since 1981 a subsidiary of News UK, in turn wholly owned by News Corp. \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\" were founded independently and have had common ownership only since 1966. It is considered a newspaper of record in the UK.\n\"The Times\" was the first newspaper to bear that name, inspiring numerous other papers around the world. In countries where these other titles are popular, the newspaper is often referred to as The London Times or The Times of London, although the newspaper is of national scope and distribution.\n\"The Times\" had an average daily circulation of 365,880 in March 2020; in the same period, \"The Sunday Times\" had an average weekly circulation of 647,622. The two newspapers also had 600,000 digital-only paid subscribers as of September 2024. An American edition of \"The Times\" has been published since 6 June 2006. A complete historical file of the digitised paper, up to 2019, is available online from Gale Cengage Learning. The political position of \"The Times\" is considered to be centre-right. \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\" launched their own radio station, Times Radio, in 2020. Its shows cover news and politics, both nationally and internationally, and had an average weekly reach of 604,000 listeners at the end of 2024.\nHistory.\n1785 to 1890.\n\"The Times\" was founded by publisher John Walter (1738\u20131812) on 1 January 1785 as \"The Daily Universal Register,\" with Walter in the role of editor. Walter had lost his job by the end of 1784 after the insurance company for which he worked went bankrupt due to losses from a Jamaican hurricane. Unemployed, Walter began a new business venture. At that time, Henry Johnson invented the logography, a new typography that was reputedly faster and more precise (although three years later, it was proved less efficient than advertised). Walter bought the logography's patent and, with it, opened a printing house to produce books. The first publication of \"The Daily Universal Register\" was on 1 January 1785. Walter changed the title after 940 editions on 1 January 1788 to \"The Times\". In 1803, Walter handed ownership and editorship to his son of the same name. Walter Sr's pioneering efforts to obtain Continental news, especially from France, helped build the paper's reputation among policy makers and financiers, in spite of a sixteen-month incarceration in Newgate Prison for libels printed in \"The Times\".\n\"The Times\" used contributions from significant figures in the fields of politics, science, literature, and the arts to build its reputation. For much of its early life, the profits of \"The Times\" were very large and the competition minimal, so it could pay far better than its rivals for information or writers. Beginning in 1814, the paper was printed on the new steam-driven cylinder press developed by Friedrich Koenig (1774\u20131833). In 1815, \"The Times\" had a circulation of 5,000. It had grown to 9,800 by 1837 and was 51,200 in 1854.\nThomas Barnes was appointed general editor in 1817. In the same year, the paper's printer, James Lawson, died and passed the business onto his son, John Joseph Lawson (1802\u20131852). Under the editorship of Barnes and his successor in 1841, John Thadeus Delane, the influence of \"The Times\" rose to great heights, especially in politics and amongst the City of London. Peter Fraser and Edward Sterling were two noted journalists, and gained for \"The Times\" the pompous/satirical nickname 'The Thunderer' (from \"We thundered out the other day an article on social and political reform.\"). The increased circulation and influence of the paper were based in part to its early adoption of the steam-driven rotary printing press. Distribution via steam trains to rapidly growing concentrations of urban populations helped ensure the profitability of the paper and its growing influence.\n\"The Times\" was one of the first newspapers to send war correspondents to cover particular conflicts. William Howard Russell, the paper's correspondent with the army in the Crimean War, was immensely influential with his dispatches back to England.\n1890 to 1981.\n\"The Times\" faced financial failure in 1890 under Arthur Fraser Walter, but it was rescued by an energetic editor, Charles Frederic Moberly Bell. During his tenure (1890\u20131911), \"The Times\" became associated with selling the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" using aggressive American marketing methods introduced by Horace Everett Hooper and his advertising executive, Henry Haxton. Due to legal fights between the \"Britannica's\" two owners, Hooper and Walter Montgomery Jackson, \"The Times\" severed its connection in 1908 and was bought by pioneering newspaper magnate, Alfred Harmsworth, later Lord Northcliffe.\nIn editorials published on 29 and 31 July 1914, Wickham Steed, the \"Times's\" Chief Editor, argued that the British Empire should enter World War I. On 8 May 1920, also under the editorship of Steed, \"The Times\", in an editorial, endorsed the anti-Semitic fabrication \"The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion\" as a genuine document, and called Jews the world's greatest danger. In the leader entitled \"The Jewish Peril, a Disturbing Pamphlet: Call for Inquiry\", Steed wrote about \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\": What are these 'Protocols'? Are they authentic? If so, what malevolent assembly concocted these plans and gloated over their exposition? Are they forgery? If so, whence comes the uncanny note of prophecy, prophecy in part fulfilled, in part so far gone in the way of fulfillment?\". The following year, when Philip Graves, the Constantinople (modern Istanbul) correspondent of \"The Times\", exposed \"The Protocols\" as a forgery, \"The Times\" retracted the editorial of the previous year.\nIn 1922, John Jacob Astor, son of the 1st Viscount Astor, bought \"The Times\" from the Northcliffe estate. The paper gained a measure of notoriety in the 1930s with its advocacy of German appeasement; editor Geoffrey Dawson was closely allied with government supporters of appeasement, most notably Neville Chamberlain. Candid news reports by Norman Ebbut from Berlin that warned of Nazi warmongering were rewritten in London to support the appeasement policy.\nKim Philby, a double agent with primary allegiance to the Soviet Union, was a correspondent for the newspaper in Spain during the Spanish Civil War of the late 1930s. Philby was admired for his courage in obtaining high-quality reporting from the front lines of the bloody conflict. He later joined British Military Intelligence (MI6) during World War II, was promoted into senior positions after the war ended, and defected to the Soviet Union when discovery was inevitable in 1963.\nBetween 1941 and 1946, the left-wing British historian E. H. Carr was assistant editor. Carr was well known for the strongly pro-Soviet tone of his editorials. In December 1944, when fighting broke out in Athens between the Greek Communist ELAS and the British Army, Carr in a \"Times\" leader sided with the Communists, leading Winston Churchill to condemn him and the article in a speech to the House of Commons. As a result of Carr's editorial, \"The Times\" became popularly known during that stage of World War II as \"the threepenny \"Daily Worker\"\" (the price of the Communist Party's \"Daily Worker\" being one penny).\nOn 3 May 1966, it resumed printing news on the front page; previously, the front page had been given over to small advertisements, usually of interest to the moneyed classes in British society. Also in 1966, the Royal Arms, which had been a feature of the newspaper's masthead since its inception, was abandoned. In the same year, members of the Astor family sold the paper to Canadian publishing magnate Roy Thomson. His Thomson Corporation brought it under the same ownership as \"The Sunday Times\" to form Times Newspapers Limited.\nAn industrial dispute prompted the management to shut down the paper for nearly a year, from 1 December 1978 to 12 November 1979.\nThe Thomson Corporation management was struggling to run the business due to the 1979 energy crisis and union demands. Management sought a buyer who was in a position to guarantee the survival of both titles, had the resources, and was committed to funding the introduction of modern printing methods.\nSeveral suitors appeared, including Robert Maxwell, Tiny Rowland and Lord Rothermere; however, only one buyer was in a position to meet the full Thomson remit, Australian media magnate Rupert Murdoch. Robert Holmes \u00e0 Court, another Australian magnate, had previously tried to buy \"The Times\" in 1980.\nFrom 1981.\nIn 1981, \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\" were bought from Thomson by Rupert Murdoch's News International. The acquisition followed three weeks of intensive bargaining with the unions by company negotiators John Collier and Bill O'Neill. Murdoch gave legal undertakings to maintain separate journalism resources for the two titles. The Royal Arms were reintroduced to the masthead at about this time, but whereas previously it had been that of the reigning monarch, it would now be that of the House of Hanover, who were on the throne when the newspaper was founded.\nAfter 14 years as editor, William Rees-Mogg resigned upon completion of the change of ownership. Murdoch began to make his mark on the paper by appointing Harold Evans as his replacement. One of his most important changes was the introduction of new technology and efficiency measures. Between March 1981 and May 1982, following agreement with print unions, the hot-metal Linotype printing process used to print \"The Times\" since the 19th century was phased out and replaced by computer input and photocomposition. \"The Times\" and the \"Sunday Times\" were able to reduce their print room staff by half as a result. However, direct input of text by journalists (\"single-stroke\" input) was still not achieved, and this was to remain an interim measure until the Wapping dispute of 1986, when \"The Times\" moved from New Printing House Square in Gray's Inn Road (near Fleet Street) to new offices in Wapping.\nRobert Fisk, seven times British International Journalist of the Year, resigned as foreign correspondent in 1988 over what he saw as \"political censorship\" of his article on the shooting down of Iran Air Flight 655 in July 1988. He wrote in detail about his reasons for resigning from the paper due to meddling with his stories, and the paper's pro-Israel stance.\nIn June 1990, \"The Times\" ceased its policy of using courtesy titles (\"Mr\", \"Mrs\", or \"Miss\" prefixes) for living persons before full names on the first reference, but it continues to use them before surnames on subsequent references. In 1992, it accepted the use of \"Ms\" for unmarried women \"if they express a preference.\"\nIn November 2003, News International began producing the newspaper in both broadsheet and tabloid sizes. Over the next year, the broadsheet edition was withdrawn from Northern Ireland, Scotland, and the West Country. Since 1 November 2004, the paper has been printed solely in tabloid format.\nOn 6 June 2005, \"The Times\" redesigned its Letters page, dropping the practice of printing correspondents' full postal addresses. Published letters were long regarded as one of the paper's key constituents. According to its leading article \"From Our Own Correspondents\", the reason for the removal of full postal addresses was to fit more letters onto the page.\nIn a 2007 meeting with the House of Lords Select Committee on Communications, which was investigating media ownership and the news, Murdoch stated that the law and the independent board prevented him from exercising editorial control.\nIn May 2008, printing of \"The Times\" switched from Wapping to new plants at Waltham Cross in Hertfordshire, and Merseyside and Glasgow, enabling the paper to be produced with full colour on every page for the first time.\nOn 26 July 2012, to coincide with the official start of the London 2012 Olympics and the issuing of a series of souvenir front covers, \"The Times\" added the suffix \"of London\" to its masthead.\nIn March 2016, the paper dropped its rolling digital coverage for a series of 'editions' of the paper at 9am, midday, and 5pm on weekdays. The change also saw a redesign of the paper's app for smartphones and tablets.\nIn April 2018, IPSO upheld a complaint against \"The Times\" for its report of a court hearing in a Tower Hamlets fostering case.\nIn April 2019, culture secretary Jeremy Wright said he was minded to allow a request by News UK to relax the legal undertakings given in 1981 to maintain separate journalism resources for \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\".\nIn 2019, IPSO upheld complaints against \"The Times\" over their article \"GPS data shows container visited trafficking hotspot\", and for three articles as part of a series on pollution in Britain's waterways: \"No river safe for bathing\", \"Filthy Business\", and \"Behind the story\". IPSO also upheld complaints in 2019 against articles headlined \"Funding secret of scientists against hunt trophy ban,\" and \"Britons lose out to rush of foreign medical students.\"\nIn 2019, \"The Times\" published an article about Imam Abdullah Patel that wrongly claimed Patel had blamed Israel for the 2003 murder of a British police officer by a terror suspect in Manchester. The story also wrongly claimed that Patel ran a primary school that had been criticised by Ofsted for segregating parents at events, which Ofsted said was contrary to \"British democratic principles.\" \"The Times\" settled Patel's defamation claim by issuing an apology and offering to pay damages and legal costs. Patel's solicitor, Zillur Rahman, said the case \"highlights the shocking level of journalism to which the Muslim community are often subject\".\nIn 2019, \"The Times\" published an article titled \"Female Circumcision is like clipping a nail, claimed speaker\". The article featured a photo of Sultan Choudhury beside the headline, leading some readers to incorrectly infer that Choudhury had made the comment. Choudhury lodged a complaint with the Independent Press Standards Organisation (IPSO) and sued \"The Times\" for libel. In 2020, \"The Times\" issued an apology, amended its article, and agreed to pay Choudhury damages and legal costs. Choudhury's solicitor, Nishtar Saleem, said, \"This is another example of irresponsible journalism. Publishing sensational excerpts on a 'free site' while concealing the full article behind a paywall is a dangerous game\".\nIn December 2020, Cage and Moazzam Begg received damages of \u00a330,000 plus costs in a libel case they had brought against \"The Times\" newspaper. In June 2020, a report in \"The Times\" suggested that Cage and Begg were supporting a man who had been arrested in relation to a knife attack in Reading in which three men were murdered. \"The Times\" report also suggested that Cage and Begg were excusing the actions of the accused man by mentioning mistakes made by the police and others. In addition to paying damages, \"The Times\" printed an apology. Cage stated that the damages amount would be used to \"expose state-sponsored Islamophobia and those complicit with it in the press. ... The Murdoch press empire has actively supported xenophobic elements and undermined principles of open society and accountability. ... We will continue to shine a light on war criminals and torture apologists and press barons who fan the flames of hate\".\n\"The Times\" was forced to correct a false article in January 2025 about electric vehicle (EV) sales, following successful complaint to IPSO.\nOn 28 October 2025, \"The Times\" published an article falsely claiming to feature quotes from former New York City mayor Bill de Blasio regarding mayoral candidate Zohran Mamdani; the article was deleted two hours after publication. The actual interviewee was later revealed to be Bill DeBlasio, a wine importer living in Huntington Station, New York. DeBlasio used ChatGPT to generate a response to the reporter's initial email, and received an interview through his home's Ring doorbell. On 30 October, \"The Nation\" published an article by the former mayor de Blasio about the incident, stating that he gave the reporter some credit for apologizing to him directly, but expressing concern about the state of journalism \"in a hyper-partisan era when standards of objectivity and decency are decaying week by week\".\nContent.\n\"The Times\" features news for the first half of the paper; the Opinion/Comment section begins after the first news section, with world news normally following this. The Register, which contains obituaries, a Court &amp; Social section, and related material, follows the business pages on the centre spread. The sports section is at the end of the main paper.\n\"Times2\".\n\"The Times\"' main supplement, every day, is \"times2\", featuring various columns. It was discontinued in early March 2010, but reintroduced on 12 October 2010 after discontinuation was criticised. Its regular features include a puzzles section called \"Mind Games\". Its previous incarnation began on 5 September 2005, before which it was called \"T2\" and previously \"Times 2\". The supplement contains arts and lifestyle features, TV and radio listings, and theatre reviews. The newspaper employs Richard Morrison as its classical music critic.\n\"The Game\".\n\"The Game\" is included in the newspaper on Mondays, and details all the weekend's football activity (Premier League and Football League Championship, League One and League Two.) The Scottish edition of \"The Game\" also includes results and analysis from Scottish Premier League games. During the FIFA World Cup and UEFA European Championship, there is a daily supplement of \"The Game\".\nSaturday supplements.\nThe Saturday edition of \"The Times\" contains a variety of supplements.\nBeginning on 5 July 2003 (issue 67807) and ending after 17 January 2009 (issue 69535), Saturday issues of \"The Times\" came with a weekly magazine called \"TheKnowledge\" containing listings for the upcoming week (from that Saturday to the next Friday) compiled by PA Arts &amp; Leisure (part of Press Association Ltd). Its taglines/coverlines include \"Your pocket guide to what's on in London\", \"The World's Greatest City, Cut Down To Size\", and \"Your critical guide to the cultural week\". It has been described as \"a weekly entertainment guide to what to see and what to miss\".\nThese supplements were relaunched on 24 January 2009 as: \"Sport\", \"Saturday Review\" (arts, books, TV listings, and ideas), \"Weekend\" (including travel and lifestyle features), \"Playlist\" (an entertainment listings guide), and \"The Times Magazine\" (columns on various topics).\n\"The Times Magazine\".\n\"The Times Magazine\" features columns touching on various subjects such as celebrities, fashion and beauty, food and drink, homes and gardens, or simply writers' anecdotes. Notable contributors include Giles Coren, Food and Drink Writer of the Year in 2005 and Nadiya Hussain, winner of \"The Great British Bake Off\".\nOnline presence.\n\"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\" have had an online presence since 1996, originally at \"the-times.co.uk\" and \"sunday-times.co.uk\", and later at \"timesonline.co.uk\" and \"thetimes.co.uk\". Both papers are now hosted on \"thetimes.com\". There are also iOS and Android editions of both newspapers available in the same app, \"The Times: UK\" &amp; \"World News\". Both papers are also hosted in the Classic app, a purpose-built tablet-only application. Since July 2010, News UK has required readers who do not subscribe to the print edition to pay \u00a32 per week to read \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\" online.\nVisits to the websites decreased by 87% after the paywall was introduced in October 2010, from 21 million unique users per month to 2.7 million one month later. In November 2024, \"thetimes.com\" site had a readership of 103 million. In October 2011, there were around 111,000 subscribers to \"The Times\"' digital products, which increased to 600,000 digital subscribers by September 2024. A Reuters Institute survey in 2024 ranked \"The Times\" as having the ninth highest trust rating out of 15 different outlets polled.\nThe Times Digital Archive is available by subscription.\nThe Wikipedia community considers \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\" to be generally reliable sources.\nOwnership.\n\"The Times\" has had the following eight owners since its foundation in 1785:\nReadership.\n\"The Times\" had a circulation of 70,405 on 5 September 1870, due to a reduction in price and the Franco-Prussian War. \"The Times\" had a circulation of 150,000 in March 1914, due to a reduction in price. \"The Times\" had a circulation of 248,338 in 1958, a circulation of 408,300 in 1968, and a circulation of 295,863 in 1978. At the time of Harold Evans' appointment as editor in 1981, \"The Times\" had an average daily sale of 282,000 copies in comparison to the 1.4 million daily sales of its traditional rival, \"The Daily Telegraph\". By 1988, \"The Times\" had a circulation of 443,462. By November 2005, \"The Times\" sold an average of 691,283 copies per day, the second-highest of any British \"quality\" newspaper (after \"The Daily Telegraph\", which had a circulation of 903,405 copies in the period), and the highest in terms of full-rate sales. By March 2014, average daily circulation of \"The Times\" had fallen to 394,448 copies, compared to \"The Daily Telegraph\"'s 523,048, with the two retaining respectively the second-highest and highest circulations among British \"quality\" newspapers. In contrast, \"The Sun\", the highest-selling \"tabloid\" daily newspaper in the United Kingdom, sold an average of 2,069,809 copies in March 2014, and the \"Daily Mail\", the highest-selling \"middle market\" British daily newspaper, sold an average of 1,708,006 copies in the period.\n\"The Sunday Times\" has significantly higher circulation than \"The Times\", and sometimes outsells \"The Sunday Telegraph\". In January 2019, \"The Times\" had a circulation of 417,298 and \"The Sunday Times\" 712,291.\nIn a 2009 national readership survey, \"The Times\" was found to have the highest number of ABC1 25\u201344 readers and the largest number of readers in London of any of the \"quality\" papers.\nTypeface.\n\"The Times\" is the originator of the widely used Times New Roman typeface, originally developed by Stanley Morison of \"The Times\" in collaboration with Monotype Imaging for its legibility in low-tech printing. In November 2006, \"The Times\" began printing headlines in a new typeface, Times Modern. \"The Times\" was printed in broadsheet format for 219 years, but switched to compact size in 2004 in an attempt to appeal more to younger readers and commuters using public transport. \"The Sunday Times\" remains a broadsheet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe... typeface\u00a0\u2013 The Times New Roman\u00a0\u2013 debuted on October 3, 1932... The design was exclusively available to \"The Times\" for one year, and then made available to other customers on October 3, 1933. (Documented in a few places, but the reference I have in front of me is The Monotype Recorder vol. XXXI, no. 247, from September\u2013October 1932. Complicating matters, this was misprinted as being vol. XXI, no. 246.)\nThis is the big one: the previous face was not known as Times Old Roman. Jeez. Just think about it: why would something be known as \"old\" whatever before there was a new version? In fact\u00a0\u2013 and this is documented in \"Printing in the Twentieth Century\" (published by \"The Times\"), The Monotype Recorder, and elsewhere\u00a0\u2013 the various typefaces used before the introduction (The) Times New Roman [\"sic\"] didn't really have a formal name.\nThey were a suite of types originally made by Miller and Co. (later Miller &amp; Richards) in Edinburgh around 1813, generally referred to as \"modern\". When The Times began using Monotype (and other hot-metal machines) in 1908, this design was remade by Monotype for its equipment. As near as I can tell, it looks like Monotype Series no. 1\u00a0\u2013 Modern (which was based on a Miller &amp; Richards typeface)\u00a0\u2013 was what was used up until 1932.\nDan Rhatigan, type director\nIn 1908, \"The Times\" started using the \"Monotype Modern\" typeface.\n\"The Times\" commissioned the serif typeface Times New Roman, created by Victor Lardent at the English branch of Monotype, in 1931. It was commissioned after Stanley Morison had written an article criticising \"The Times\" for being badly printed and typographically antiquated. Victor Lardent, an artist from \"The Times\"' advertising department, created the typeface under Morison's supervision. Morison used an older typeface named Plantin as the basis for his design but made revisions for legibility and economy of space. \"Times New Roman\" made its debut in the issue of 3 October 1932. After one year, the design was released for commercial sale. \"The Times\" stayed with \"Times New Roman\" for 40 years, but new production techniques and the format change from broadsheet to tabloid in 2004 have caused the newspaper to switch typeface five times since 1972. However, all the new typeface have been variants of the original New Roman type:\nPolitical alignment.\nHistorically, the paper was not overtly pro-Tory or Whig, but has been a long time bastion of the British Establishment and Empire. In 1959, the historian of journalism Allan Nevins analysed the importance of \"The Times\" in shaping the views of events of London's elite, writing:\nFor much more than a century \"The Times\" has been an integral and important part of the political structure of Great Britain. Its news and its editorial comment have in general been carefully coordinated, and have at most times been handled with an earnest sense of responsibility. While the paper has admitted some trivia to its columns, its whole emphasis has been on important public affairs treated with an eye to the best interests of Britain. To guide this treatment, the editors have for long periods been in close touch with 10 Downing Street.\n\"The Times\" adopted a stance described as \"peculiarly detached\" at the 1945 general election; although it was increasingly critical of the Conservative Party's campaign, it did not advocate a vote for any one party. However, the newspaper reverted to the Conservatives for the next election five years later. It supported the Conservatives for the subsequent three elections, followed by support for both the Conservatives and the Liberal Party for the next five elections, expressly supporting a Con-Lib coalition in 1974. The paper then backed the Conservatives solidly until 1997, when it declined to make any party endorsement but supported individual (primarily Eurosceptic) candidates.\nFor the 2001 general election, \"The Times\" declared its support for Tony Blair's Labour government, which was re-elected by a landslide (although not as large as in 1997). It supported Labour again in 2005, when Labour achieved a third successive win, though with a reduced majority. In 2004, according to MORI, the voting intentions of its readership were 40% for the Conservative Party, 29% for the Liberal Democrats, and 26% for Labour. For the 2010 general election, the newspaper declared its support for the Conservatives once again; the election ended in the Tories taking the most votes and seats but having to form a coalition with the Liberal Democrats in order to form a government as they had failed to gain an overall majority.\nIts changes in political alignment make it the most varied newspaper in terms of political support in British history. Some columnists in \"The Times\" are connected to the Conservative Party, such as Daniel Finkelstein, Tim Montgomerie, Matthew Parris, and Matt Ridley, but there are also columnists connected to the Labour Party, such as David Aaronovitch and Jenni Russell.\n\"The Times\" occasionally makes endorsements for foreign elections. In November 2012, it endorsed a second term for Democrat Barack Obama, although it also expressed reservations about his foreign policy.\nDuring the 2019 Conservative leadership election, \"The Times\" endorsed Boris Johnson and subsequently endorsed the Conservative Party in the general election of that year.\nIn 2022, Tony Gallagher was appointed to replace John Witherow, who had served nine years as editor. A former \"Sun\" editor, Gallagher enthusiastically backed Brexit during the 2016 EU referendum. According to \"The Guardian\", \"\"The Times\"' readership is split politically, with journalists at the outlet speculating on how Gallagher will shape the paper's editorial line as the prospect of a Labour government became more likely (in 2024).\"\n\"The Times\" did not endorse any political party at the 2024 general election. In its leader article, it stated that Labour \"cannot expect an endorsement\" as it had \"yet to earn the trust of the British people\" and had been \"sparing with the truth about what it will do in office\".\nSponsorships.\n\"The Times\", along with the British Film Institute, sponsored the BFI London Film Festival from 2003 to 2009. It also sponsors the Cheltenham Literature Festival and the Asia House Festival of Asian Literature at Asia House, London.\nEditors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated publications.\nAn Irish digital edition of the paper was launched in September 2015 at TheTimes.ie. A print edition was launched in June 2017, replacing the international edition previously distributed in Ireland. The Irish edition was set to close in June 2019 with the loss of 20 jobs.\n\"The Times Literary Supplement\" (\"TLS\") first appeared in 1902 as a supplement to \"The Times\", becoming a separately paid-for weekly literature and society magazine in 1914. The \"TLS\" is owned and published by News International and co-operates closely with \"The Times\", with its online version hosted on \"The Times\" website, and its editorial offices based in 1 London Bridge Street, London.\nBetween 1951 and 1966, \"The Times\" published a separately paid-for quarterly science review, \"The Times Science Review\". \"The Times\" started a new, free, monthly science magazine, \"Eureka\", in October 2009. The magazine closed in October 2012.\n\"The Times Review of Industry\" (which began in 1947) and \"Technology\" (which began in 1957) merged in March 1963 to become \"The Times Review of Industry &amp; Technology\". From 1952, \"The Times Review of Industry\" included the \"London and Cambridge Economic Bulletin\".\nTimes Atlases have been produced since 1895. The Collins Bartholomew imprint of HarperCollins Publishers is currently responsible for producing them. The flagship product is \"The Times Comprehensive Atlas of the World\".\nIn 1971, \"The Times\" began publishing the \"Times Higher Education Supplement\" (now known as the \"Times Higher Education\") which focuses its coverage on tertiary education.\nHistorical value.\nIn 1915, R P Farley said \"the files of \"The Times\" must be constantly studied\" as an authority for the political and social history of the English people during the period from the Reform Bill 1832 to the Education Act 1870 (1832 to 1870). From 1971 to 1973, John Joseph Bagley said \"The Times\" is \"valuable\" as a source of nineteenth-century English history and that the annual index to \"The Times\" is useful for the twentieth century. In 2003, Richard Krzys said \"The Times\" is very reliable as a source of history. In 2016, Denise Bates said \"The Times\" is \"indispensable\" as a source for historical events of national importance.\nIn 2019, James Oldham said \"The Times\" is an important source for nisi prius trials. In 2015, Johnston and Plummer said that \"The Times\" is an important source for music reviews.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the dystopian future world of George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", \"The Times\" has been transformed into an organ of the totalitarian ruling party. The book's lead character, Winston Smith is employed to rewrite past issues of the newspaper for the Ministry of Truth.\nRex Stout's fictional detective Nero Wolfe is described as fond of solving the London \"Times\"' crossword puzzle at his New York home, in preference to those of American papers.\nIn the James Bond series by Ian Fleming, James Bond reads \"The Times\". As described by Fleming in \"From Russia, with Love,\" \"The Times\" was \"the only paper that Bond ever read.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39129", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39129", "title": "OS/390", "text": "Operating system for IBM mainframes\nOS/390 is an IBM operating system for the System/390 IBM mainframe computers.\nOverview.\nOS/390 was introduced in late 1995 in an effort to simplify the packaging and ordering for the key, entitled elements needed to complete a fully functional Multiple Virtual Storage (MVS) operating system package. These elements included, but were not limited to:\nAn additional benefit of the OS/390 packaging concept was to improve reliability, availability and serviceability (RAS) for the operating system, as the number of different combinations of elements that a customer could order and run was drastically reduced. This reduced the overall time required for customers to test and deploy the operating system in their environments, as well as reducing the number of customer-reported problems, errors (Authorized Program Analysis Reports and Program temporary fixes) arising from the variances in element levels.\nIn December 2001 IBM extended OS/390 to include support for 64-bit zSeries processors and added various other improvements, and the result is now named z/OS. IBM ended support for the older OS/390-branded versions in late 2004.\nOS/390 Releases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39130", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39130", "title": "Boadicea", "text": ""}
{"id": "39132", "revid": "43912531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39132", "title": "Faunus", "text": "Roman deity of the countryside\nIn ancient Roman religion and myth, Faunus was the rustic god of the forest, plains and fields; when he made cattle fertile, he was called Inuus. He came to be equated in literature with the Greek god Pan, after which Romans depicted him as a horned god.\nFaunus was one of the oldest Roman deities, known as the \"di indigetes\". According to the epic poet Virgil, he was a legendary king of the Latins. His shade was consulted as a goddess of prophecy under the name of Fatuus, with oracles in the sacred grove of Tibur, around the well Albunea, and on the Aventine Hill in ancient Rome itself.\nMarcus Terentius Varro asserted that the oracular responses were given in Saturnian verse. Faunus revealed the future in dreams and voices that were communicated to those who came to sleep in his precincts, lying on the fleeces of sacrificed lambs. Fowler (1899) suggested that \"Faunus\" is identical with \"Favonius\", one of the Roman wind gods (compare the Anemoi).\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Faunus\" is generally thought to stem from Proto-Italic *\"fawe\" or \"*fawono\" (variant *\"faw\u014dn(jo)\"), thus being cognate with Umbrian \"fons\", \"foner\" ('merciful'). It may ultimately derive from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) \"*b\u02b0h\u2082u-n\" ('favourable'), which also reflects Old Irish \"b\u00faan\" ('good, favourable, firm') and Middle Welsh \"bun\" ('maiden, sweetheart').(p102)\nAnother theory contends that Faunus is the Latin outcome of PIE *\"dhau-no-\" ('the strangler', thus denoting the 'wolf'), a proposition suggested by the fact that the two Luperci (\"wolf-men\", from Latin \"lupus\", 'wolf') are commonly treated as temporary priests of the god Faunus. If so, his name would be cognate with the Greek \"\u03b8\u03b1\u1fe6\u03bd\u03bf\u03bd\" (a less common synonym of \"\u03b8\u03b7\u03c1\u03af\u03bf\u03bd\", 'wild animal').\nOrigin.\nFaunus may be of Indo-European origin and related to the Vedic god Rudra. It is believed that he was worshipped by traditional Roman farmers before becoming a nature deity.\nConsorts and family.\nIn fable Faunus appears as an old king of Latium, grandson of Saturnus, son of Picus, and father of Latinus by the nymph Marica (who was also sometimes Faunus' mother). After his death he is raised to the position of a tutelary deity of the land, for his many services to agriculture and cattle-breeding.\nA goddess of like attributes, called Fauna and Fatua, was associated in his worship. She was regarded as his sister and wife. The female deity Bona Dea was often equated with Fauna.\nAs Pan was accompanied by the \"Paniskoi\", or little Pans, so the existence of many Fauni was assumed besides the chief Faunus. Fauns are place-spirits (\"genii\") of untamed woodland. Educated, Hellenizing Romans connected their fauns with the Greek satyrs, who were wild and orgiastic drunken followers of Dionysus, with a distinct origin.\nConflation with Greek Pan.\nFaunus was naturally conflated with the Greek god Pan, who was a pastoral god of shepherds who was said to reside in Arcadia. \nWith the increasing influence of Greek mythology on Roman mythology in the 3rd and 2nd\u00a0centuries\u00a0BCE, the Romans identified their own deities with Greek ones in what was called \"interpretatio Romana\".\nHowever, the two deities were also considered separate by many; for instance, the epic poet Virgil, in his \"Aeneid\", independently mentioned both Faunus and Pan.\nPan had always been depicted with horns whereas the original Roman Faunus was not. An indication of the cultural conflation of the two can be seen in many Roman depictions of Faunus that also began to display Faunus with horns.\nFestivals.\nIn Justin's epitome, Faunus is identified with \"Lupercus\" (\"he who wards off the wolf\"), otherwise a priest of Faunus. Livy named Inuus as the god originally worshiped at the Lupercalia, 15\u00a0February, when his priests (\"Luperci\") wore goat-skins and hit passers-by with goatskin whips.\nTwo festivals, called Faunalia, were celebrated in his honour\u2014one on 13\u00a0February, in the temple of Faunus on the island in the Tiber, the other on 5\u00a0December, when the peasants brought him rustic offerings and amused themselves with dancing.\nA euhemeristic account made Faunus a Latin king, son of Picus and Canens. He was then revered as the god Fatuus after his death, worshipped in a sacred forest outside what is now Tivoli, but had been known since Etruscan times as Tibur, the seat of the Tiburtine Sibyl. His numinous presence was recognized by wolf skins, with wreaths and goblets.\nIn Nonnos' \"Dionysiaca\", Faunus/Phaunos accompanied Dionysus when the god campaigned in India.\nLater worship.\nFaunus was worshipped across the Roman Empire for many centuries. An example of this was a set of thirty-two 4th\u00a0century spoons found near Thetford in England in 1979. They had been engraved with the name \"Faunus\", and each had a different epithet after the god's name. The spoons also bore Christian symbols, and it has been suggested that these were initially Christian but later taken and devoted to Faunus by pagans. The 4th\u00a0century was a time of large scale Christianisation, and the discovery provides evidence that even during the decline of traditional Roman religion, the god Faunus was still worshipped. \nIn Gaul, Faunus was identified with the Celtic Dusios.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39133", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39133", "title": "Good Friday agreement", "text": ""}
{"id": "39134", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39134", "title": "Pearl Harbour, New Zealand", "text": "Pearl Harbour is a small harbour at the head of the Waiau River, in the town of Manapouri on the South Island of New Zealand.\nThe harbour and town are located at the south-east corner of Lake Manapouri. The name was given to the harbour soon after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii in 1941.\nPearl Harbour is used mainly by ferry and water taxi operators transporting Meridian Energy staff across Lake Manapouri to the Manapouri Hydroelectric Power Station, on the West Arm of the lake. Ferries also carry tourists travelling to the power station and onwards to Doubtful Sound / Patea, located on the coast beyond the West Arm. It also provides easy access to Lake Manapouri for recreational boat users.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39135", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39135", "title": "Martin Luther King, Jr", "text": ""}
{"id": "39136", "revid": "44302498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39136", "title": "Accelerating expansion of the universe", "text": "Cosmological phenomenon\nObservations show that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, such that the velocity at which a distant galaxy recedes from the observer is continuously increasing with time. The accelerated expansion of the universe was discovered in 1998 by two independent projects, the Supernova Cosmology Project and the High-Z Supernova Search Team, which used distant type Ia supernovae to measure the acceleration. The idea was that as type Ia supernovae have almost the same intrinsic brightness (a standard candle), and since objects that are further away appear dimmer, the observed brightness of these supernovae can be used to measure the distance to them. The distance can then be compared to the supernovae's cosmological redshift, which measures how much the universe has expanded since the supernova occurred; the Hubble law established that the further away an object is, the faster it is receding. The unexpected result was that objects in the universe are moving away from one another at an accelerating rate. Cosmologists at the time expected that recession velocity would always be decelerating, due to the gravitational attraction of the matter in the universe. Three members of these two groups have subsequently been awarded Nobel Prizes for their discovery. Confirmatory evidence has been found in baryon acoustic oscillations, and in analyses of the clustering of galaxies.\nThe accelerated expansion of the universe is thought to have begun since the universe entered its dark-energy-dominated era roughly 5\u00a0billion years ago.\nWithin the framework of general relativity, an accelerated expansion can be accounted for by a positive value of the cosmological constant \u039b, equivalent to the presence of a positive vacuum energy, dubbed \"dark energy\". While there are alternative possible explanations, the description assuming dark energy (positive \u039b) is used in the standard model of cosmology, which also includes cold dark matter (CDM) and is known as the Lambda-CDM model.\nBackground.\nIn the decades since the detection of cosmic microwave background (CMB) in 1965, the Big Bang model has become the most accepted model explaining the evolution of our universe. The Friedmann equation defines how the energy in the universe drives its expansion.\nformula_1\nwhere the pressure P is defined by the cosmological model chosen &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nPhysicists at one time were so assured of the deceleration of the universe's expansion that they introduced a so-called deceleration parameter \"q\"0. Recent observations indicate this deceleration parameter is negative.\nRelation to inflation.\nAccording to the theory of cosmic inflation, the very early universe underwent a period of very rapid, quasi-exponential expansion. While the time-scale for this period of expansion was far shorter than that of the existing expansion, this was a period of accelerated expansion with some similarities to the current epoch.\nTechnical definition.\nThe definition of \"accelerating expansion\" is that the second time derivative of the cosmic scale factor, formula_2, is positive, which is equivalent to the deceleration parameter, formula_3, being negative. However, note this does not imply that the Hubble parameter is increasing with time. Since the Hubble parameter is defined as formula_4, it follows from the definitions that the derivative of the Hubble parameter is given by\nformula_5\nso the Hubble parameter is decreasing with time unless formula_6. Observations prefer formula_7, which implies that formula_2 is positive but formula_9 is negative. Essentially, this implies that the cosmic recession velocity of any one particular galaxy is increasing with time, but its velocity/distance ratio is still decreasing; thus different galaxies expanding across a sphere of fixed radius cross the sphere more slowly at later times.\nIt is seen from above that the case of \"zero acceleration/deceleration\" corresponds to formula_10 is a linear function of formula_11, formula_12, formula_13, and formula_14.\nEvidence for acceleration.\nThe rate of expansion of the universe can be analyzed using the magnitude-redshift relationship of astronomical objects using standard candles, or their distance-redshift relationship using standard rulers. Also a factor is the growth of large-scale structure, finding that the observed values of the cosmological parameters are best described by models which include an accelerating expansion.\nSupernova observation.\nIn 1998, the first evidence for acceleration came from the observation of Type Ia supernovae, which are exploding white dwarf stars that have exceeded their stability limit. Because they all have similar masses, their intrinsic luminosity can be standardized. Repeated imaging of selected areas of the sky is used to discover the supernovae, then follow-up observations give their peak brightness, which is converted into a quantity known as luminosity distance (see distance measures in cosmology for details). Spectral lines of their light can be used to determine their redshift.\nFor supernovae at redshift less than around 0.1, or light travel time less than 10 percent of the age of the universe, this gives a nearly linear distance\u2013redshift relation due to Hubble's law. At larger distances, since the expansion rate of the universe has changed over time, the distance-redshift relation deviates from linearity, and this deviation depends on how the expansion rate has changed over time. The full calculation requires computer integration of the Friedmann equation, but a simple derivation can be given as follows: the redshift z directly gives the cosmic scale factor at the time the supernova exploded.\nformula_15\nSo a supernova with a measured redshift \"z\" \n 0.5 implies the universe was \u00a0=\u00a0 of its present size when the supernova exploded. In the case of accelerated expansion, formula_2 is positive; therefore, formula_17 was smaller in the past than today. Thus, an accelerating universe took a longer time to expand from 2/3 to 1 times its present size, compared to a non-accelerating universe with constant formula_17 and the same present-day value of the Hubble constant. This results in a larger light-travel time, larger distance and fainter supernovae, which corresponds to the actual observations. Adam Riess \"et al.\" found that \"the distances of the high-redshift SNe Ia were, on average, 10% to 15% further than expected in a low mass density \"\u03a9\"M \n 0.2 universe without a cosmological constant\". This means that the measured high-redshift distances were too large, compared to nearby ones, for a decelerating universe.\nSeveral researchers have questioned the majority opinion on the acceleration or the assumption of the \"cosmological principle\" (that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic). For example, a 2019 paper analyzed the Joint Light-curve Analysis catalog of Type Ia supernovas, containing ten times as many supernova as were used in the 1998 analyses, and concluded that there was little evidence for a \"monopole\", that is, for an isotropic acceleration in all directions &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nBaryon acoustic oscillations.\nIn the early universe before recombination and decoupling took place, photons and matter existed in a primordial plasma. Points of higher density in the photon-baryon plasma would contract, being compressed by gravity until the pressure became too large and they expanded again. This contraction and expansion created vibrations in the plasma analogous to sound waves. Since dark matter only interacts gravitationally, it stayed at the centre of the sound wave, the origin of the original overdensity. When decoupling occurred, approximately 380,000 years after the Big Bang, photons separated from matter and were able to stream freely through the universe, creating the cosmic microwave background as we know it. This left shells of baryonic matter at a fixed radius from the overdensities of dark matter, a distance known as the sound horizon. As time passed and the universe expanded, it was at these inhomogeneities of matter density where galaxies started to form. So by looking at the distances at which galaxies at different redshifts tend to cluster, it is possible to determine a standard angular diameter distance and use that to compare to the distances predicted by different cosmological models.\nPeaks have been found in the correlation function (the probability that two galaxies will be a certain distance apart) at 100 \"h\"\u22121 Mpc, (where \"h\" is the dimensionless Hubble constant) indicating that this is the size of the sound horizon today, and by comparing this to the sound horizon at the time of decoupling (using the CMB), we can confirm the accelerated expansion of the universe.\nClusters of galaxies.\nMeasuring the mass functions of galaxy clusters, which describe the number density of the clusters above a threshold mass, also provides evidence for dark energy . By comparing these mass functions at high and low redshifts to those predicted by different cosmological models, values for w and \u03a9m are obtained which confirm a low matter density and a non-zero amount of dark energy.\nAge of the universe.\nGiven a cosmological model with certain values of the cosmological density parameters, it is possible to integrate the Friedmann equations and derive the age of the universe.\nformula_19\nBy comparing this to actual measured values of the cosmological parameters, we can confirm the validity of a model which is accelerating now, and had a slower expansion in the past.\nGravitational waves as standard sirens.\nRecent discoveries of gravitational waves through LIGO and VIRGO not only confirmed Einstein's predictions but also opened a new window into the universe. These gravitational waves can work as sort of standard sirens to measure the expansion rate of the universe. Abbot et al. 2017 measured the Hubble constant value to be approximately 70 kilometres per second per megaparsec. The amplitudes of the strain 'h' is dependent on the masses of the objects causing waves, distances from observation point and gravitational waves detection frequencies. The associated distance measures are dependent on the cosmological parameters like the Hubble Constant for nearby objects and will be dependent on other cosmological parameters like the dark energy density, matter density, etc. for distant sources.\nExplanatory models.\nDark energy.\nThe most important property of dark energy is that it has negative pressure (repulsive action) which is distributed relatively homogeneously in space.\nformula_20\nwhere c is the speed of light and \u03c1 is the energy density. Different theories of dark energy suggest different values of w, with \"w\" &lt; \u2212 for cosmic acceleration (this leads to a positive value of \u00e4 in the acceleration equation above).\nThe simplest explanation for dark energy is that it is a cosmological constant or vacuum energy; in this case \"w\" \n \u22121. This leads to the Lambda-CDM model, which has generally been known as the Standard Model of Cosmology from 2003 through the present, since it is the simplest model in good agreement with a variety of recent observations. Riess \"et al.\" found that their results from supernova observations favoured expanding models with positive cosmological constant (\"\u03a9\u03bb\" &gt; 0) and an accelerated expansion (\"q\"0 &lt; 0).\nPhantom energy.\nThese observations allow the possibility of a cosmological model containing a dark energy component with equation of state \"w\" &lt; \u22121. This phantom energy density would become infinite in finite time, causing such a huge gravitational repulsion that the universe would lose all structure and end in a Big Rip. For example, for \"w\" \n \u2212 and \"H\"0\u00a0=70\u00a0km\u00b7s\u22121\u00b7Mpc\u22121, the time remaining before the universe ends in this Big Rip is 22\u00a0billion years.\nAlternative theories.\nThere are many alternative explanations for the accelerating universe. Some examples are quintessence, a proposed form of dark energy with a non-constant state equation, whose density decreases with time. A negative mass cosmology does not assume that the mass density of the universe is positive (as is done in supernova observations), and instead finds a negative cosmological constant. Occam's razor also suggests that this is the 'more parsimonious hypothesis'. Dark fluid is an alternative explanation for accelerating expansion which attempts to unite dark matter and dark energy into a single framework. Alternatively, some authors have argued that the accelerated expansion of the universe could be due to a repulsive gravitational interaction of antimatter or a deviation of the gravitational laws from general relativity, such as massive gravity, meaning that gravitons themselves have mass. The measurement of the speed of gravity with the gravitational wave event GW170817 ruled out many modified gravity theories as alternative explanations to dark energy. Another type of model, the backreaction conjecture, was proposed by cosmologist Syksy R\u00e4s\u00e4nen: the rate of expansion is not homogenous, but Earth is in a region where expansion is faster than the background. Inhomogeneities in the early universe cause the formation of walls and bubbles, where the inside of a bubble has less matter than on average. According to general relativity, space is less curved than on the walls, and thus appears to have more volume and a higher expansion rate. In the denser regions, the expansion is slowed by a higher gravitational attraction. Therefore, the inward collapse of the denser regions looks the same as an accelerating expansion of the bubbles, leading us to conclude that the universe is undergoing an accelerated expansion. The benefit is that it does not require any new physics such as dark energy. R\u00e4s\u00e4nen does not consider the model likely, but without any falsification, it must remain a possibility. It would require rather large density fluctuations (20%) to work.\nShockwave cosmology, proposed by Joel Smoller and Blake Temple in 2003, has the \"big bang\" as an explosion inside a black hole, producing the expanding volume of space and matter that includes the observable universe. A related theory by Smoller, Temple, and Vogler proposes that this shockwave may have resulted in our part of the universe having a lower density than that surrounding it, causing the accelerated expansion normally attributed to dark energy. They also propose that this related theory could be tested: a universe with dark energy should give a figure for the cubic correction to redshift versus luminosity C = \u22120.180 at a = a whereas for Smoller, Temple, and Vogler's alternative C should be positive rather than negative. They give a more precise calculation for their shockwave model alternative as: the cubic correction to redshift versus luminosity at a = a is C = 0.359.\nAlthough shockwave cosmology produces a universe that \"looks essentially identical to the aftermath of the big bang\", cosmologists consider that it needs further development before it could be considered as a more advantageous model than the big bang theory (or standard model) in explaining the universe. In particular, and especially for the proposed alternative to dark energy, it would need to explain big bang nucleosynthesis, the quantitative details of the microwave background anisotropies, the Lyman-alpha forest, and galaxy surveys.\nA final possibility is that dark energy is an illusion caused by some bias in measurements. For example, if we are located in an emptier-than-average region of space, the observed cosmic expansion rate could be mistaken for a variation in time, or acceleration. A different approach uses a cosmological extension of the equivalence principle to show how space might appear to be expanding more rapidly in the voids surrounding our local cluster. While weak, such effects considered cumulatively over billions of years could become significant, creating the illusion of cosmic acceleration, and making it appear as if we live in a Hubble bubble. Yet other possibilities are that the accelerated expansion of the universe is an illusion caused by the relative motion of us to the rest of the universe, or that the supernova sample size used wasn't large enough.\nConsequences for the universe.\nAs the universe expands, the density of radiation and ordinary dark matter declines more quickly than the density of dark energy (see equation of state) and, eventually, dark energy dominates. Specifically, when the scale of the universe doubles, the density of matter is reduced by a factor of 8, but the density of dark energy is nearly unchanged (it is exactly constant if the dark energy is the cosmological constant).\nIn models where dark energy is the cosmological constant, the universe will expand exponentially with time in the far future, coming closer and closer to a de Sitter universe. This will eventually lead to all evidence for the Big Bang disappearing, as the cosmic microwave background is redshifted to lower intensities and longer wavelengths. Eventually, its frequency will be low enough that it will be absorbed by the interstellar medium, and so be screened from any observer within the galaxy. This will occur when the universe is less than 50 times its existing age, leading to the end of any life as the distant universe turns dark.\nA constantly expanding universe with a non-zero cosmological constant has mass density decreasing over time. Under such a scenario, it is understood that all matter will ionize and disintegrate into isolated stable particles such as electrons and neutrinos, with all complex structures dissipating. This is called \"heat death of the universe\" (or the Big Freeze).\nAlternatives for the ultimate fate of the universe include the Big Rip mentioned above, a Big Bounce, or a Big Crunch.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39137", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39137", "title": "Quintessence (physics)", "text": "Hypothetical fundamental force\nIn physics, quintessence is a hypothetical form of dark energy, more precisely a scalar field minimally coupled to gravity, postulated as an explanation of the observation of an accelerating rate of expansion of the universe. The first example of this scenario was proposed by Ratra and Peebles (1988) and Wetterich (1988). The concept was expanded to more general types of time-varying dark energy, and the term \"quintessence\" was first introduced in a 1998 paper by Robert R. Caldwell, Rahul Dave and Paul Steinhardt. It has been proposed by some physicists to be a fifth fundamental force. Quintessence differs from the cosmological constant explanation of dark energy in that it is dynamic; that is, it changes over time, unlike the cosmological constant which, by definition, does not change. Quintessence can be either attractive or repulsive depending on the ratio of its kinetic and potential energy. Those working with this postulate believe that quintessence became repulsive about ten billion years ago, about 3.5 billion years after the Big Bang.\nA group of researchers argued in 2021 that observations of the Hubble tension may imply that only quintessence models with a nonzero coupling constant are viable.\nTerminology.\nThe name comes from \"quinta essentia\" (fifth element). So called in Latin starting from the Middle Ages, this was the (first) element added by Aristotle to the other four ancient classical elements because he thought it was the essence of the celestial world. Aristotle posited it to be a pure, fine, and primigenial element which he referred to as \"aether\" in his text On the Heavens. Similarly, modern quintessence would be the fifth known \"dynamical, time-dependent, and spatially inhomogeneous\" contribution to the overall mass\u2013energy content of the universe.\nOf course, the other four components are not the ancient Greek classical elements, but rather \"baryons, neutrinos, dark matter, [and] radiation.\" Although neutrinos are sometimes considered radiation, the term \"radiation\" in this context is only used to refer to massless photons. Spatial curvature of the cosmos (which has not been detected) is excluded because it is non-dynamical and homogeneous; the cosmological constant would not be considered a fifth component in this sense, because it is non-dynamical, homogeneous, and time-independent.\nScalar field.\nQuintessence (\"Q\") is a scalar field with an equation of state where \"w\"\"q\", the ratio of pressure \"p\"\"q\" and density formula_1\"q\", is given by the potential energy formula_2 and a kinetic term:\nformula_3\nHence, quintessence is dynamic, and generally has a density and \"w\"\"q\" parameter that varies with time. Specifically, \"w\"\"q\" parameter can vary within the range [-1,1]. By contrast, a cosmological constant is static, with a fixed energy density and \"w\"\"q\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121.\nTracker behavior.\nMany models of quintessence have a \"tracker\" behavior, which according to Ratra and Peebles (1988) and Paul Steinhardt \"et al.\" (1999) partly solves the cosmological constant problem. In these models, the quintessence field has a density which closely tracks (but is less than) the radiation density until matter-radiation equality, which triggers quintessence to start having characteristics similar to dark energy, eventually dominating the universe. This naturally sets the low scale of the dark energy. When comparing the predicted expansion rate of the universe as given by the tracker solutions with cosmological data, a main feature of tracker solutions is that one needs four parameters to properly describe the behavior of their equation of state, whereas it has been shown that at most a two-parameter model can optimally be constrained by mid-term future data (horizon 2015\u20132020).\nSpecific models.\nSome special cases of quintessence are phantom dark energy, in which \"w\"\"q\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\u22121, and k-essence (short for kinetic quintessence), which has a non-standard form of kinetic energy. If this type of energy were to exist, it would cause a Big Rip in the universe due to the growing energy density of dark energy, which would cause the expansion of the universe to increase at a faster-than-exponential rate.\nHolographic dark energy.\nHolographic dark energy models, compared with cosmological constant models, imply a high degeneracy. It has been suggested that dark energy might originate from quantum fluctuations of spacetime, and is limited by the event horizon of the universe.\nStudies with quintessence dark energy found that it dominates gravitational collapse in a spacetime simulation, based on the holographic thermalization. These results show that the smaller the state parameter of quintessence is, the harder it is for the plasma to thermalize.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39139", "revid": "40906110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39139", "title": "Proso millet", "text": "Species of grass\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPanicum miliaceum is a grain crop with many common names, including proso millet, broomcorn millet, common millet, hog millet, Kashfi millet, red millet, and white millet. Archaeobotanical evidence suggests millet was first domesticated about 10,000 BP in Northern China. Major cultivated areas include Northern China, Himachal Pradesh of India, Nepal, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, the Middle East, Turkey, Romania, and the Great Plains states of the United States. About are grown each year. The crop is notable both for its extremely short lifecycle, with some varieties producing grain only 60 days after planting, and its low water requirements, producing grain more efficiently per unit of moisture than any other grain species tested. The name \"proso millet\" comes from the pan-Slavic general and generic name for millet (, , , ). \nProso millet is a relative of foxtail millet, pearl millet, maize, and sorghum within the grass subfamily Panicoideae. While all of these crops use C4 photosynthesis, the others all employ the NADP-ME as their primary carbon shuttle pathway, while the primary C4 carbon shuttle in proso millet is the NAD-ME pathway.\nEvolutionary history.\n\"Panicum miliaceum\" is a tetraploid species with a base chromosome number of 18, twice the base chromosome number of diploid species within its genus \"Panicum\". The species appears to be an allotetraploid resulting from a wide hybrid between two different diploid ancestors. One of the two subgenomes within proso millet appears to have come from either \"P. capillare\" or a close relative of that species. The second subgenome does not show close homology to any known diploid \"Panicum\" species, but some unknown diploid ancestor apparently also contributed a copy of its genome to a separate allotetraploid species \"P. repens\" (torpedo grass). The two subgenomes within proso millet are estimated to have diverged 5.6 million years ago. However, the species has experienced only limited amounts of fractionation and copies of most genes are still retained on both subgenomes. A sequenced version of the proso millet genome, estimated to be around 920 megabase pairs in size, was published in 2019.\nAs a weed.\nWeedy and feral types are classified as \"Panicum ruderale\"(Kitag.) Chang comb. Nov. or \"Panicum miliaceum\" subsp. \"ruderale\". A 2018 report developed a morphometric analysis method which distinguishes seeds of \"P. miliaceum\" and \"P. ruderale\" on the basis of micromorphology.\nDomestication and history of cultivation.\nWeedy forms of proso millet are found throughout central Asia, covering a widespread area from the Caspian Sea east to Xinjiang and Mongolia. These may represent the wild progenitor of proso millet or feral escapes from domesticated production. Indeed, in the United States, weedy proso millet, representing feral escapes from cultivation, are now common, suggesting current proso millet cultivars retain the potential to revert, similar to the pattern seen for weedy rice. Currently, the earliest archeological evidence for domesticated proso millet comes from the Cishan site in semiarid north east China around 8,000 BCE. Because early varieties of proso millet had such a short lifecycle, as little as 45 days from planting to harvest, they are thought to have made it possible for seminomadic tribes to first adopt agriculture, forming a bridge between hunter-gatherer-focused lifestyles and early agricultural civilizations. Archaeological charred grains of common millet were found in several Neolithic sites in Europe and Transcaucasia but radiocarbon dates obtained thanks to AMS method directly from the grains, indicated that it appeared in that area in the 2nd millennium BC. At around 1700 BCE, broomcorn millet was present north of the Black Sea, 1450 BCE in central Europe, and 1200 BCE in northern Europe.\nCultivation.\nProso millet is a relatively low-demanding crop, and diseases are not known; consequently, it is often used in organic farming systems in Europe. In the United States, it is often used as an intercrop. Thus, proso millet can help to avoid a summer fallow, and continuous crop rotation can be achieved. Its superficial root system and its resistance to atrazine residue make proso millet a good intercrop between two water- and pesticide-demanding crops. The stubbles of the last crop, by allowing more heat into the soil, result in a faster and earlier millet growth. While millet occupies the ground, because of its superficial root system, the soil can replenish its water content for the next crop. Later crops, for example, a winter wheat, can in turn benefit from the millet stubble, which act as snow accumulators. \"P. miliaceum\" is commonly classified into five races, \"miliaceum\", \"patentissimum\", \"contractum\", \"compactum\", and \"ovatum\".\nClimate and soil requirements.\nDue to its C4 photosynthetic system, proso millet is thermophilic like maize, so shady locations of the field should be avoided. It is sensitive to temperatures lower than . Proso millet is highly drought-resistant, which makes it of interest to regions with low water availability and longer periods without rain. The soil should be light or medium-heavy. Due to its flat root systems, soil compaction must be avoided. Furthermore, proso millet does not tolerate soil wetness caused by dammed-up water.\nA 2019 study found different cultivars have significantly different effects on rhizosphere assemblage, and also that \"Proteobacteria\", \"Bacteroidetes\", \"Chloroflexi\", \"Gemmatimonadetes\", \"Firmicutes\", \"Verrucomicrobia\", and \"Planctomycetes\" are the most common members, in declining order.\nSeedbed and sowing.\nThe seedbed should be finely crumbled as for sugar beet and rapeseed. In Europe, proso millet is sowed between mid-April and the end of May. About of seeds are required, which is roughly . In organic farming, this amount should be increased if a harrow weeder is used. For sowing, the usual sowing machines can be used similarly to how they are used for other crops such as wheat. A distance between the rows of is recommended if the farmer uses an interrow cultivator. The sowing depth should be in optimal soil or in dry soil. Rolling of the ground after sowing is helpful for further cultivation. Cultivation in no-till farming systems is also possible and often practiced in the United States. Sowing then can be done two weeks later.\nField management.\nOnly a few diseases and pests are known to attack proso millet, but they are not economically important. Weeds are a bigger problem. The critical phase is in juvenile development. The formation of the grains happens in the 3- to 5-leaf stage. After that, all nutrients should be available for the millet, so preventing the growth of weeds is necessary. In conventional farming, herbicides may be used. In organic farming, harrow weeder or interrow cultivator use is possible, but special sowing parameters are needed.\nFor good crop development, fertilization with nitrogen per hectare is recommended. Planting proso millet in a crop rotation after maize should be avoided due to its same weed spectrum. Because proso millet is an undemanding crop, it may be used at the end of the rotation.\nPests.\nInsect pests include:\nHarvesting and postharvest treatments.\nHarvest time is at the end of August until mid-September. Determining the best harvest date is not easy because all the grains do not ripen simultaneously. The grains on the top of the panicle ripen first, while the grains in the lower parts need more time, making compromise and harvest necessary to optimize yield. Harvesting can be done with a conventional combine harvester with the moisture content of the grains around 15-20%. Usually, proso millet is mowed into windrows first, since the plants are not dry like wheat. There, they can wither, which makes the threshing easier. Then the harvest is done with a pickup attached to a combine.\nPossible yields are between under optimal conditions. Studies in Germany showed that even higher yields can be attained.\nGeographical distribution.\nIn the United States, as of 2015, the total cultivated area of proso millet was , mostly in the Great Plains states. The top three producers in 2015 were Colorado, Nebraska, and South Dakota, with , , and . Historically grown as animal and bird seed, as of 2020, it has found a market as an organic gluten-free grain.\nProso millet is one of the few types of millet not cultivated in Africa.\nUses.\nNutrition.\nMillet flour is 9% water, 75% carbohydrates, 11% protein, and 4% fat. In a reference amount of , millet flour supplies 382 calories, and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of several B vitamins and dietary minerals. \nThe demand for more diverse and healthier cereal-based foods is increasing, particularly in affluent countries. Protein content in proso millet grains is comparable with that of wheat, but the share of some essential amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and methionine) is substantially higher in proso millet. Among the most commonly consumed products are ready-to-eat breakfast cereals made purely from millet flour, and a variety of noodles and bakery products that are, however, often produced from mixtures with wheat flour to improve their sensory quality.\nCulinary.\nIn Inner Mongolia and northwestern Shanxi, China, fermented proso millet porridge known as \"suan zhou\" (\u9178\u7ca5) is popular. Millet is soaked to allow fermentation, then water is emptied to obtain porridge. The emptied water is served as a millet drink called \"suan mi tang\" (\u9178\u7c73\u6e6f). The porridge is eaten alongside pickles, e.g. turnips, carrots, radish and celery. The porridge may be stir-fried and is called \"chao suan zhou\" (\u7092\u9178\u7ca5). The porridge may also be steamed into a firmer form known as \"suan lao fan\" (\u9178\u6488\u98ef). While the traditional grain is proso millet, it is mixed with rice when available. Many folk idioms of sourness derive from this dish.\nIn the United States, proso millet is used to brew gluten-free beer, being mixed with other grains for texture.\nLivestock and poultry.\nProso millet is primarily grown as livestock and poultry fodder. As food it is very deficient in lysine and needs complementation. Proso millet is also a poor fodder due to its low leaf-to-stem ratio and a possible irritant effect due to its hairy stem. Foxtail millet, having a higher leaf-to-stem ratio and less hairy stems, is preferred as fodder, particularly the variety called moha, which is a high-quality fodder.\nFermentation products.\nStarch derived from millet has been shown to be a good substrate for fermentation and malting with grains having similar starch contents as wheat grains. One study suggested that starch derived from proso millet can be converted to ethanol with an only moderately lower efficiency than starch derived from corn. As proso millet is compatible with low-input agriculture, cultivation on marginal soils for biofuel production may present a new market for farmers.\nLocal names.\nNative names for proso millet in its cultivated area include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39140", "revid": "13313590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39140", "title": "Dyson's eternal intelligence", "text": "Hypothetical concept in astrophysics\nDyson's eternal intelligence is a theoretical framework, proposed by Freeman Dyson in his 1979 paper \"Time without end: Physics and biology in an open universe,\" through which an intelligent form of life could perform an infinite number of computations, and thus experience an infinite subjective time using only a finite amount of energy. This concept relies on the life form adapting its metabolism and speed of thought to the decreasing temperature of an open, ever-expanding universe. The mathematical precision of the theory is rooted in the principles of thermodynamics, information theory, and the ultimate physical limits of computation.\nEnergy expenditure and hibernation.\nThe core of Dyson's idea is a strategy of energy conservation. An intelligent civilization would begin by storing a finite amount of energy, formula_1. They would then live their lives in cycles of activity and hibernation. In each cycle, they expend a fixed fraction, formula_2, of their \"remaining\" energy.\nFor example, if formula_3:\nThe total energy consumed after formula_7 cycles is the sum of a geometric series:\nformula_8\nAs formula_9, the total energy consumed approaches formula_1. This demonstrates that an infinite number of cycles of activity can be powered by a finite initial energy store. During each period of activity, the beings think a finite number of thoughts, but since there are an infinite number of such periods, their total subjective time (the sum of all their thoughts) is infinite. The long periods of hibernation between active phases are crucial, as they allow the beings to radiate away waste heat and wait for the ambient temperature of the universe to drop.\nTemperature, energy per thought, and Landauer's limit.\nThe physical possibility of this scenario depends on the relationship between energy and information processing at very low temperatures. Dyson's model assumes that thought is a form of computation. According to Landauer's principle, there is a minimum thermodynamic energy cost associated with erasing one bit of information, which is a fundamental step in irreversible computation. This minimum energy is given by:\nformula_11\nwhere:\nThe crucial insight is that as the universe expands and cools, the ambient temperature formula_14 approaches zero. Consequently, the minimum energy required to process a bit of information also approaches zero. If a single \"thought\" is assumed to require the processing of a fixed number of bits, formula_16, then the energy cost per thought, formula_17, is:\nformula_18\nAs formula_19, formula_20. This allows the intelligent beings to afford an infinite number of thoughts with their finite energy budget, provided they perform these thoughts at progressively lower temperatures.\nTime per computational step and scaling laws.\nA consequence of performing computations at ever-lower temperatures and with ever-decreasing energy is that the speed of these computations must also decrease dramatically. The subjective experience of the beings might remain constant, but the objective cosmic time elapsed for each thought would lengthen. Dyson postulated that a life-form could adapt by slowing down its metabolic processes, so that its rate of subjective experience scales with the ambient temperature.\nLet formula_21 be the subjective time and formula_22 be the objective (cosmic) time. Dyson proposed a scaling law where the rate of energy dissipation, formula_23, required to maintain a certain rate of subjective experience, formula_24, is proportional to some power of the temperature:\nformula_25 (for a fixed rate of subjective experience).\nTo make thoughts possible with ever-decreasing energy, the beings must stretch out their computational steps over longer periods of objective time. The time required for one thought, formula_26, would therefore grow infinitely long as the temperature drops:\nformula_27 for some positive exponent formula_28.\nThe hibernation periods must also become progressively longer to allow the universe to cool to the required temperature for the next, even lower-energy, thought process.\nBremermann's limit.\nBremermann's limit provides the ultimate constraint on the speed of computation, establishing a ceiling that Dyson's intelligent beings would operate far beneath. The limit states the maximum rate of computation that can be achieved by any self-contained system of a given mass, based on the mass-energy equivalence and the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. The limit is given by:\nformula_29\nwhere:\nThis can be derived from the uncertainty principle for energy and time, formula_32, and Einstein's mass-energy equivalence, formula_33. A system of mass formula_34 has a maximum energy of formula_35, which sets the ultimate limit on the energy uncertainty formula_36. The minimum time formula_37 to transition to a new distinguishable state (equivalent to one computational operation) is therefore proportional to formula_38.\nIn the context of Dyson's eternal intelligence, Bremermann's limit represents the absolute fastest that a thought could possibly be processed by a brain or computer of a given mass. However, the strategy for eternal survival requires the exact opposite: deliberately slowing down computation to infinitesimal speeds to conserve energy, thus always remaining far from this ultimate physical limit.\nDyson noted that \"in an accelerated universe everything is different\". A key assumption in Dyson's original proposal is that the universe will continue to cool down indefinitely, allowing the ambient temperature formula_14 to approach zero. However, this assumption is challenged by the observed accelerated expansion of the universe, which is attributed to a positive cosmological constant, formula_40. In such a de Sitter-like universe, there is a fundamental lower limit to the temperature that any observer can experience. This minimum temperature is known as the Gibbons-Hawking temperature, which arises from the thermal radiation produced by the cosmological event horizon. The vacuum state in this spacetime is the Bunch-Davies vacuum, and for an accelerating observer, this vacuum appears as a thermal bath with a temperature proportional to the acceleration. As the universe continues its accelerated expansion, the temperature will asymptotically approach a non-zero value:\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 is the radius of the cosmological event horizon. Because the temperature never falls below this minimum, Landauer's principle implies a permanent, non-zero minimum energy cost for erasing a bit of information. This establishes a finite lower bound on the energy required for any computational thought, formula_43. Consequently, with only a finite initial store of energy, only a finite number of thoughts can ever be processed. This \"thermal death\" of the universe prevents the infinite hibernation and computation trick from working, thus rendering Dyson's eternal intelligence scenario impossible in a universe with a positive cosmological constant.\nReversible computing.\nDyson's analysis of eternal intelligence is fundamentally based on the thermodynamics of irreversible computation. The core of his argument rests on Landauer's principle, which states that any logically irreversible manipulation of information, such as erasing a bit, must dissipate a minimum amount of energy as heat, equal to formula_44. Dyson's intelligent beings overcome this by performing computations at progressively lower temperatures, thereby reducing the energy cost per thought towards zero. This entire framework is invalidated, however, by the principle of reversible computation.\nReversible computing is a model of computation where all processes are logically and, in principle, thermodynamically reversible. A logically reversible operation is one where the input can always be uniquely determined from the output, meaning no information is erased or destroyed. Charles Bennett showed that any computation can, in principle, be performed in a logically reversible manner. Crucially, a logically reversible computation does not have a fundamental lower bound of energy dissipation and can, in theory, be performed with zero energy cost. This circumvents Landauer's principle entirely, as the principle only applies to irreversible operations that destroy information.\nIf an intelligent civilization could master reversible computing, the central pillar of Dyson's argument would collapse. There would be no need to hibernate and wait for the universe to cool, because the energy cost per thought (formula_17) would not be tied to the ambient temperature formula_14. A finite amount of energy could, in principle, power an infinite amount of reversible computation at \"any\" non-zero temperature, without the need for the elaborate scheme of dissipating progressively smaller fractions of energy. The entire strategy of slowing down thought to match the cooling of the universe becomes unnecessary. While practical implementations of reversible computing face immense engineering challenges, its theoretical possibility fundamentally undermines the thermodynamic constraints that make Dyson's scenario for eternal intelligence both necessary and plausible.\nLegacy.\nFrank J. Tipler has cited Dyson's writings, and specifically his writings on the eternal intelligence, as a major influence on his own highly controversial Omega Point theory.\nTipler's theory differs from Dyson's theory on several key points, most notable of which is that Dyson's eternal intelligence presupposes an open universe while Tipler's Omega Point presupposes a closed/contracting universe. Both theories will be invalidated if the observed universal expansion continues to accelerate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39143", "revid": "46791144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39143", "title": "Prince Igor", "text": "Opera by Alexander Borodin\nPrince Igor (, ) is an opera in four acts with a prologue, written and composed by Alexander Borodin.\nThe composer adapted the libretto from the early Russian epic \"The Lay of Igor's Host\", which recounts the campaign of the 12th-century prince Igor Svyatoslavich against the invading Cuman (\"Polovtsian\") tribes in 1185. He also incorporated material drawn from two medieval Kievan chronicles. The opera was left unfinished upon the composer's death in 1887 and was edited and completed by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov and Alexander Glazunov. It was first performed in St. Petersburg, Russia, in 1890.\nComposition history.\nOriginal composition: 1869\u20131887.\nAfter briefly considering Lev Mei's \"The Tsar's Bride\" as a subject (later taken up in 1898 by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, his 9th opera), Borodin began looking for a new project for his first opera. Vladimir Stasov, critic and advisor to The Mighty Handful, suggested \"The Lay of Igor's Host\", a 12th\u00a0century epic prose poem, and sent Borodin a scenario for a three-act opera on 30\u00a0April 1869. Initially, Borodin found the proposition intriguing, but daunting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Your outline is so complete that everything seems clear to me and suits me perfectly. But will I manage to carry out my own task to the end? Bah! As they say here, 'He who is afraid of the wolf doesn't go into the woods!' So I shall give it a try\u00a0...\u2014\u200a\nAfter collecting material from literary sources, Borodin began composition in September 1869 with initial versions of Yaroslavna's arioso and Konchakovna's cavatina, and sketched the Polovtsian Dances and March of the Polovtsy. He soon began to have doubts and ceased composing. He expressed his misgivings in a letter to his wife: \"There is too little drama here, and no movement ... To me, opera without drama, in the strict sense, is unnatural.\" This began a period of about four years in which he proceeded no further on \"Prince Igor\", but began diverting materials for the opera into his other works, the Symphony No.\u00a02 in B\u00a0minor (1869\u20131876) and the collaborative opera-ballet \"Mlada\"\u00a0(1872).\nThe \"Mlada\" project was soon aborted, and Borodin, like the other members of The Mighty Handful who were involved \u2013 C\u00e9sar Cui, Modest Mussorgsky, and Rimsky-Korsakov \u2013 thought about ways to recycle the music he contributed. Of the eight numbers he had composed for Act\u00a04 of \"Mlada\", those that eventually found their way into (or back into) \"Prince Igor\" included No.\u00a01 (Prologue: The opening C\u00a0major chorus), No.\u00a02 (material for Yaroslavna's arioso and Igor's aria), No.\u00a03 (Prologue: The eclipse), No.\u00a04 (Act\u00a03: The trio), and No.\u00a08 (Act 4:\u00a0The closing chorus).\nBorodin returned to \"Prince Igor\" in 1874, inspired by the success of his colleagues Rimsky-Korsakov and Mussorgsky in the staging of their historical operas, \"The Maid of Pskov\" (1873) and \"Boris Godunov\" (1874). This period also marks the creation of two new characters, the deserters Skula and Yeroshka, who have much in common with the rogue monks Varlaam and Misail in \"Boris Godunov\".\nIn his memoirs, Rimsky-Korsakov mentions an 1876 concert at which Borodin's \"closing chorus\" was performed, the first public performance of any music from \"Prince Igor\" identified by him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0Borodin's closing chorus [\"Glory to the beautiful Sun\"]\u00a0..., which, in the epilogue of the opera (subsequently removed) extolled Igor's exploits, was shifted by the author himself to the prologue of the opera, of which it now forms a part. At present this chorus extolls Igor as he starts on his expedition against the Polovtsy. The episodes of the solar eclipse, of the parting from Yaroslavna, etc., divide it into halves which fringe the entire prologue. In those days this whole middle part was non-existent, and the chorus formed one unbroken number of rather considerable dimensions.\u2014\u200a\nThe idea of a choral epilogue in the original scenario was no doubt inspired by the example of \"A Life for the Tsar\" by Mikhail Glinka, to whose memory \"Prince Igor\" is dedicated.\nBorodin's primary occupation was chemistry, including research and teaching. However, he also spent much time in support of women's causes, much to the consternation of his fellow composers, who felt he should devote his time and talent to music. In 1876, a frustrated Stasov gave up hope that Borodin would ever finish \"Prince Igor\", and offered his scenario to Rimsky-Korsakov. Rimsky-Korsakov instead assisted Borodin in orchestrating important numbers in preparation for concert performance; for example, the \"Polovtsian Dances\" in 1879:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was no end of waiting for the orchestration of the \"Polovtsian Dances\", and yet they had been announced and rehearsed by me with the chorus. It was high time to copy out the parts. In despair I heaped reproaches on Borodin. He, too, was none too happy. At last, giving up all hope, I offered to help him with the orchestration. Thereupon he came to my house in the evening, bringing with him the hardly touched score of the Polovtsian Dances; and the three of us\u2014he, Anatoly Lyadov, and I \u2013 took it apart and began to score it in hot haste. To gain time, we wrote in pencil and not in ink. Thus we sat at work until late at night. The finished sheets of the score Borodin covered with liquid gelatine, to keep our pencil marks intact; and in order to have the sheets dry the sooner, he hung them out like washing on lines in my study. Thus the number was ready and passed on to the copyist. The orchestration of the closing chorus I did almost single-handed\u00a0...\"\u2014\u200a\nBorodin worked on \"Prince Igor\", off and on, for almost 18\u00a0years.\nPosthumous completion and orchestration: 1887\u20131888.\nBorodin died suddenly in 1887, leaving \"Prince Igor\" incomplete. Rimsky-Korsakov and Stasov went to Borodin's home, collected his scores, and brought them to Rimsky-Korsakov's house.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Glazunov and I together sorted all the manuscripts ... In the first place there was the unfinished \"Prince Igor\". Certain numbers of the opera, such as the first chorus, the dance of the Polovtsy, Yaroslavna's Lament, the recitative and song of Vladimir Galitsky, Konchak's aria, the arias of Konchakovna and Prince Vladimir Igorevich, as well as the closing chorus, had been finished and orchestrated by the composer. Much else existed in the form of finished piano sketches; all the rest was in fragmentary rough draft only, while a good deal simply did not exist. For Acts\u00a0II and III (in the camp of the Polovtsy) there was no adequate libretto \u2013 no scenario, even \u2013 there were only scattered verses and musical sketches, or finished numbers that showed no connection between them. The synopsis of these acts I knew full well from talks and discussions with Borodin, although in his projects he had been changing a great deal, striking things out and putting them back again. The smallest bulk of composed music proved to be in Act\u00a0III. Glazunov and I settled the matter as follows between us: He was to fill in all the gaps in Act\u00a0III and write down from memory the Overture played so often by the composer, while I was to orchestrate, finish composing, and systematize all the rest that had been left unfinished and unorchestrated by Borodin.\u2014\u200a\nThe often-repeated account that Glazunov reconstructed and orchestrated the overture from memory after hearing the composer play it at the piano is true only in part. The following statement by Glazunov himself clarifies the matter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The overture was composed by me roughly according to Borodin's plan. I took the themes from the corresponding numbers of the opera and was fortunate enough to find the canonic ending of the second subject among the composer's sketches. I slightly altered the fanfares for the overture ... The bass progression in the middle I found noted down on a scrap of paper, and the combination of the two themes (Igor's aria and a phrase from the trio) was also discovered among the composer's papers. A few bars at the very end were composed by me.\u2014\u200a\nMusical analysis.\nCentral to the opera is the way the Russians are distinguished from the Polovtsians through melodic characterization. While Borodin uses features of Russian folk music to represent his compatriots, he uses chromaticism, melismas and appoggiaturas\u2014among other techniques\u2014represent their 'heathen' opponents. These methods had already been used by Glinka and others to portray Orientalism in Russian music.\nPerformance history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"During the season of 1888\u20139 the Directorate of Imperial Theatres began to lead us a fine dance with the production of Prince Igor, which had been finished, published, and forwarded to the proper authorities. We were led by the nose the following season as well, with constant postponements of production for some reason or other.\" \"On October 23, 1890, \"Prince Igor\" was produced at last, rehearsed fairly well by K. A. Kuchera, as N\u00e1pravn\u00edk had declined the honor of conducting Borodin's opera. Both Glazunov and I were pleased with our orchestration and additions. The cuts later introduced by the Directorate in Act 3 of the opera did it considerable harm. The unscrupulousness of the Mariinsky Theatre subsequently went to the length of omitting Act 3 altogether. Taken all in all, the opera was a success and attracted ardent admirers, particularly among the younger generation.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe world premiere was given in St. Petersburg on 4 November (23 October O.S.), 1890 at the Mariinsky Theatre. Set designers were Yanov, Andreyev, and Bocharov, while Lev Ivanov was balletmaster. Moscow premieres followed in 1892 by the Russian Opera Society, conducted by Iosif Pribik. The Bolshoi Theatre premiere was given in 1898 and was conducted by Ulrikh Avranek\nOther notable premieres were given in Prague in 1899 and in Paris in 1909, with a Sergei Diaghilev production featuring Feodor Chaliapin as Galitsky and Maria Nikolaevna Kuznetsova as Yaroslavna. Ivanov's choreography was revived by Mikhail Fokin (and in that form can be seen in the 1969 film. London saw the same production in 1914 conducted by Thomas Beecham, again with Chaliapin as Galitsky. In 1915 the United States premiere took place at the Metropolitan Opera, staged in Italian and conducted by Giorgio Polacco. The first performance in English was at Covent Garden on 26 July 1919, with Miriam Licette as Yaroslavna.\nIn January and February 2009 there was a production at the Aalto Theatre by the Essen Opera. While some aspects of the production may have been unusual, one critic noted that \"placing the (Polovtsian) Dances as a Finale is an elegant idea, ... the director Andrejs Zagars and the conductor Noam Zur have thus presented a musically and dramaturgically coherent \"Prince Igor\". Heartfelt applause for a worthwhile evening at the opera.\"\nIn 2011 there was a concert performance in Moscow by Helikon Opera, based on Pavel Lamm's reconstruction. A new edition based on 92 surviving manuscripts by Borodin was completed by musicologist Anna Bulycheva and published in 2012.\nIn 2014, the Metropolitan Opera in New York City staged a reconceived version, sung in Russian for the first time there. Director Dmitri Tcherniakov and conductor Gianandrea Noseda removed most of the melodies contributed by Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov, although they retained those composers' orchestrations. They added many fragments by Borodin that Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov had omitted, basing their work on many decades of musicological research. They rearranged the order in which some of the material appeared, in some cases taking account of notes left by Borodin. The overall conception made the opera more of a psychological drama about Prince Igor and his state of mind, given the deep depression he went into following his soldiers' loss to the Polovtsians. The entire opera was reordered: after the prologue, in which the solar eclipse was taken as a bad omen, Act 1 presented a dream sequence dealing with the relation of Igor and his son with the Polovtsian general and his daughter in the Polovtsian camp. The second act largely dealt with the antics of Prince Galitsky in Putivyl and ended with the destruction of the city. The third act ended with Prince Igor coming out of his depression to begin the rebuilding of the destroyed city. This production starred Russian bass Ildar Abdrazakov in the title role with Ukrainian soprano Oksana Dyka as Yaroslavna. The performances in New York included a worldwide HD broadcast. The production was jointly produced with De Nederlandse Opera of Amsterdam.\nAt the beginning of the Opening Ceremony of the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, in February 2014, some of Borodin's music from this opera was played while an eclipsed sun, crescent-shaped, drifted across the upper levels of the center of the stadium, showing the basis of Russian history in the Prince Igor story.\nRoles.\n\"Note:\"\nSynopsis.\n\"Time\": The year 1185\n\"Place\": The city of Putivl (prologue, Acts 1 and 4); a Polovtsian camp (Acts 2 and 3)\nNote: \"As discussed in this article, Borodin's final decision on the order of the first two acts is unclear. The traditional grouping presented here is that of the Rimsky-Korsakov-Glazunov edition. In many productions, Act 3 is omitted.\"\nPrologue.\n\"The cathedral square in Putivl\"\nPrince Igor is about to set out on a campaign against the Cumans/Polovtsy and their Khans who have previously attacked the Russian lands. The people sing his praise and that of his son, the other leaders and the army (\"Chorus: \"Glory to the beautiful Sun\"\"). A solar eclipse takes place to general consternation. Two soldiers Skula and Yeroshka desert feeling sure that Vladimir Yaroslavich, Prince Galitsky, will offer them work more to their liking. Although Yaroslavna, Igor's wife, takes the eclipse for a bad omen, Igor insists that honour demands that he go to war. He leaves her to the care of her brother, Prince Galitsky, who tells of his gratitude to Igor for sheltering him after he was banished from his own home by his father and brothers. The people sing a great chorus of praise (\"Chorus: \"Glory to the multitude of stars\"\") as the host sets out on their campaign against the Polovtsy.\nAct 1.\n\"Scene 1: Vladimir Galitsky's court in Putivl\"\nGalitsky's followers sing his praise. Skula and Yeroshka are now working as gudok-players. They entertain the followers and all sing of how Galitsky and his men abducted a young woman and how she pleaded to be allowed to return to her father without being dishonoured. The prince arrives and sings of how, if he were Prince of Putivl, he would drink and feast all day while dispensing judgment and have the prettiest maidens with him all night (\"Galitsky's Song\"). The treasury would be spent on himself and his men while his sister would be praying in a monastery. A group of young women beg the prince to restore their abducted friend. He threatens them and drives them away, saying how she now lives in luxury in his quarters and does not have to work. The prince returns to his rooms having sent for wine for his followers. The gudok players and the prince's followers mock the women. They wonder what might happen if Yaroslavna hears of what happens, but then realise she would be helpless with all her men gone to war. They sing of how they are all drunkards and are supported by Galitsky. The men decide to go to the town square to declare Galitsky the Prince of Putivl, leaving just the two drunk musicians behind.\n\"Scene 2: A room in Yaroslavna's palace\"\nYaroslavna is alone worrying about why she has not heard from Igor and his companions (\"Yaroslavna's Arioso\"). She sings of her tearful nights and nightmares and reminisces about when she was happy with Igor by her side. The nurse brings in the young women who tell Yaroslavna of their abducted friend. They are reluctant at first to reveal the culprit but eventually name Galitsky and talk of how he and his drunken followers cause trouble around Putivl. Galitsky enters and the women run away. Yaroslavna questions him as to the truth of their story and he mocks her saying she should treat him as a guest in her house. She threatens him with what Igor will do on his return, but Galitsky replies that he can seize the throne whenever he wants. Yaroslavna accuses him of repeating the betrayal that he carried out against their father, but he replies that he was only joking and asks if she has a lover now her husband is away. She threatens him with sending him back to their father. He replies that he will return the girl but will take another later and leaves. The council of boyars arrive to inform Yaroslavna that the Polovtsy under Khan Gzak are about to attack Putivl. Igor's army has been utterly destroyed and he has been wounded and captured with his son and brother. After a moment of faintness, Yaroslavna orders messengers sent to the city's allies, but the Boyars report that the roads are cut, some towns are in revolt and their princes will be captured. The Boyars say that they will organise the defence but Galitsky returns with his followers to demand that a new Prince be chosen. His retinue say it should be him as he is Yaroslavna's brother and Igor's brother-in-law. The boyars refuse. The argument is interrupted by the sight of flames and the sound of crying women. Some of the boyars flee; some join the battle, others guard the Princess. They call the attack God's judgment.\nAct 2.\n\"Evening in the Polovtsian Camp\"\nPolovtsian maidens sing comparing love to a flower that droops in the heat of the day and is revived by night. They dance together (\"Dance of the Polovtsian Maidens\"). Konchakovna joins in the singing hoping that her own lover will join her soon (\"Konchakovna's Cavatina\"). The Russian prisoners arrive from their day's work and express their gratitude when fed by Konchakovna and the maidens. Their guards retire for the night leaving just Ovlur, a Christian, in charge. Vladimir, son of Igor, sings of his hope that his love will soon join him now that the day is fading (\"Vladimir's Cavatina\"). His love is Konchakovna. She comes and the two sing of their love and their desire to marry (\"Love Duet\"). While her father will consent to the marriage, they know that his will not. They part when they hear Igor coming. He sings of his disgrace and torment at being captured with his followers dead (\"Prince Igor's Aria\"). Only his wife, he feels, will be loyal. He hopes for the chance to regain his honour. Ovlur urges Igor to escape and the prince agrees to think about it. Khan Konchak asks him if all is well (\"Konchak's Aria\") and he replies that the falcon cannot live in captivity. Konchak says that as Igor did not ask for mercy he is not a prisoner but an honoured guest equal to a Khan. Igor reminds him that he too knows what it is to be a captive. Konchak offers Igor freedom if he will promise not to wage war on him again, but he refuses saying he cannot lie. Konchak regrets that they were not born to be allies. They would then have captured all of Russia. He summons the Polovtsian slaves to entertain Igor and himself and offers Igor his choice of them. As the slaves dance the Polovtsy sing of Konchak's glory (\"Polovtsian Dances\").\nAct 3.\n\"The Polovtsian camp\"\nThe Polovtsian army returns in triumph singing the praise of Khan Gzak (\"Polovtsian March\"). Konchak sings of the sack of Putivl and other victories and confidently predicts that they will soon capture all of Russia. Igor and his son Vladimir have their worst fears confirmed by the new captives. Vladimir and the other prisoners urge Igor to escape, but he is at first reluctant, singing of his shame and saying that it is the duty of the other Russian princes to save the homeland (\"Igor's Monologue\", Mariinsky edition only). Ovlur now arrives to say that he has prepared horses for Igor and Vladimir and Igor now agrees to escape. The distressed Konchakovna comes, challenging Vladimir to show his love by either taking her with him or by staying. Igor urges his son to come, but Vladimir feels unable to leave Konchakovna who threatens to wake the camp. Eventually Igor flees alone and Konchakovna sounds the alarm. She and her father refuse to let the Polovtsy kill Vladimir. Instead Konchak orders the death of the guards and marries Vladimir to his daughter. As for Igor, Konchak thinks more of him for his escape.\nAct 4.\n\"Dawn in Putivl\"\nYaroslavna weeps at her separation from Igor and the defeat of his army, blaming the very elements themselves for helping the enemy (\"Yaroslavna's Lament\"). Peasant women blame not the wind but Khan Gzak for the devastation. As Yaroslavna looks around to acknowledge the destruction, she sees two riders in the distance who turn out to be Igor and Ovlur. The two lovers sing of their joy of being reunited and of the expectation that Igor will lead the Russians to victory against the Khan. Unaware of Igor's return, Skula and Yeroshka, the drunken gudok players, sing a song that mocks him. Then they notice him in the distance. After a moment of panic about what will happen to them, Skula says that they should rely on their cunning and decides on a plan that will save them. They ring the church bells to summon a crowd. Although people at first treat them with suspicion, the gudok players manage to convince the crowd that Igor has returned and the boyars that they are loyal followers of the true prince and not Galitsky. All joyously celebrate Igor's return.\nOverture\nPrincipal arias and numbers.\nPrologue\nChorus: \"Glory to the beautiful Sun\", \u00ab\u0421\u043e\u043b\u043d\u0446\u0443 \u043a\u0440\u0430\u0441\u043d\u043e\u043c\u0443 \u0441\u043b\u0430\u0432\u0430!\u00bb (People of Putivl)\nChorus: \"Glory to the multitude of stars\", \u00ab\u0427\u0430\u0441\u0442\u044b\u043c \u0437\u0432\u0451\u0437\u0434\u043e\u0447\u043a\u0430\u043c \u0441\u043b\u0430\u0432\u0430!\u00bb (People of Putivl)\nAct 1\nSong: \"If only I had the honor\", \u00ab\u0422\u043e\u043b\u044c\u043a\u043e \u0431 \u043c\u043d\u0435 \u0434\u043e\u0436\u0434\u0430\u0442\u044c\u0441\u044f \u0447\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0438\u00bb (Galitsky)\nArioso: \"A long time has passed\", \u00ab\u041d\u0435\u043c\u0430\u043b\u043e \u0432\u0440\u0435\u043c\u0435\u043d\u0438 \u043f\u0440\u043e\u0448\u043b\u043e \u0441 \u0442\u0435\u0445 \u043f\u043e\u0440\u00bb (Yaroslavna)\nAct 2\nDance: \"Dance of the Polovtsian Maidens\", \u00ab\u041f\u043b\u044f\u0441\u043a\u0430 \u043f\u043e\u043b\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0446\u043a\u0438\u0445 \u0434\u0435\u0432\u0443\u0448\u0435\u043a\u00bb (Orchestra)\nCavatina: \"The light of day fades\", \u00ab\u041c\u0435\u0440\u043a\u043d\u0435\u0442 \u0441\u0432\u0435\u0442 \u0434\u043d\u0435\u0432\u043d\u043e\u0439\u00bb (Konchakovna)\nCavatina: \"Slowly the day died away\", \u00ab\u041c\u0435\u0434\u043b\u0435\u043d\u043d\u043e \u0434\u0435\u043d\u044c \u0443\u0433\u0430\u0441\u0430\u043b\u00bb (Vladimir)\nDuet: \"Is that you, my Vladimir?\", \u00ab\u0422\u044b \u043b\u0438, \u0412\u043b\u0430\u0434\u0438\u043c\u0438\u0440 \u043c\u043e\u0439?\u00bb (Konchakovna, Vladimir)\nAria: \"No sleep, no rest for my tormented soul\", \u00ab\u041d\u0438 \u0441\u043d\u0430, \u043d\u0438 \u043e\u0442\u0434\u044b\u0445\u0430 \u0438\u0437\u043c\u0443\u0447\u0435\u043d\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u0434\u0443\u0448\u0435\u00bb (Igor)\nAria: \"Are you well, Prince?\", \u00ab\u0417\u0434\u043e\u0440\u043e\u0432 \u043b\u0438, \u043a\u043d\u044f\u0437\u044c?\u00bb (Konchak)\nPolovtsian Dances: \"Fly away on the wings of the wind\", \u00ab\u0423\u043b\u0435\u0442\u0430\u0439 \u043d\u0430 \u043a\u0440\u044b\u043b\u044c\u044f\u0445 \u0432\u0435\u0442\u0440\u0430\u00bb (Slaves, Konchak)\nAct 3\nMarch: \"Polovtsian March\", \u00ab\u041f\u043e\u043b\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0446\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u043c\u0430\u0440\u0448\u00bb (Orchestra)\nTrio: \"Vladimir! Is all this really true?\", \u00ab\u0412\u043b\u0430\u0434\u0438\u043c\u0438\u0440! \u0423\u0436\u0435\u043b\u044c \u0432\u0441\u0435 \u044d\u0442\u043e \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0434\u0430?\u00bb (Konchakovna, Vladimir, Igor)\nAct 4\nAria: \"Oh, I weep\", \u00ab\u0410\u0445, \u043f\u043b\u0430\u0447\u0443 \u044f\u00bb (Yaroslavna)\nChorus: \"God heard our prayers\", \u00ab\u0417\u043d\u0430\u0442\u044c, \u0433\u043e\u0441\u043f\u043e\u0434\u044c \u043c\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0431\u044b \u0443\u0441\u043b\u044b\u0448\u0430\u043b\u00bb (People of Putivl)\nBoth the Overture to \"Prince Igor\" and the \"Polovtsian Dances\" (from Act II) are well-known concert standards. Together with the \"Polovtsian March\", they form the so-called \"suite\" from the opera.\nCritical analysis.\n\"Prince Igor\" is a staple of Russian opera, but has not travelled well abroad. One obvious reason is the Russian language, although translation into Italian was once a solution.\nAnother explanation for the failure to gain acceptance is its lack of unity resulting from its unfinished state. Despite the skill and efforts of editors Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov, the opera is still episodic and dramatically static, a problem of which the composer himself was aware when he embarked on composition (see quote above in \"Composition History\"). This is partly a consequence of Borodin's failure to complete a libretto before beginning composition of the music\u2014the same problem that plagued his colleague Mussorgsky in the composition of \"Khovanshchina\". Both composers wrote their librettos piece by piece while composing the music, both lost sight of the overall narrative thread of their operas, and both wound up with pages and pages of music that needed to be sacrificed to assemble a cohesive whole. Also, both died before finishing their operas, leaving the task of completion, editing, and orchestration in both cases to Rimsky-Korsakov.\nPerformance practice.\nOne of the main considerations when performing \"Prince Igor\" is the question of whether to include Act 3, much of which was composed by Glazunov. The practice of omitting it was mentioned as early as 1909 in Rimsky-Korsakov's memoirs. Many productions leave Act 3 out because it \"fails to carry conviction both musically and dramatically.\"\nOn the other hand, maintaining the act has certain benefits. It contains some fine pages (e.g., the \"Polovtsian March\"), provides an important link in the narrative (Igor's escape, Vladimir's fate), and is the origin of some of the memorable themes first heard in the overture (the trio, brass fanfares). Fortunately, the option of omitting the fine overture, also known to have been composed by Glazunov, is seldom considered.\nRecently, the question of the best sequence of scenes in which to perform the opera has gained some prominence. Borodin did not complete a libretto before composing the music to \"Prince Igor\". The opera has traditionally been performed in the edition made by Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov. It will be obvious that the positions to which they assigned the Prologue, Act 3, and Act 4 cannot be changed if the story is to make sense. However, because the events of Act 1 and Act 2 overlap and are independent of one another, Act 2 may just as well precede Act 1 without any loss of coherence. Soviet musicologists Pavel Lamm and Arnold Sokhor reported the existence of a written plan (now in Glinka's Musical Culture Museum, Moscow), in Borodin's hand, that specified this sequence of scenes:\nSokhor assessed the plan as not written later than 1883.\nThe 1993 recording of \"Prince Igor\" by Valery Gergiev with the Kirov Opera features a new edition of the score with additions commissioned from composer Yuri Faliek for a production at the Mariinsky Theatre, adopting this hypothetical original sequence. The authors of the notes to the recording assert that this order better balances the musical structure of the score by alternating the acts in the Russian and Polovtsian settings with their distinctive musical atmospheres.\nDespite this justification, there is reason to maintain the traditional sequence. Act II contains most of the numbers for which the work is known today, with Igor's brooding and impassioned aria (\"Oh give me freedom\") at the center, flanked by Vladimir's cavatina and Konchak's aria, not to mention the rousing conclusion provided by the \"Polovtsian Dances.\" Moving its wealth of arias and dances from the center of the work to near the beginning may weaken the opera's structure.\nThe \"Mariinsky edition\" makes other important changes and additions to the score. Although much of the material composed or orchestrated by Glazunov and Rimsky-Korsakov is retained, there are additions culled from the unpublished vocal score by Pavel Lamm, orchestrated and linked by Faliek. The changes include:\nOutside Russia, the opera has often been given in languages other than Russian. For example, the 1960 recording under Lovro von Mata\u010di\u0107 is sung in German, the 1964 recording under Armando La Rosa Parodi is in Italian and the 1982 radio broadcast of Opera North conducted by David Lloyd-Jones is in English. On the other hand, the 1962 Oscar Danon and the 1990 Bernard Haitink recordings are Western performances sung in Russian.\nRecordings.\nThis is a list of studio recordings. A comprehensive list of all recordings of \"Prince Igor\" may be found at http:// \nAudio\nVideo\nPopular culture.\nIn the American musical \"Kismet\" (1953), most of the score was adapted from works by Borodin. Themes from the Polovtsian Dances from \"Prince Igor\" were used extensively and the \"Gliding Dance of the Maidens\" provided the melody for the popular hit song \"Stranger in Paradise\".\nIn \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Simpson Tide\", the Boyars' Chorus (Act 1, Scene 2) plays while tanks emerge from parade floats during a peace parade on Red Square in front of Saint Basil's, soldiers walk out of a building, the Berlin Wall re-erects itself out of the ground, and Lenin rises from his grave, saying \"Rrr! Must Crush Capitalism, Rrr!\". The \"Gliding dance of the Maidens\" is also played during the Valentine's Day Itchy and Scratchy cartoon featured in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"I Love Lisa\".\nMusical quotations from the Polovtsian Dances can be heard: \nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "39145", "revid": "51009575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39145", "title": "The Abduction of Figaro", "text": "Opera by P. D. Q. Bach\nThe Abduction of Figaro is a comic opera in three acts, described as \"A Simply Grand Opera by P. D. Q. Bach\", by Peter Schickele. It is a parody of opera in general, and the title is a play on two operas by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart: \"The Abduction from the Seraglio\", K. 384, and \"The Marriage of Figaro\", K. 492. Those two operas, as well as \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\" and \"Don Giovanni\", and Gilbert and Sullivan's \"The Pirates of Penzance\" are among the core inspirations for the piece. \"The Abduction of Figaro\" is numbered S. 384, 492 in Schickele's catalogue of works.\nSchickele was commissioned to \"discover\" this opera by the Minnesota Opera, where the piece premiered on April 27 and 28, 1984. In addition to parodying Mozart, the music incorporates diverse influences and musical quotes, from traditional camp songs like \"Found a Peanut\" to popular songs like \"Macho Man\" by the Village People. The opera has been released on VHS and DVD.\nRoles.\nSeveral characters' names and roles closely resemble those of characters in Mozart operas:\nAdditionally, much of the first act takes place at the palace of the \"Count and Countess Almamater\", a reference to the Count and Countess Almaviva from \"The Marriage of Figaro\", though neither character is physically seen in the opera.\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\nA dying Figaro lies in bed, attended by his wife Susanna Susannadanna, her servant Pecadillo, doctor Al Donfonso, and a chorus of townspeople. Donfonso detects a heartbeat after removing a couple of peanuts out of Figaro's pocket. He says Figaro must get rest if he's going to live. Shortly after Donfonso leaves, Figaro sits up as if trying to say something but falls back down, prompting everyone to call the doctor back. Donfonso returns and applies medicinal leeches, much to everyone's disgust. He insists it was a treatment used on George Washington, but admits that Washington didn't survive (Introduction/\"Found a peanut!\").\nSusanna is left alone with Figaro. She puts a pillow under him because his back hurts, then tearfully pleads for his health to improve, supported by three doo-wop singers (\"Stay with me\"). A noble lady suddenly enters, stating that she is looking for a man named Donald Giovanni who has betrayed her (\"Perfidy, thy name is Donald\"). After being subdued by Susanna and Pecadillo, she introduces herself as Donna Donna. Pecadillo is immediately drawn to her servant, Blondie. All four express their views on love in a quartet (\"Love is gone\").\nOutside, in the palace courtyard, Donald Giovanni arrives with his servant Schlepporello. Schlepporello wants to sing an aria, but Giovanni tells him he's a mute character and shouldn't even be speaking. Susanna and Blondie emerge on the balcony. While Pecadillo sings a serenade to Blondie while playing ukulele (\"Behold, fair maiden\"), Giovanni calls to Susanna, who eventually invites him inside (\"Thy lofty tree\").\nSusanna shows Giovanni her husband lying asleep. Donfonso returns to check on Figaro. Donna Donna enters and recognizes Giovanni, demanding that he marry her or be shot. Before Donna Donna can shoot Giovanni, a pirate emerges from a chest and threatens to kill anyone who moves. He introduces himself as Captain Kadd (\"My name is Captain Kadd\") and announces he's \"taking this ship to Cuba\" in search of a hidden treasure. Donfonso awkwardly explains that they aren't on a ship, but rather in Figaro's bedroom, \"in a town on the coast of Spain or Italy or somewhere\". Undeterred, Kadd takes Figaro and his bed hostage and rolls out of the room. Everyone else laments about the situation, and Susanna dramatically faints from shock (\"What a downer!\").\nGiovanni descends a ladder from the balcony, but Donna Donna is waiting for him outside. Lying, he assures her he isn't trying to flee. He explains that he is going to find Figaro and bring him back (\"No man\"). He recruits the unwilling Pecadillo to join him and Schlepporello. At a dock, Giovanni and Pecadillo promise to be faithful to Donna Donna and Blondie and say goodbye (\"Ah, though we must part\"). The three men board a ship and sail off. Immediately, there's a storm, and the ship sinks in the distance (Act 1 finale).\nAct 2.\nSeveral days later, the men reach an unknown shore somewhere in the Turkish Empire (\"God be praised\"). They meet Opec, who sings a nonsensical song while picking various tropical fruit off of a single tree (\"Fish gotta swim\"). Opec tells the trio that they are at the palace of the Pasha Shaboom. The Pasha enters with his entourage (\"Hey, make way\"), and a group of dancers perform the Dance of the Seven Pails. Opec informs the Pasha of the three suspicious foreigners he has found, but the Pasha is clearly stoned and isn't bothered. After the Pasha and his company leave, Giovanni and Pecadillo express their admiration of two veiled women. However, the women reveal themselves as Donna Donna and Blondie in diguise and promptly leave, feeling insulted by the men's lack of fidelity (\"May I introduce\").\nBlondie and Donna Donna commiserate. Blondie laments that there aren't any faithful men, but Donna Donna still wants a man who will be true to her (\"Macho, macho\"). Pecadillo begs for Blondie's forgiveness while playing a pedal steel guitar (\"You can beat me\"). Donna Donna angrily comes out, but Giovanni insists that she still has his heart. She initially succumbs to his advances, but quickly breaks off and denounces him. She becomes so angry that she breaks the fourth wall, telling the orchestra's conductor that \"I'm not even going to sing my aria!\" before storming offstage.\nGiovanni tells Pecadillo and Schlepporello that it's time to continue their quest to rescue Figaro. Opec asks to join them, offering to provide a ship and crew. The quartet sets sail for Cuba, \"the land of coconuts and rum\" (Act 2 finale).\nAct 3.\nOn a tropical island, there's a ballet which has nothing to do with the story. The four men enter, believing they're in an enchanted forest or perhaps dreaming, but Pecadillo decides they're simply lost (\"A magic forest\"). Schlepporello still wants to sing, but Giovanni harshly reminds him he's not allowed to.\nThe group meets Papa Geno and Mama Geno, a pair of poverty-stricken swineherds (\"I am a swineherd\"). They explain that they've been living on the island ever since they were in a shipwreck. Captain Kadd arrives, still with Figaro's bed. Kadd recognizes Papa Geno as his former ship's cook and receives a map from him. The directions lead to the bed, where everyone discovers that Figaro is missing. Where he was lying, though, is the Maltese Falcon. That's why Figaro's back was hurting; the treasure was in the bed the whole time.\nKadd discovers that the hollow statuette, which is supposed to contain the treasure, is empty and halts the performance midway through the opera's finale (Finale, part 1). He argues with the opera company's manager, who wants Kadd to go on and simply pretend that the treasure is there (despite the entire audience now knowing the truth), but Kadd insists the production is supposed to be fully staged. Schlepporello, now breaking character, reveals he has intentionally hidden the treasure and that he'll return it on the condition that he is allowed to sing, suggesting an aria of Donald Giovanni's that was \"cut\" from the second act during rehearsals. The manager gives in (\"Why, oh why\").\nAfter an underwhelming vocal performance and tap dance, Schlepporello produces the treasure, and the finale concludes with Kadd celebrating his newly acquired wealth. An offstage narrator briefly summarizes the later life of the main characters, such as Giovanni dying of \"unnatural causes\" and Figaro moving to Paris to start a newspaper (Finale, part 2).\nMusical numbers.\n&lt;poem&gt;\n1. Introductory remarks by Prof. Peter Schickele\n2. Opening credits\n3. Overture\nAct 1: A town on the seacoast of Spain or Italy or somewhere\nScene 1: Figaro's bedroom in the palace of Count Almamater\n4. Introduction: \"Found a peanut!\"\n5. Recitative: \"Ah, dear husband\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aria: \"Stay with me\"\n6. Recitative: \"Suzanna\"\n7. Recitative: \"Dog!\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aria: \"Perfidy, thy name is Donald\"\n8. Recitative: \"I am distraught\"\n9. Quartet: \"Love is gone\"\nScene 2: A courtyard of the palace\n10. Recitative: \"Well, here we are\"\n11. Aria: \"Behold, fair maiden\"\n12. Recitative: \"Just a moment\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Duet: \"Thy lofty tree\"\nScene 3: Figaro's bedroom\n13. Recitative: \"And here is my husband\"\n14. Recitative: \"Hold it!\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aria: \"My name is Captain Kadd\"\n15. Recitative: \"Now that you've heard\"\n16. Sextet: \"What a downer!\"\nScene 4: The courtyard\n17. Recitative: \"Schlepporello\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aria: \"No man\"\nScene 5: At the dock\n18. Recitative: \"What a strange turn of events\"\n19. Quintet and chorus: \"Ah, though we must part\"\n20. Act 1 finale\n21. Introduction to act 2\nAct 2: Somewhere in the Turkish Empire\nScene 1: At the seashore\n22. Duet: \"God be praised\"\nScene 2: In front of the Pasha's palace\n23. Aria: \"Fish gotta swim\"\n24. Chorus: \"Hey, make way\"\n25. Dance of the Seven Pails\n26. Recitative: \"Your immenseness\"\n27. Duet, chorus, and dialogue: \"Who is the highest\"\n28. Quartet: \"May I introduce\"\nScene 3: A courtyard of the palace\n29. Dialogue and recitative: \"Why?\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aria and dialogue: \"Macho, macho\"\n30. Cavatina and dialogue: \"You can beat me\"\n31. Act 2 finale\nAct 3: A tropical forest\n32. Ballet\n33. Trio and dialogue: \"A magic forest\"\n34. Duet and dialogue: \"I am a swineherd\"\n35. Finale (part 1) and dialogue\n36. Aria and dialogue: \"Why, oh why\"\n37. Finale (part 2)\n38. Curtain calls and closing credits\n39. Closing remarks by Prof. Schickele\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nDVD bonus tracks\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39147", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39147", "title": "Finite difference", "text": "Discrete analog of a derivative\nA finite difference is a mathematical expression of the form \"f\"(\"x\" + \"b\") \u2212 \"f\"(\"x\" + \"a\"). Finite differences (or the associated difference quotients) are often used as approximations of derivatives, such as in numerical differentiation.\nThe difference operator, commonly denoted formula_1, is the operator that maps a function f to the function formula_2 defined by\nformula_3\nA difference equation is a functional equation that involves the finite difference operator in the same way as a differential equation involves derivatives. There are many similarities between difference equations and differential equations. Certain recurrence relations can be written as difference equations by replacing iteration notation with finite differences.\nIn numerical analysis, finite differences are widely used for approximating derivatives, and the term \"finite difference\" is often used as an abbreviation of \"finite difference approximation of derivatives\".\nFinite differences were introduced by Brook Taylor in 1715 and have also been studied as abstract self-standing mathematical objects in works by George Boole (1860), L. M. Milne-Thomson (1933), and K\u00e1roly Jordan (1939). Finite differences trace their origins back to one of Jost B\u00fcrgi's algorithms (c.\u20091592) and work by others including Isaac Newton. The formal calculus of finite differences can be viewed as an alternative to the calculus of infinitesimals.\nBasic types.\nThree basic types are commonly considered: \"forward\", \"backward\", and \"central\" finite differences.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;forward difference, denoted formula_4 of a function f is a function defined as\nformula_5\nDepending on the application, the spacing h may be variable or constant. When not specified, the default value for h is 1; that is, \nformula_6\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;backward difference uses the function values at x and \"x\" \u2212 \"h\", instead of the values at \nformula_7\nFinally, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;central difference is given by\nformula_8\nRelation with derivatives.\nThe approximation of derivatives by finite differences plays a central role in finite difference methods for the numerical solution of differential equations, especially boundary value problems.\nThe derivative of a function f at a point x is defined by the limit\nformula_9\nIf h has a fixed (non-zero) value instead of approaching zero, then the right-hand side of the above equation would be written\nformula_10\nHence, the forward difference divided by h approximates the derivative when h is small. The error in this approximation can be derived from Taylor's theorem. Assuming that f is twice differentiable, we have\nformula_11\nThe same formula holds for the backward difference:\nformula_12\nHowever, the central (also called centered) difference yields a more accurate approximation. If f is three times differentiable,\nformula_13\nThe main problem with the central difference method, however, is that oscillating functions can yield zero derivative. If \"f\"(\"nh\") = 1 for n odd, and \"f\"(\"nh\") = 2 for n even, then \"f\"\u2032(\"nh\") = 0 if it is calculated with the central difference scheme. This is particularly troublesome if the domain of f is discrete. See also Symmetric derivative.\nAuthors for whom finite differences mean finite difference approximations define the forward/backward/central differences as the quotients given in this section (instead of employing the definitions given in the previous section).\nHigher-order differences.\nIn an analogous way, one can obtain finite difference approximations to higher order derivatives and differential operators. For example, by using the above central difference formula for \"f\"\u2009\u2032(\"x\" + ) and \"f\"\u2009\u2032(\"x\" \u2212 ) and applying a central difference formula for the derivative of \"f\"\u2009\u2032 at x, we obtain the central difference approximation of the second derivative of \nSimilarly we can apply other differencing formulas in a recursive manner.\nMore generally, the n-th order forward, backward, and central differences are given by, respectively,\nThese equations use binomial coefficients after the summation sign shown as formula_20 Each row of Pascal's triangle provides the coefficient for each value of \nNote that the central difference will, for odd n, have h multiplied by non-integers. This is often a problem because it amounts to changing the interval of discretization. The problem may be remedied substituting the average of formula_21 and formula_22\nForward differences applied to a sequence are sometimes called the binomial transform of the sequence, and have a number of interesting combinatorial properties. Forward differences may be evaluated using the N\u00f6rlund\u2013Rice integral. The integral representation for these types of series is interesting, because the integral can often be evaluated using asymptotic expansion or saddle-point techniques; by contrast, the forward difference series can be extremely hard to evaluate numerically, because the binomial coefficients grow rapidly for large n.\nThe relationship of these higher-order differences with the respective derivatives is straightforward,\nformula_23\nHigher-order differences can also be used to construct better approximations. As mentioned above, the first-order difference approximates the first-order derivative up to a term of order h. However, the combination\nformula_24\napproximates \"f\"\u2009\u2032(\"x\") up to a term of order \"h\"2. This can be proven by expanding the above expression in Taylor series, or by using the calculus of finite differences, explained below.\nIf necessary, the finite difference can be centered about any point by mixing forward, backward, and central differences.\nSometimes, the low order derivatives of a function may be analytically known, but high order derivatives are not. In these cases, the high order derivatives can be approximated by finite difference of low order derivatives, which is often more accurate and numerically more stable than finite difference of the function \"f\"&amp;hairsp;(\"x\") itself. This is sometimes called seminumerical differentiation. For example, when the first order derivative \"f\"\u2009\u2032(\"x\") is available but the second order derivative \"f\"\u2009\u2032\u2032(\"x\") is not, the latter can be approximated by second-order central difference of \"f\"\u2009\u2032(\"x\"):\nformula_25\nPolynomials.\nFor a given polynomial of degree \"n\" \u2265 1, expressed in the function \"P\"(\"x\"), with real numbers \"a\" \u2260 0 and \"b\" and \"lower order terms\" (if any) marked as l.o.t.:\nformula_26\nAfter \"n\" pairwise differences, the following result can be achieved, where \"h\" \u2260 0 is a real number marking the arithmetic difference:\nformula_27\nOnly the coefficient of the highest-order term remains. As this result is constant with respect to \"x\", any further pairwise differences will have the value 0.\nInductive proof.\nBase case.\nLet \"Q\"(\"x\") be a polynomial of degree 1:\nformula_28\nThis proves it for the base case.\nInductive step.\nLet \"R\"(\"x\") be a polynomial of degree \"m\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 where \"m\" \u2265 2 and the coefficient of the highest-order term be \"a\" \u2260 0. Assuming the following holds true for all polynomials of degree \"m\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01:\nformula_29\nLet \"S\"(\"x\") be a polynomial of degree \"m\". With one pairwise difference:\nformula_30\nAs \"ahm\" \u2260 0, this results in a polynomial \"T\"(\"x\") of degree \"m\" \u2212 1, with \"ahm\" as the coefficient of the highest-order term. Given the assumption above and \"m\" \u2212 1 pairwise differences (resulting in a total of \"m\" pairwise differences for \"S\"(\"x\")), it can be found that:\nformula_31\nThis completes the proof.\nApplication.\nThis identity can be used to find the lowest-degree polynomial that intercepts a number of points (\"x\", \"y\") where the difference on the \"x\"-axis from one point to the next is a constant \"h\" \u2260 0. For example, given the following points:\nWe can use a differences table, where for all cells to the right of the first \"y\", the following relation to the cells in the column immediately to the left exists for a cell (\"a\" + 1, \"b\" + 1), with the top-leftmost cell being at coordinate (0, 0):\nformula_32\nTo find the first term, the following table can be used:\nThis arrives at a constant 648. The arithmetic difference is \"h\" = 3, as established above. Given the number of pairwise differences needed to reach the constant, it can be surmised this is a polynomial of degree 3. Thus, using the identity above:\nformula_33\nSolving for \"a\", it can be found to have the value 4. Thus, the first term of the polynomial is 4\"x\"3.\nThen, subtracting out the first term, which lowers the polynomial's degree, and finding the finite difference again:\nHere, the constant is achieved after only two pairwise differences, thus the following result:\nformula_34\nSolving for \"a\", which is \u221217, the polynomial's second term is \u221217\"x\"2.\nMoving on to the next term, by subtracting out the second term:\nThus the constant is achieved after only one pairwise difference:\nformula_35\nIt can be found that \"a\" = 36 and thus the third term of the polynomial is 36\"x\". Subtracting out the third term:\nWithout any pairwise differences, it is found that the 4th and final term of the polynomial is the constant \u221219. Thus, the lowest-degree polynomial intercepting all the points in the first table is found:\nformula_36\nArbitrarily sized kernels.\nUsing linear algebra one can construct finite difference approximations which utilize an arbitrary number of points to the left and a (possibly different) number of points to the right of the evaluation point, for any order derivative. This involves solving a linear system such that the Taylor expansion of the sum of those points around the evaluation point best approximates the Taylor expansion of the desired derivative. Such formulas can be represented graphically on a hexagonal or diamond-shaped grid.\nThis is useful for differentiating a function on a grid, where, as one approaches the edge of the grid, one must sample fewer and fewer points on one side.\nFinite difference approximations for non-standard (and even non-integer) stencils given an arbitrary stencil and a desired derivative order may be constructed.\nIn differential equations.\nAn important application of finite differences is in numerical analysis, especially in numerical differential equations, which aim at the numerical solution of ordinary and partial differential equations. The idea is to replace the derivatives appearing in the differential equation by finite differences that approximate them. The resulting methods are called finite difference methods.\nCommon applications of the finite difference method are in computational science and engineering disciplines, such as thermal engineering, fluid mechanics, etc.\nNewton's series.\nThe Newton series consists of the terms of the Newton forward difference equation, named after Isaac Newton; in essence, it is the Gregory\u2013Newton interpolation formula (named after Isaac Newton and James Gregory), first published in his \"Principia Mathematica\" in 1687, namely the discrete analog of the continuous Taylor expansion,\nformula_39\nwhich holds for any polynomial function f and for many (but not all) analytic functions. (It does not hold when f is exponential type formula_40. This is easily seen, as the sine function vanishes at integer multiples of formula_40; the corresponding Newton series is identically zero, as all finite differences are zero in this case. Yet clearly, the sine function is not zero.) Here, the expression\nformula_42\nis the binomial coefficient, and\nformula_43\nis the \"falling factorial\" or \"lower factorial\", while the empty product (\"x\")0 is defined to be\u00a01. In this particular case, there is an assumption of unit steps for the changes in the values of \"x\", \"h\" \n 1 of the generalization below.\nNote the formal correspondence of this result to Taylor's theorem. Historically, this, as well as the Chu\u2013Vandermonde identity, \nformula_44\n(following from it, and corresponding to the binomial theorem), are included in the observations that matured to the system of umbral calculus.\nNewton series expansions can be superior to Taylor series expansions when applied to discrete quantities like quantum spins (see Holstein\u2013Primakoff transformation), bosonic operator functions or discrete counting statistics.\nTo illustrate how one may use Newton's formula in actual practice, consider the first few terms of doubling the Fibonacci sequence \"f\" \n 2, 2, 4, ... One can find a polynomial that reproduces these values, by first computing a difference table, and then substituting the differences that correspond to \"x\"0 (underlined) into the formula as follows,\nformula_45\nFor the case of nonuniform steps in the values of x, Newton computes the divided differences,\nformula_46\nthe series of products,\nformula_47\nand the resulting polynomial is the scalar product,\nformula_48\nIn analysis with p-adic numbers, Mahler's theorem states that the assumption that f is a polynomial function can be weakened all the way to the assumption that f is merely continuous.\nCarlson's theorem provides necessary and sufficient conditions for a Newton series to be unique, if it exists. However, a Newton series does not, in general, exist.\nThe Newton series, together with the Stirling series and the Selberg series, is a special case of the general difference series, all of which are defined in terms of suitably scaled forward differences.\nIn a compressed and slightly more general form and equidistant nodes the formula reads\nformula_49\nCalculus of finite differences.\nThe forward difference can be considered as an operator, called the difference operator, which maps the function f to \u0394\"h\"[\"f\"]. This operator amounts to formula_50 where T\"h\" is the shift operator with step h, defined by and I is the identity operator.\nThe finite difference of higher orders can be defined in recursive manner as Another equivalent definition is \nThe difference operator \u0394\"h\" is a linear operator, as such it satisfies \nIt also satisfies a special Leibniz rule:\nformula_51\nSimilar Leibniz rules hold for the backward and central differences.\nFormally applying the Taylor series with respect to h, yields the operator equation\nformula_52\nwhere D denotes the conventional, continuous derivative operator, mapping f to its derivative The expansion is valid when both sides act on analytic functions, for sufficiently small h; in the special case that the series of derivatives terminates (when the function operated on is a finite polynomial) the expression is exact, for \"all\" finite stepsizes, Thus and formally inverting the exponential yields \nformula_53\nThis formula holds in the sense that both operators give the same result when applied to a polynomial.\nEven for analytic functions, the series on the right is not guaranteed to converge; it may be an asymptotic series. However, it can be used to obtain more accurate approximations for the derivative. For instance, retaining the first two terms of the series yields the second-order approximation to \"f\"\u00a0\u2032(\"x\") mentioned at the end of the section \"\".\nThe analogous formulas for the backward and central difference operators are\nformula_54\nThe calculus of finite differences is related to the umbral calculus of combinatorics. This remarkably systematic correspondence is due to the identity of the commutators of the umbral quantities to their continuum analogs (\"h\" \u2192 0 limits),\nformula_55\nA large number of formal differential relations of standard calculus involving \nfunctions \"f\"(\"x\") thus \"systematically map to umbral finite-difference analogs\" involving \nFor instance, the umbral analog of a monomial xn is a generalization of the above falling factorial (Pochhammer k-symbol), \nformula_56 \nso that \nformula_57\nhence the above Newton interpolation formula (by matching coefficients in the expansion of an arbitrary function \"f\"(\"x\") in such symbols), and so on.\nFor example, the umbral sine is\nformula_58\nAs in the continuum limit, the eigenfunction of also happens to be an exponential,\nformula_59\nand hence \"Fourier sums of continuum functions are readily, faithfully mapped to umbral Fourier sums\", i.e., involving the same Fourier coefficients multiplying these umbral basis exponentials. This umbral exponential thus amounts to the exponential generating function of the Pochhammer symbols.\nThus, for instance, the Dirac delta function maps to its umbral correspondent, the cardinal sine function \nformula_60\nand so forth. Difference equations can often be solved with techniques very similar to those for solving differential equations.\nThe inverse operator of the forward difference operator, so then the umbral integral, is the indefinite sum or antidifference operator.\nRules for calculus of finite difference operators.\nAnalogous to rules for finding the derivative, we have:\nAll of the above rules apply equally well to any difference operator as to \u0394, including \u03b4 and \nSee references.\nMultivariate finite differences.\nFinite differences can be considered in more than one variable. They are analogous to partial derivatives in several variables.\nSome partial derivative approximations are:\nformula_68\nAlternatively, for applications in which the computation of f is the most costly step, and both first and second derivatives must be computed, a more efficient formula for the last case is\nformula_69\nsince the only values to compute that are not already needed for the previous four equations are \"f\"(\"x\" + \"h\", \"y\" + \"k\") and \"f\"(\"x\" \u2212 \"h\", \"y\" \u2212 \"k\").\nFor functions with formula_70 variables formula_71, evaluating the full formula_72-th order derivative tensor via finite difference requires formula_73 calls of the function formula_74 (where we have used the Big O notation to denote the asymptotic scaling behavior), or formula_75 calls of the formula_76-th order derivative of the function formula_74 (where formula_78). However, for many classes of functions, the formula_72-th order derivative tensor is sparse, or its off-diagonal blocks may have low rank. In these cases, algorithms may exist that can numerically estimate the formula_72-th order derivative tensor using less than formula_75 calls of the formula_76-th order derivative, for example when formula_83 and formula_84; in the latter case it is possible to estimate the Hessian matrix using only formula_85 gradients, instead of formula_86 gradients as would be required by the conventional finite difference algorithm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39149", "revid": "1573079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39149", "title": "Frederic W. H. Myers", "text": "English poet and essayist (1843\u20131901)\nFrederic William Henry Myers (6 February 1843 \u2013 17 January 1901) was a British poet, classicist, philologist, and a founder of the Society for Psychical Research. Myers' work on psychical research and his ideas about a \"subliminal self\" were influential in his time, but have not been accepted by the scientific community.\nEarly life.\nMyers was born on 6 February 1843 at St John's parsonage, Keswick, Cumberland, the son of Revd Frederic Myers (1811\u20131851) and his second wife Susan Harriet Myers \"nee\" Marshall (1811\u20131896). He was a brother of poet Ernest Myers (1844\u20131921) and of Dr. Arthur Thomas Myers (1851\u20131894). His maternal grandfather was the wealthy industrialist John Marshall (1765\u20131845).\nMyers was educated at Cheltenham College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he received a B.A. in 1864, and university prizes, including the Bell, Craven, Camden and Chancellor's Medal, though he was forced to resign the Camden medal for 1863 after accusations of plagiarism. He was a Fellow of Trinity College from 1865 to 1874 and college lecturer in classics from 1865 to 1869. In 1872 he became an Inspector of schools.\nIn 1867, Myers published a long poem, \"St Paul\", which includes the words of the hymn \"Hark what a sound, and too divine for hearing\". This was followed in 1882 by \"The Renewal of Youth and Other Poems\". He also wrote books of literary criticism, in particular, \"Wordsworth\" (1881) and \"Essays, Classical and Modern\" (in two volumes, 1883), which included an essay on Virgil.\nPersonal life.\nAs a young man, Myers was involved in homosexual relationships with Arthur Sidgwick, the poet John Addington Symonds, and possibly Lord Battersea. He later fell in love with Annie Eliza, the wife of his cousin Walter James Marshall. Myers' relationship with his cousin's wife has been questioned by different researchers to be sexual or Platonic. Annie committed suicide in September 1876 by drowning.\nThe British writer on the occult Richard Cavendish commented: \"According to his own statement, he [Myers] had very strong sexual inclinations, which he indulged. These would seem to have been mainly homosexual in his youth, but in later life, he was said to be wholly heterosexual.\" In 1880, Myers married Eveleen Tennant (1856\u20131937), daughter of Charles Tennant and Gertrude Tennant. They had two sons, the elder the novelist Leopold Hamilton Myers (1881\u20131944), and a daughter. English author Ronald Pearsall suggested that Myers had sexual interests in young lady mediums, writing \"[I]t is certainly true that Myers's interest in young lady mediums was not solely due to their spiritualistic talents.\"\nThe researcher Trevor H. Hall argued that Myers had an affair with the medium Ada Goodrich Freer. However, Trevor Hamilton dismissed this and suggested that Freer was simply using her acquaintance with Myers to gain status in the psychical research movement. John Grant has suggested that Myers was a womaniser who was easily duped and \"probably seduced\" by Freer.\"\nBiographer Bart Schultz wrote that \"Myers was suspected of all manner of sexual quirks and it was alleged that he looked upon psychical research as giving him opportunities for voyeurism.\" He also noted the odd behaviour of Myers, such as insisting to be with Edmund Gurney with his bride on their Honeymoon even against strong protest from the bride.\nA relationship between eroticism and Myer's interest in psychical research was examined by Professor of Philosophy Jeffrey J. Kripal.\nBiographer Trevor Hamilton has defended Myer's against the allegations of sexual misconduct.\nPsychical research.\nMyers was interested in psychical research and was one of the founding members of the Society for Psychical Research (SPR) in 1883. He became the President in 1900. Myers psychical ideas and theory of a subliminal self did not impress contemporary psychologists. Psychologists who shared an interest in psychical research such as Th\u00e9odore Flournoy and William James were influenced by Myers. However, according to historian Janet Oppenheim \"not even all Myer's colleagues at the SPR accepted his hypotheses.\"\nEarly SPR members like Myers and Henry Sidgwick hoped to cling to something spiritual through psychical research. Psychical researcher Eric Dingwall wrote regarding the early formation of the Society for Psychical Research, \"Myers, among others... knew that the primary aim of the society was not objective experimentation but the establishment of telepathy.\"\nBritish historian G.R. Searle described Myers as \"having lost his Christian faith, sought a new kind of religion that could reassure him that death did not lead to extinction.\"\nMediums and psychics.\nIn opposition to Richard Hodgson and Eleanor Mildred Sidgwick who held the view that many physical mediums were fraudulent, Myers believed that although many of these mediums cheated they could also produce genuine physical phenomena. According to Trevor Hamilton \"Myers had no direct involvement in the exposure of physical fraud.\"\nIn the late 19th century Douglas Blackburn and George Albert Smith were endorsed as genuine psychics by Myers and Edmund Gurney. Smith even became an SPR member himself and the private secretary to the Honorary Secretary Gurney from 1883 to 1888. However, Blackburn later confessed to fraud. Blackburn called Gurney and Myers a \"couple of credulous spiritualists\" and wrote \"we resolved that we should be doing the world a service by fooling them to the top of their bent, and then showing how easy a matter it was to 'take in' scientific observers.\"\nMyers' 1884 essay \"Visible Apparitions\" with Gurney claimed a \"personal experience\" by a retired Judge Edmund Hornby involving a visitation from a spirit was true, but Joseph McCabe wrote that the story was a \"jumble of inaccuracies\" and \"Sir E. Hornby was compelled to admit, that the story was entirely untrue.\"\nIn July 1895, Eusapia Palladino was invited to England to Myers' house in Cambridge for a series of investigations into her mediumship. According to reports by the investigators such as Richard Hodgson and magician John Nevil Maskelyne, all the phenomena observed in the Cambridge sittings were the result of trickery. Her fraud was so clever, according to Myers, that it \"must have needed long practice to bring it to its present level of skill.\" However, despite the exposure of her fraud, Myers was convinced some of her phenomena was genuine.\nClinical neurologist Sebastian Dieguez has commented that Myers \"was seriously duped by many people\".\nPhantasms of the living.\nMyers was the co-author of the two-volume \"Phantasms of the Living\" (1886) with Gurney and Frank Podmore which documented alleged sightings of apparitions. Myers wrote an introduction and concluding chapter. The two volumes consist of 701 cases of alleged spontaneous apparitional communications. It also explored a telepathic theory to explain such cases. Psychical researcher Thomas Walker Mitchell commented that \"the chief aim of [the] book was to produce a cumulative quasi-statistical proof of telepathy.\" It was enthusiastically praised by psychologist William James as a \"most extraordinary work...exhibiting untiring zeal in collecting facts, and patience in seeking to make them accurate.\" Both James and Myers are mentioned together in the book \"The Seven Purposes\".\nSome scholars, however, criticised \"Phantasms of the Living\" for its lack of written testimony and the time elapsed between the occurrence and the report of it being made. Some of the reports were analysed by the German hallucination researcher Edmund Parish (1861\u20131916) who concluded they were evidence for a dream state of consciousness, not the paranormal. Charles Sanders Peirce wrote a long criticism of the book arguing that no scientific conclusion could be reached from anecdotes and stories of unanalyzed phenomena. Peirce argued that the stories were \"worthless, partly because of the uncertainty and error of the numerical data, and partly because the authors have been astonishingly careless in the admission of cases ruled out by the conditions of the argumentation.\"\nA strong attack on the book was made by physiologist William Thierry Preyer. Mathematician Simon Newcomb noted that there were many possible natural explanations for the stories including \"unconscious exaggeration; the faculty of remembering what is striking and forgetting what is not; illusions of sense, mistakes of memory; the impressions left by dreams; and, finally, deceit and trickery, whether intentional or unconscious.\" Because of all these possible factors that were not ruled out, he concluded \"there is therefore no proof of telepathy in any of the wonders narrated in these volumes.\"\nAlexander Taylor Innes attacked the book due to the stories lacking evidential substantiation in nearly every case. According to Innes the alleged sightings of apparitions were unreliable as they rested upon the memory of the witnesses and no contemporary documents had been produced, even in cases where such documents were alleged to exist. Edmund Gurney replied to the criticism, but \"could only point to three cases that met Innes's requirements, one of which later turned out to be fraud\".\nAnother major criticism of the book was that it endorsed the tests of the Creery Sisters as genuine evidence for telepathy. However, in 1887 two of the sisters had been detected in fraud, utilising a code of signals and the third sister confessed to using the signals in the experiments. The psychologist C. E. M. Hansel noted that the stories in \"Phantasms of the Living\" were not backed up by any corroborating evidence. Hansel concluded \"none of the stories investigated has withstood critical examination.\"\nShane McCorristine in his book \"Spectres of the Self\" (2010), explores the criticisms of \"Phantasms of the Living\" in depth.\nHuman personality and its survival of bodily death.\nMyers wrote a small collection of essays, \"Science and a Future Life\" which was published in 1893. In 1903, after Myers's death, \"Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death\" was compiled and published. This work comprises two large volumes at 1,360 pages in length and presents an overview of Myers's research into the unconscious mind. Myers believed that a theory of consciousness must be part of a unified model of mind which derives from the full range of human experience, including not only normal psychological phenomena but also a wide variety of abnormal and \"supernormal\" phenomena. In the book, Myers believed he had provided evidence for the existence of the soul and survival of personality after death. The book cites cases of automatic writing, hypnotism, mediumship, possession, psychokinesis, and telepathy.\nIn \"Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death\", Myers speculated on the existence of a deep region of the subconscious mind, which he termed the \"subliminal self\", which he believed could account for paranormal events. He also proposed the existence of a \"metetherial world,\" a world of images lying beyond the physical world. He wrote that apparitions are not hallucinations but have a real existence in the metetherial world which he described as a dream-like world. Myers\u2019 belief that apparitions occupied regions of physical space and had an objective existence was in opposition to the views of his co-authors Gurney and Podmore who wrote apparitions were telepathic hallucinations.\nIt was well received by parapsychologists and spiritualists, being described as \"the Bible of British psychical researchers\". Th\u00e9odore Flournoy and William James both positively reviewed the book. It was negatively reviewed by psychologist George Stout who described the concept of the subliminal self as \"baseless, futile, and incoherent.\" Andrew Lang and Gerald Balfour were unconvinced about some of Myers ideas. William McDougall in a detailed review for \"Mind\" also criticised the book. French psychologist Henri Delacroix commented that Myers \"experimental metaphysics\" was a failure. Psychologist G. T. W. Patrick criticised Myers concepts as a \"metaphysical, not a psychological hypothesis.\"\nMyers' book greatly impressed Aldous Huxley. In 1961, \"Human Personality\" was re-published as an abridged version with Huxley's foreword, in which he remarked \"an amazingly rich, profound and stimulating book.\"\nStrong praise for the book and a revival of interest in Myers' ideas appeared in the 2007 \"Irreducible Mind\" by Emily Williams Kelly, Alan Gauld and Bruce Greyson.\nDeath.\nIn each of 1898, 1899, and 1900 Myers had severe attacks of influenza and also developed Bright's disease. At the end of 1900 he travelled abroad to try to restore his health. He died of pneumonia in Rome on 17 January 1901. Myers was buried in the graveyard of St John's Church, Keswick, between his father's grave and a gateway into the garden of the house where he was born. He was survived by his wife. A memorial tablet to Myers was erected in Rome's Protestant cemetery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39150", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39150", "title": "HAL9000", "text": ""}
{"id": "39152", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39152", "title": "Radionuclides", "text": ""}
{"id": "39153", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39153", "title": "Miljopartiet", "text": ""}
{"id": "39155", "revid": "16392611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39155", "title": "ActiveX Data Objects", "text": "Component Object Model APIs for accessing data sources\nIn computing, Microsoft's ActiveX Data Objects (ADO) comprises a set of Component Object Model (COM) objects for accessing data sources. A part of MDAC (Microsoft Data Access Components), it provides a middleware layer between programming languages and OLE DB (a means of accessing data stores, whether databases or not, in a uniform manner). ADO allows a developer to write programs that access data without knowing how the database is implemented; developers must be aware of the database for connection only. No knowledge of SQL is required to access a database when using ADO, although one can use ADO to execute SQL commands directly (with the disadvantage of introducing a dependency upon the type of database used).\nMicrosoft introduced ADO in October 1996, positioning the software as a successor to Microsoft's earlier object layers for accessing data sources, including RDO (Remote Data Objects) and DAO (Data Access Objects).\nADO is made up of four collections and twelve objects.\n This collection contains a set of Field objects. The Collection can be used in either a Recordset object or in a Record object. In a Recordset object, each of the Field objects that make up the Fields collection corresponds to a column in that Record set object. In a Record object, a Field can be an absolute or relative URL that points into a tree-structured namespace (used for semi-structured data providers like the Microsoft OLE DB Provider for Internet Publishing) or as a reference to the default Stream object associated with that Record object.\n An object can have more than one Property object, which are contained in the object's Properties collection.\n A Command object can have several Parameter commands to change its predefined behaviour, and each of the Parameter objects are contained in the Command object's Parameters collection\n All provider-created errors are passed to a collection of Error objects, while the Errors collection itself is contained in a Connection object. When an ADO operation creates an error, the collection is cleared and a new group of Error objects is created in the collection.\n The connection object is ADO's connection to a data store via OLE DB. The connection object stores information about the session and provides methods of connecting to the data store. As some data stores have different methods of establishing a connection, some methods may not be supported in the connection object for particular OLE DB provider. A connection object connects to the data store using its 'Open' method with a connection string which specifies the connection as a list of key value pairs (for example: \"Provider='SQLOLEDB';Data Source='TheSqlServer'; Initial Catalog='Northwind';Integrated Security='SSPI';\"). The start of this connection string must identify the type of data store connection that the connection object requires:\n* an OLE DB provider (for example SQLOLEDB), using the syntax \"provider=\";\n* a file name, using the syntax \"file name=\";\n* a remote provider and server (see RDS), using the syntax \"Remote provider=\" and \"Remote server=\"; or\n* an absolute URL, using the syntax \"URL=\"\n After the connection object establishes a session to the data source, instructions are sent to the data provider via the command object. The command object can send SQL queries directly to the provider through the use of the CommandText property, send a parameterised query or stored procedure through the use of a Parameter object or Parameters collection or run a query and return the results to a dataset object via the Execute method. There are several other methods that can be used in the Command object relating to other objects, such as the Stream, RecordSet or Connection objects.\n A recordset is a group of records, and can either come from a base table or as the result of a query to the table. The RecordSet object contains a Fields collection and a Properties collection. The Fields collection is a set of Field objects, which are the corresponding columns in the table. The Properties collection is a set of Property objects, which defines a particular functionality of an OLE DB provider. The RecordSet has numerous methods and properties for examining the data that exists within it. Records can be updated in the recordset by changing the values in the record and then calling on the Update or UpdateBatch method. \n The recordset is locked using the adLockOptimistic or adLockPessimistic lock. The data are updated at the data source after the record is changed and the Update method is called.\n The recordset is locked using adLockBatchOptimistic and each time Update is called the data are updated in a temporary buffer. Finally, when UpdateBatch is called the data are completely updated back at the data source. This has the advantage of it all being done in memory, and if a problem occurs then UpdateCancel is called and the updates are not sent to the data source.\n If the OLE DB provider allows it, transactions can be used. To start the transaction, the programmer invokes the BeginTrans method and does the required updates. When they are all done, the programmer invokes the CommitTrans method. RollbackTrans can be invoked to cancel any changes made inside the transaction and roll back the database to the state before the transaction began.\n This object represents one record in the database and contains a fields collection. A RecordSet consists of a collection of Record objects.\n A stream, mainly used in a RecordSet object, is a means of reading and writing a stream of bytes. It is mostly used to save a recordset in an XML format, to send commands to an OLE DB provider as an alternative to the CommandText object and to contain the contents of a binary or text file.\n A parameter is a means of altering the behaviour of a common piece of functionality, for instance a stored procedure might have different parameters passed to it depending on what needs to be done; these are called parameterised commands.\n Each Record object contains many fields, and a RecordSet object has a corresponding Field object also. The RecordSet object's Field object corresponds to a column in the database table that it references.\n This object is specific to the OLE DB provider and defines an ability that the provider has implemented. A property object can be either a built-in property \u2014 it is a well-defined property implemented by ADO already and thus cannot be altered \u2014 or can be a dynamic property \u2014 defined by the underlying data provider and can be changed\n When an OLE DB provider error occurs during the use of ADO, an Error object will be created in the Errors collection. Other errors do not go into an Error object, however. For instance, any errors that occur when manipulating data in a RecordSet or Field object are stored in a Status property.\nBasic usage.\nSome basic steps are required in order to be able to access and manipulate data using ADO :\nASP example.\nHere is an ASP example using ADO to select the \"Name\" field, from a table called \"Phonebook\", where a \"PhoneNumber\" was equal to \"555-5555\".\ndim myconnection, myrecordset, name\nset myconnection = server.createobject(\"ADODB.Connection\")\nset myrecordset = server.createobject(\"ADODB.Recordset\")\nmyconnection.open mydatasource\nmyrecordset.open \"Phonebook\", myconnection \nmyrecordset.find \"PhoneNumber = '555-5555'\"\nname = myrecordset.fields.item(\"Name\")\nmyrecordset.close\nset myrecordset = nothing\nset myconnection = nothing\nThis is equivalent to the following ASP code, which uses plain SQL instead of the functionality of the Recordset object:\ndim myconnection, myrecordset, name\nset myconnection = server.createobject(\"ADODB.connection\")\nmyconnection.open mydatasource\nset myrecordset = myconnection.execute(\"SELECT Name FROM Phonebook WHERE PhoneNumber = '555-5555'\")\nname = myrecordset(0)\nSoftware support.\nADO is supported in any development language that supports binding to binary COM interfaces. These languages include ASP, Delphi, PowerBuilder, and Visual Basic for Applications (VBA). ADO support has now been added to dBase Plus 8 (With ADO)\nLegacy.\nADO.NET has replaced ADO in the same way that C#/.NET replaced C/Win32 as the primary mode for targeting Windows application development. ADO.NET follows the same design pattern as ADO, enabling an ADO developer an easy path forward when moving to the .NET framework.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39156", "revid": "15934770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39156", "title": "Don A. Stuart", "text": ""}
{"id": "39158", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39158", "title": "Superior", "text": "Superior may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSuperiority.\nSuperiority may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39159", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39159", "title": "Mace (bludgeon)", "text": "Blunt striking weapon\nA mace is a blunt weapon, a type of club or virge that uses a heavy head on the end of a handle to deliver powerful strikes. A mace typically consists of a strong, heavy, wooden or metal shaft, often reinforced with metal, featuring a head made of stone, bone, copper, bronze, iron, or steel.\nThe head of a mace can be shaped with flanges or knobs to increase the pressure of an impact by focusing the force on a small point. They would bind on metal instead of sliding around it, allowing them to deliver more force to an armored opponent than a traditional mace. This effect increased the potential for the mace to injure an armored opponent through weak spots in the armor, and even damage plate armor by denting it, potentially binding overlapping plates and impeding the wearer's range of motion. Medieval historian and re-enactor Todd Todeschini (AKA Todd Cutler) demonstrated this effect with period accurate equipment in a series of tests on video. \nMaces are rarely used today for actual combat, but many government bodies (for instance, the British House of Commons and the U.S. Congress), universities and other institutions have ceremonial maces and continue to display them as symbols of authority. They are often paraded in academic, parliamentary or civic rituals and processions.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"mace\" entered Middle English from Old French \"mace,\" (\"large mallet/sledgehammer, mace\") itself from a Vulgar Latin term \"*mattia\" or \"*mattea\" (cf. Italian \"mazza,\" \"club, baton, mace\"), probably from Latin \"mateola\" (uncertain, possibly a kind of club, hammer, or \"hoe handle/stick\"). Possibly influenced by Latin \"mattiobarbulus\" (\"type of javelin\"), \"mattiarius\" (\"soldier armed with said javelin\"), from \"mataris, matara\" (\"Gallic javelin\"), from a Gaulish or Celtic word.\nDevelopment history.\nPrehistory.\nThe mace was developed during the Upper Paleolithic from the simple club, by adding sharp spikes of either flint or obsidian.\nIn Europe, an elaborately carved ceremonial flint mace head was one of the artifacts discovered in excavations of the Neolithic mound of Knowth in Ireland, and Bronze Age archaeology cites numerous finds of perforated mace heads.\nIn ancient Ukraine, stone mace heads were first used nearly eight millennia ago. The others known were disc maces with oddly formed stones mounted perpendicularly to their handle. The Narmer Palette shows a king swinging a mace. See the articles on the Narmer Macehead and the Scorpion Macehead for examples of decorated maces inscribed with the names of kings.\nThe problem with early maces was that their stone heads shattered easily and it was difficult to fix the head to the wooden handle reliably. The Egyptians attempted to give them a disk shape in the predynastic period (about 3850\u20133650\u00a0BC) in order to increase their impact and even provide some cutting capabilities, but this seems to have been a short-lived improvement.\nA rounded pear form of mace head known as a \"piriform\" replaced the disc mace in the Naqada II period of pre-dynastic Upper Egypt (3600\u20133250\u00a0BC) and was used throughout the Naqada III period (3250\u20133100\u00a0BC). Similar mace heads were also used in Mesopotamia around 2450\u20131900\u00a0BC. On a Sumerian Clay tablet written by the scribe Gar.Ama, the title Lord of the Mace is listed in the year 3100\u00a0BC. The Assyrians used maces probably about nineteenth century BC and in their campaigns; the maces were usually made of stone or marble and furnished with gold or other metals, but were rarely used in battle unless fighting heavily armoured infantry.\nAn important, later development in mace heads was the use of metal for their composition. With the advent of copper mace heads, they no longer shattered and a better fit could be made to the wooden club by giving the eye of the mace head the shape of a cone and using a tapered handle.\nThe Shardanas or warriors from Sardinia who fought for Ramses II against the Hittites were armed with maces consisting of wooden sticks with bronze heads. Many bronze statuettes of the times show Sardinian warriors carrying swords, bows and original maces.\nAncient history.\nPersians used a variety of maces and fielded large numbers of heavily armoured and armed cavalry (see Cataphract). For a heavily armed Persian knight, a mace was as effective as a sword or battle axe. In fact, Shahnameh has many references to heavily armoured knights facing each other using maces, axes, and swords. The enchanted talking mace Sharur made its first appearance in Sumerian/Akkadian mythology during the epic of Ninurta.\nThe Indian epics \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharata\" describe the extensive use of the \"gada\" in ancient Indian warfare as gada-yuddha or 'mace combat'.\nThe ancient Romans did not make wide use of maces, probably because of the influence of armour, and due to the nature of the Roman infantry's fighting style which involved the \"Pilum\" (spear) and the \"Gladius\" (short sword used in a stabbing fashion), though auxiliaries from Syria Palestina were armed with clubs and maces at the battles of Immae and Emesa in 272 AD. They proved highly effective against the heavily armoured horsemen of Palmyra.\nPost classical history.\nWestern Europe.\nDuring the Middle Ages metal armour such as mail protected against the blows of edged weapons. Though iron became increasingly common, copper and bronze were also used, especially in iron-deficient areas.\nOne example of a mace capable of penetrating armour is the flanged mace. The flanges allow it to dent or penetrate thick armour. Flange maces did not become popular until after knobbed maces. Although there are some references to flanged maces (\"bardoukion\") as early as the Byzantine Empire c. 900 it is commonly accepted that the flanged mace did not become popular in Europe until the 12th century, when it was concurrently developed in Russia and Mid-west Asia.\nMaces, being simple to make, cheap, and straightforward in application, were quite common weapons.\nIt is popularly believed that maces were employed by the clergy in warfare to avoid shedding blood (\"sine effusione sanguinis\"). The evidence for this is sparse and appears to derive almost entirely from the depiction of Bishop Odo of Bayeux wielding a club-like mace at the Battle of Hastings in 1066 in the Bayeux Tapestry, the idea being that he did so to avoid either shedding blood or bearing the arms of war.\nIn the 1893 work \"Arms and Armour in Antiquity and the Middle Ages\", Paul Lacombe and Charles Boutell state that the mace was chiefly used for blows struck upon the head of an enemy.\nEastern Europe.\nEastern European maces often had pear shaped heads. These maces were also used by the Moldavian ruler Stephen the Great in some of his wars (see Bulawa).\nThe mace is also the favourite weapon of Prince Marko, a hero in South Slavic epic poetry.\nThe pernach was a type of flanged mace developed since the 12th century in the region of Kievan Rus', and later widely used throughout the whole of Europe. The name comes from the Slavic word \"pero\" (\"\u043f\u0435\u0440\u043e\") meaning feather, reflecting the form of pernach that resembled a fletched arrow. Pernachs were the first form of the flanged mace to enjoy a wide usage. It was well suited to penetrate plate armour and chain mail. In the later times it was often used as a symbol of power by the military leaders in Eastern Europe.\nPre-Columbian America.\nThe cultures of pre-Columbian America used clubs and maces extensively. The warriors of the Moche state and the Inca Empire used maces with bone, stone or copper heads and wooden shafts. The quauhol\u014dlli was used in Mesoamerica.\nAsia.\nMaces in Asia were most often steel clubs with a spherical head. In Persia, the \"Gorz\" (spherical-head mace) served as a primary combat arm across many eras, most often being used by heavy infantry or Cataphracts. In India a form of these clubs was used by wrestlers to exercise the arms and shoulders. They have been known as gada since ancient times.\nDuring the Mughal era, the flanged mace of Persia was introduced to South Asia. The term \"shishpar\" is a Persian phrase which literally translates to \"six-wings\", to refer to the (often) six flanges on the mace. The shishpar mace was introduced by the Delhi Sultanate and continued to be utilized until the 18th century.\nModern history.\nTrench raiding clubs used during World War I were modern variations on the medieval mace. They were homemade m\u00eal\u00e9e weapons used by both the Allies and the Central Powers. Clubs were used during night time trench raiding expeditions as a quiet and effective way of killing or wounding enemy soldiers.\nMakeshift maces were also found in the possession of some football hooligans in the 1980s.\nIn 2020 China\u2013India skirmishes personnel of People's Liberation Army Ground Force were seen using makeshift maces (batons wrapped in barbed wire and clubs embedded with nails).\nSome units of the People's Police of China carry two-handed maces. Reportedly these are used for disabling errant martial artists.\nCeremonial use.\nMaces have had a role in ceremonial practices over time, including some still in use today.\nParliamentary maces.\nThe ceremonial mace is a short, richly ornamented staff often made of silver, the upper part of which is furnished with a knob or other head-piece and decorated with a coat of arms. The ceremonial mace was commonly borne before eminent ecclesiastical corporations, magistrates, and academic bodies as a mark and symbol of jurisdiction.\nCeremonial maces are important in many parliaments following the Westminster system. They are carried in by the sergeant-at-arms or some other mace-bearers and displayed on the clerks' table while parliament is in session to show that a parliament is fully constituted. They are removed when the session ends. The mace is also removed from the table when a new speaker is being elected to show that parliament is not ready to conduct business.\nEcclesiastical maces.\nMaces may also be carried before clergy members in church processions, although in the case of the Roman Catholic pope and cardinals, they have largely been replaced with processional crosses.\nParade maces.\nMaces are also used as a parade item, rather than a tool of war, notably in military bands. Specific movements of the mace from the drum major will signal specific orders to the band they lead. The mace can signal anything from a step-off to a halt, from the commencement of playing to the cut off.\nUniversity maces.\nUniversity maces are employed in a manner similar to parliamentary maces. They symbolize the authority and independence of a chartered university and the authority vested in the provost. They are typically carried in at the beginning of a convocation ceremony and are often less than half a meter high.\nHeraldic use.\nLike many weapons from feudal times, maces have been used in heraldic blazons as either a charge on a shield or other item, or as external ornamentation.\nThus, in France:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39161", "revid": "808104533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39161", "title": "Nautical miles", "text": ""}
{"id": "39163", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39163", "title": "Toktar Aubakirov", "text": "Soviet cosmonaut (born 1946)\nToktar Ongarbayuly Aubakirov ( (\"Toqtar O\u00f1\u011farbai\u016bly \u00c4ub\u00e4k\u0131rov\"), , born on 27 July 1946) is a retired Kazakh Air Force officer and a former cosmonaut. He is the first person from Kazakhstan to go to space.\nEarly life.\nToktar Aubakirov was born in Karkaraly District, Karaganda Region, Kazakh SSR, which is now Kazakhstan. After graduating from the 8th grade of a secondary school he started working as a metal turner at the Temirtau foundry, whilst attending an evening school. In 1965 he joined the Armavir Military Aviation Institute of the Anti-Air Defence Pilots. He served as a fighter pilot in the Soviet Air Force on the Far East borders of the USSR until his acceptance into the Fedotov Test Pilot School in 1975.\nTest pilot career.\nBetween 1976 and 1991 Aubakirov served as a test pilot at the Mikoyan Experimental Design Bureau (MiG aircraft). During this time he tested over 50 types of aircraft. He was the first in the Soviet Union to make a nonstop flight crossing the North Pole, with two in-flight refuelings, and the first in the Soviet Union to take off from the aircraft-carrier \"Tbilisi\" (later named \"Kuznetsov\") on a MiG 29K.\nSpaceflight experience.\nIn 1991, in accordance with an agreement between the governments of the USSR and the Kazakh SSR, started training at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center. On 2 October 1991 he launched with Russian cosmonaut Alexander Volkov as flight commander, and the Austrian research cosmonaut Franz Viehb\u00f6ck in Soyuz TM-13 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome spaceport, and spent over eight days in space. Their mission was the last launched by the Soviet Union, which dissolved shortly thereafter, with Aubakirov becoming a citizen of the independent Republic of Kazakhstan.\nCareer.\nSince 1993, he has been the general director of the National Aerospace Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan. He was a member of the Kazakhstan parliament. Now he is a pensioner and consultant.\nFamily.\nToktar Aubakirov is married to Tatyana Aubakirova. They have two children: Timur (born in 1977) and Mikhail (born in 1982).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39167", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39167", "title": "Arms (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "39170", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39170", "title": "Flash", "text": "Flash, flashes, or FLASH may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39172", "revid": "16017191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39172", "title": "Clustering", "text": "Clustering can refer to the following:\nIn computing:\nIn economics:\nIn graph theory:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
