{"id": "37523", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37523", "title": "Halebidu", "text": "Halebidu (IAST: Ha\u1e37\u0113b\u012b\u1e0du, literally \"old capital, city, encampment\" or \"ruined city\") is a town located in Hassan District, Karnataka, India. Historically known as Dw\u0101rasamudra (also Dorasamudra), Halebidu became the regal capital of the Hoysala Empire in the 11th century CE. In the modern era literature it is sometimes referred to as Halebeedu or Halebid as the phonetic equivalent, a local name after it was damaged and deserted after being ransacked and looted twice by the forces of the Turko-Persian Delhi Sultanate in the 14th century.\nHalebidu is home to some of the best examples of Hindu and Jain temples with Hoysala architecture. These show the breadth of Hindu artwork traditions \u2013 Shiva, Vishnu, Devi and Vedic deities \u2013 fused into the same temple complex, depicted with a diversity of regional heritages, along with inscriptions in scripts from across India. The Hindu temples include Jaina reliefs in its panel. Similarly, the Jaina artwork includes the different Tirthankara as well as a Saraswati within its mantapa. Most notable among the Halebidu monuments are the ornate Hoysalesvara temple, Kedareshwara temple, Jaina Basadi temples, as well as the Hulikere step well (\"kalyani\"). These sites are within a kilometer of each other. The Hoysaleshwara Temple remains the only surviving monument in Halebidu.\nLocation.\nHalebidu is connected by road to Hassan on SH-21 (30\u00a0km), Mysore (150\u00a0km) and Mangalore on NH-73 (184\u00a0km). It is about 15 kilometers from Belur, another site known for its intricately carved Hoysala era temples.\nHistory.\nHalebidu is in the midst of a valley east of the Western Ghats (Sahyadri Mountains un Karnataka). It is surrounded by low-lying mountains, boulders and seasonal rivers. This valley is well connected to northern Karnataka, western Andhra Pradesh and northern Tamil Nadu. Around this region, between the 10th and 14th-century, the Hoysa\u1e37a dynasty came to power, whose history is unclear. By their own 11th and 12th-century inscriptions, they were descendants of the Krishna-Baladeva-roots and the Yadavas of Devagiri. They married into the Kalyana Chalukya Hindu dynasty, known for its temple and art tradition. The reliability of these inscriptions have been questioned as potential mythistory by some historians, who propose that the Hoysalas were a local Hindu family \u2013 a hill chief from the Sahyadri hill range of Karnataka remembered for having killed a tiger or a lion, and they seized and over time expanded their power starting in the 10th century.\nHalebidu was built anew near a large reservoir by the early Hoysala kings, with support from their governors, merchants, and artisans. They greatly excavated and expanded the Dorasamudra reservoir. Major and spectacularly carved Hindu and Jain temples were already complete by the 12th century. Around the city were fort walls, generally tracing a rounded square-like area with an average span of 2.25 kilometers. Inside were four major water reservoirs and many smaller public water tanks. The city life, it major temples and the roads were centered near the Dorasamudra water reservoir. The city several dozen temples, of which only a small set has survived. Three set of temples \u2013 Hoysaleswara (twin temple), Jain Basadi (three temples) and Kedareshvara (one temple) \u2013 were the largest, more sophisticated in their architecture and artwork, while the rest were simpler.\nTo the immediate west of the major Hindu and Jain temples was the Hoysala Palace. This palace stretched south up to the \"Benne Gudda\" (\"lit.\", butter hill). The palace is completely ruined and gone, with section lost in mounds and fragments found near the Benne Gudda. To the west of the palace was another group of Hindu and Jain temples \u2013\u00a0the Nagaresvara site, also destroyed whose ruins have been found in mounds. To the north of the original Hoysala city was a Saraswati temple and a Krishna temple, both also ruined and mostly lost. Towards the center and south of the old city were Hucesvara temple and a Rudresvara temple, evidenced by inscriptions and ruins that have been discovered. Four temples in northeastern section have survived \u2013 Gudlesvara, Virabhadra, Kumbalesvara and Ranganatha. The western part of the fortified section and beyond the fort were the historic farms that fed the population of the Dorasamudra capital. Roads connected the Hoysala capital to other major towns and pilgrimage sites such as Belur and Pushpagiri. Numerous inscriptions dating between mid 10th-century to early 13th-century attest to the importance of Dorasamudra to various Hoysala kings.\nAfter the first invasion and destruction of Dorasamudra in the 14th century, inscriptions suggest that there were attempts to repair the temples, palace and infrastructure in Dorasamudra. As a condition to an end to the invasion, Malik Kafur of Turko-Persian Delhi Sultanate demanded the monarch Veera Ballala III to accept suzerainty of Khalji, pay tribute and provide logistical support to the Sultanate forces seeking to raid and loot the fabled wealth in the Pandya capital of Madurai in Tamil Nadu. Additional waves of wars of destruction and loot from the Turko-Persian Sultanates ended the Hoysala kingdom and Dorasamudra's prosperity as a capital city. For nearly 300 years, Dorasamudra saw no new inscriptions or evidence of political or economic prosperity. A mid 17th-century Nayaka era inscription in Belur thereafter becomes the first to mention \"Halebidu\". Meanwhile the surviving Hindu and Jain communities continued to support and repair the temples, with evidence of living temples in what is now the northern part of Halibidu.\nMonuments.\nThe major historic monuments in Halebid include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "37524", "revid": "2952402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37524", "title": "Shravanabelagola", "text": "Shravanabelagola (pronunciation: ) is a town located near Channarayapatna of Hassan district in the Indian state of Karnataka and is from Bengaluru. The Gommateshwara Bahubali statue at Shravanabelagola is one of the most important tirthas (pilgrimage destinations) in Jainism, one that reached a peak in architectural and sculptural activity under the patronage of Western Ganga dynasty of Talakad. Chandragupta Maurya is said to have died on the hill of Chandragiri, which is located in Shravanabelagola, in 298 BCE after he became a Jain monk and assumed an ascetic life style.\nGommateshwara statue, Akkana Basadi, Chandragupta basadi, Chamundaraya Basadi, Parshvanath Basadi and inscriptions of Shravanabelagola group of monuments are listed as Adarsh Smarak Monument by Archaeological Survey of India.\nLocation.\nShravanabelagola is located at to the south-east of Channarayapatna in the Channarayapatna taluk of Hassan district of Karnataka. It is at a distance of south-east of Hassan, Karnataka, the district centre. It is situated at a distance of to the south from the Bengaluru-Mangaluru road (NH-75), from Hirisave, from Halebidu, from Belur, from Mysuru, from Bengaluru, the capital of Karnataka and from Mangaluru.\nSacred places are spread over two hills, Chandragiri and Vindyagiri, and also among the villages at the foothills.\nEtymology.\n\"Shravanabelagola\" \"White Pond of the Shravana\" is named with reference to the colossal image of Gomma\u1e6da - the prefix \"\u015arava\u1e47a\" serves to distinguish it from other Belagolas with the prefixes Hale- and Kodi-, while \"Be\u1e37ago\u1e37a\" \"white pond\" is an allusion to the pond in the middle of the town. The Sanskrit equivalents \"\u015avetasarovara\", \"Dhavalasarovara\" and \"Dhavalasarasa\" used in the inscriptions that support this meaning. There are more than 560 inscriptions in Shravabelagola.\nSome inscriptions mention the name of the place as Be\u1e37go\u1e37a, which has given rise to another derivation from the plant \"Solanum ferox\" (hairy-fruited eggplant). This derivation is in allusion to a tradition which says that a pious old woman completely anointed the colossal image with the milk brought by her in a \"gullakayi\" or eggplant. The place is also designated as \"Devara Be\u1e37go\u1e37a\" \"White Pond of the God\" and \"Gomma\u1e6dapuram\" \"city of Gomma\u1e6da\" in some epigraphs.\nHistory.\nShravanabelagola has two hills, Chandragiri and Vindhyagiri. \"Acharya\" Bhadrabahu and his pupil Chandragupta Maurya are believed to have meditated there. Chandragupta Basadi, which was dedicated to Chandragupta Maurya, was originally built there by Ashoka in the third century BCE. Chandragiri also has memorials to numerous monks and \u015ar\u0101vakas who have meditated there since the fifth century CE, including the last king of the Rashtrakuta dynasty of Manyakheta. Chandragiri also has a famous temple built by Chavundaraya.\nThe 58-feet tall monolithic statue of Gommateshwara is located on Vindyagiri. It is considered to be the world's largest monolithic statue. The base of the statue has an inscriptions in Prakrit, dating from 981 CE. The inscription praises the king who funded the effort and his general, Chavundaraya, who erected the statue for his mother. Every twelve years, thousands of devotees congregate here to perform the Mahamastakabhisheka, a spectacular ceremony in which the statue is anointed with Water, Turmeric, Rice flour, Sugar cane juice, Sandalwood paste, saffron, and gold and silver flowers. Recently Mahamastakabhisheka was held in 2018 during feb month. The next Mahamastakabhisheka will be held in 2030.\nShravanabelagola, nestled by the Vindhyagiri and Chandragiri Hills, protected by the monolith Bhagwan Bahubali, and home to over 2,300 years of Jain heritage, is a veritable picture postcard of our history and heritage spanning the centuries. In the town of Shravanabelagola, stands a colossal rock-cut statue of Gommateshwara Shri Bahubali. About eight hundred odd inscriptions which the Karnataka Archeological Department has collected at the place are mostly Jaina and cover a very extended period from 600 to 1830 CE. Some refer even to the remote time of Chandragupta Maurya and also relate the story of the first settlement of Jains at Shravanabelagola. That this village was an acknowledged seat of learning is proved from the fact that a priest from here named Akalanka was in 788 CE summoned to the court of Himasitala at Kanchi where having confuted the Buddhists in public disputation, he was instrumental in gaining their expulsion from the South of India to Ceylon.\nInscriptions.\nMore than 800 inscriptions have been found at Shravanabelagola, dating to various times from 600 CE to 1830 CE. A large number of these are found in the Chandragiri and the rest can be seen in the Vindhyagiri Hill and the town. Most of the inscriptions at the Chandragiri date back before the 10th century. These inscriptions include texts in the Kannada. The second volume of Epigraphia Carnatica, written by B. Lewis Rice, is dedicated to the inscriptions found here. It is said to be the oldest Marathi inscription. The inscriptions are written in \"Purvahalagannada\" (Ancient Kannada) and \"Halegannada\" (Old Kannada) characters. Some of these inscriptions mention the rise and growth in power of the Western Ganga Dynasty, the Rashtrakutas, the Hoysala Empire, the Vijayanagara Empire and the Udaiyaar dynasty. These inscriptions have helped modern scholars to understand the nature and development of the Kannada language and its literature.\nTyagada Brahmadeva Pillar is a decorated freestanding pillar (\"lit\", \"Stambha\"), tall, commissioned by Chamundaraya. The pillar dates to around 983 CE and exists on the Vindyagiri hill (called \"Dodda Betta\" in local Kannada language. On the base of the pillar, on the north side, is an inscription in old Kannada language of the same period.\nBasadi.\nThe Sasana Basadi, Savitagandharva Basadi, Terina Basadi and Santiswara Basadi are other important temples on the Chandragiri hill.\nMahamastakabhisheka.\nThe Mahamastakabhisheka (Grand Consecration/The Great Indian Festival), refers to the \"abhi\u1e63heka\" (anointment) of the Jain images when held on a large scale. The most famous of such consecrations is the anointment of the Bahubali Gommateshwara Statue located at Shravanabelagola. It is an important Jain festival held once in every 12 years. It is an integral part of the ancient and composite Jain tradition. The festival is held in veneration of a high monolithic statue of the Siddha Bahubali. The anointing last took place in February 2018, and the next ceremony is going to take place in 2030. During this festival, the statue is then bathed and anointed with libations such as milk, sugarcane juice, and saffron paste, and sprinkled with powders of sandalwood, turmeric, and vermilion.\nThe event has been attended by multiple political personalities including Krishna-Rajendra Wodeyar in 1910, Jawaharlal Nehru in 1951, Indira Gandhi in 1967 and 1981, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam in 2006, and Narendra Modi and Ramnath Kovind in 2018.\nOther notable things.\nShravanabelagola is the seat of the ancient Bhattaraka Matha, belonging to the Desiya Gana lineage of Mula Sangh, from the Digambara monastic tradition. http:// is an educational institute at Shrava\u1e47abe\u1e37ago\u1e37a.\nShravanabelagola is also part of the route followed by the luxury tourist train, the Golden Chariot.\nThe government of Karnataka showcased the statue of Gometashwara at the Republic Day Parade of 2005 where it received the first prize from the then President of India Honourable Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam.\nOn August 5, 2007, the statue at Shravanabelagola was voted by the readers of \"Times of India\" as the first of the Seven Wonders of India with 49% votes in favor of the statue.\nArchaeological Survey of India has listed the group of monuments in Shravanabelagola as \"Adarsh Smarak Monument\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37526", "revid": "1241543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37526", "title": "433 Eros", "text": "Near-Earth asteroid\n433 Eros is a stony asteroid of the Amor group, and the first discovered, and second-largest near-Earth object. It has an elongated shape and a volume-equivalent diameter of approximately . Visited by the NEAR Shoemaker space probe in 1998, it became the first asteroid ever studied from its own orbit.\nThe asteroid was discovered by German astronomer C. G. Witt at the Berlin Observatory on 13\u00a0August 1898 in an eccentric orbit between Mars and Earth. It was later named after Eros, a god from Greek mythology, the son of Aphrodite. He is identified with the planet Venus.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nEros was discovered on 13\u00a0August 1898 by Carl Gustav Witt at Berlin Urania Observatory and Auguste Charlois at Nice Observatory and temporarily labeled D.Q. Witt was taking a two-hour exposure of beta Aquarii to secure astrometric positions of asteroid 185 Eunike.\nName.\nEros is named after the Greek god of love, Er\u014ds. It was the first minor planet to be given a male name; the break with earlier tradition was made because it was the first near-Earth asteroid discovered.\nLater studies.\nDuring the opposition of 1900\u20131901, a worldwide program was launched to make parallax measurements of Eros to determine the solar parallax (or distance to the Sun), with the results published in 1910 by Arthur Hinks of Cambridge and Charles D. Perrine of the Lick Observatory, University of California. Perrine published progress reports in 1906 and 1908. He took 965\u00a0photographs with the Crossley Reflector and selected 525 for measurement. A similar program was then carried out, during a closer approach, in 1930\u20131931 by Harold Spencer Jones. The value of the Astronomical Unit (roughly the Earth-Sun distance) obtained by this program was considered definitive until 1968, when radar and dynamical parallax methods started producing more precise measurements.\nEros was the first asteroid detected by the Arecibo Observatory's radar system.\nEros was one of the first asteroids visited by a spacecraft, the first one orbited, and the first one soft-landed on. NASA spacecraft NEAR Shoemaker entered orbit around Eros in 2000, and landed in 2001.\nMars-crosser.\nEros is a Mars-crosser asteroid, the first known to come within the orbit of Mars. Its orbit is inclined at about 10.8\u00b0 to the solar ecliptic, it is above the plane of the ecliptic when it crosses Mars' orbit, so the two orbits do not intersect. Objects in such an orbit can remain there for only a few hundred million years before the orbit is perturbed by gravitational interactions. Dynamical system modeling suggests that Eros may evolve into an Earth-crosser within as short an interval as two million years, and has a roughly 50% chance of doing so over a time scale of 108~109\u00a0years. It is a potential Earth impactor, about five times larger than the impactor that created Chicxulub crater and led to the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs.\n\"NEAR Shoemaker\" survey and landing.\nThe NEAR Shoemaker probe visited Eros twice, first with a brief flyby in 1998, and then by orbiting it in 2000, when it extensively photographed its surface. On 12\u00a0February 2001, at the end of its mission, it landed on the asteroid's surface using its maneuvering jets.\nThis was the first time a Near Earth asteroid was closely visited by a spacecraft.\nPhysical characteristics.\nSurface gravity depends on the distance from a spot on the surface to the center of a body's mass. Eros's surface gravity varies greatly because Eros is not a sphere but an elongated peanut-shaped object. The daytime temperature on Eros can reach about at perihelion. Nighttime measurements fall near . Eros's density is 2.67\u00a0g/cm3, about the same as the density of Earth's crust.\nNEAR scientists have found that most of the larger rocks strewn across Eros were ejected from a single crater in an impact approximately 1\u00a0billion years ago. (The crater involved was proposed to be named \"Shoemaker\", but is not recognized as such by the International Astronomical Union (IAU), and has been formally designated Charlois Regio.) This event may also be responsible for the 40\u00a0percent of the Erotian surface that is devoid of craters smaller than 0.5\u00a0kilometers across. It was originally thought that the debris thrown up by the collision filled in the smaller craters. An analysis of crater densities over the surface indicates that the areas with lower crater density are within 9 kilometers of the impact point. Some of the lower density areas were found on the opposite side of the asteroid but still within 9\u00a0kilometers.\nIt is thought that seismic shockwaves propagate through the asteroid, shaking smaller craters into rubble. Since Eros is irregularly shaped, parts of the surface antipodal to the point of impact can be within 9\u00a0kilometres of the impact point (measured in a straight line through the asteroid) even though some intervening parts of the surface are more than 9\u00a0kilometres away in straight-line distance. A suitable analogy would be the distance from the top centre of a bun to the bottom centre as compared to the distance from the top centre to a point on the bun's circumference: top-to-bottom is a longer distance than top-to-periphery when measured along the surface but shorter than it in direct straight-line terms.\nCompression from the same impact is believed to have created the thrust fault Hinks Dorsum.\nA phenomenon named dust ponds were discovered in the asteroid in October 2000. Dust ponds are a phenomenon where pockets of dust are seen in airless celestial bodies. These are smooth deposits of dust accumulated in depressions on the surface of the body (like craters), contrasting from the rocky terrain around them. They typically have different color and albedo compared to the surrounding areas. The asteroid contains many large craters more than 200 m in diameter. Their number is near to the saturation point of these craters. But craters smaller than that are relatively low. Suggesting that some process of erasure has covered them up. The floors of some craters are covered with smooth and flat areas (less than 10\u00b0 slope). Such dust ponds are characterized by slightly bluer colour compared to the surrounding terrain. 334 of such ponds are identified, with a diameter of 10m. 255 of these are larger than 30m, and 231 (or 91%) are found within 30\u00b0 from equator.\nData from the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous spacecraft collected on Eros in December 1998 suggests that it could contain 20 billion tonnes of aluminum and similar amounts of metals that are rare on Earth, such as gold and platinum.\nVisibility from Earth.\nOn 31 January 2012, Eros passed Earth at , about 70\u00a0times the distance to the Moon, with a visual magnitude of +8.1. During rare oppositions, every 81 years, such as in 1975 and 2056, Eros can reach a magnitude of +7.0, which is brighter than Neptune and brighter than any main-belt asteroid except 1 Ceres, 4 Vesta and, rarely, 2 Pallas and 7 Iris. Under this condition, the asteroid actually appears to stop, but unlike the normal condition for a body in heliocentric conjunction with Earth, its retrograde motion is very small. For example, in January and February 2137, it moves retrograde only 34\u00a0minutes in right ascension.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the novel and television series \"The Expanse\", a catastrophic science experiment is unleashed on a civilian population living within tunnels cut through Eros. This so-called \"Eros Incident\" ends with the asteroid mysteriously breaking its usual orbit and crashing into Venus.\nIt makes an appearance in the novel (and its film adaptation) \"Ender's Game\" by Orson Scott Card, serving as a base for humanity and the location of Command School after having been captured from the invading aliens (the Formics) prior to the initial novel who had used the asteroid as their forward operating base in their previous invasion.\nIn the \"Space Angel\" episode 'Visitors from Outer Space' (title text not quite matching narration), Scott McCloud and his crew are forced to destroy Eros by deflecting it into the Sun, after it becomes a hazard to spacecraft navigation.\nIt is the setting for the entirety of the plot of the novel \"Captive Universe\" by Harry Harrison.\nDuring Grant Morrison's relaunch of the \"Justice League\", Eros was used to imprison the General after attacking the Justice League.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37527", "revid": "51025944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37527", "title": "Alfa Romeo", "text": "Italian automotive manufacturer\nAlfa Romeo Automobiles S.p.A. () is an Italian car manufacturer known for its sports-oriented vehicles, strong auto racing heritage, and iconic design. Headquartered in Turin, Italy, it is a subsidiary of Stellantis Europe and one of 14 brands of multinational automotive company Stellantis.\nFounded on 24 June 1910 in Milan, Italy as A.L.F.A.\u2014an acronym for \u2014the company was established by Cavaliere Ugo Stella to acquire the assets of the ailing Italian subsidiary of French carmaker Darracq, of which he had been an investor and manager. Its first car was the 24 HP, designed by Giuseppe Merosi, which became commercially successful and participated in the 1911 Targa Florio endurance race.\nIn August 1915, ALFA was acquired by Neapolitan entrepreneur and engineer Nicola Romeo, who vastly expanded the company's portfolio to include heavy machinery and aircraft engines. In 1920, the company's name was changed to Alfa Romeo, with the Torpedo 20\u201330 HP being the first vehicle to bear the new brand.\nThrough the 1920s, Alfa Romeo produced several successful road and race cars, and was well represented in prominent European motorsport events, notably winning the inaugural AIACR World Manufacturers' Championship at the 1925 Grand Prix season. Nevertheless, the company soon faced financial troubles, leading to Romeo's contentious departure in 1928 and Italian government ownership in 1933.\nUnder the control of the industrial organization \"Institute per la Ricostruzione Industriale\" (IRI), Alfa Romeo initially continued making its signature custom luxury vehicles, but following the financial hardship of World War II, shifted to mass-producing small vehicles. In 1954, it launched the Giulietta series of family cars and developed the Alfa Romeo Twin Cam engine, which would remain in production until 1994.\nAlfa Romeo became known for producing mass-market vehicles that nonetheless blended the aesthetics and performance of sport and luxury marques. Despite its strong brand image and relatively sizeable share of the high-performance auto market in Europe, by the 1970s, the company was operating at a loss, prompting IRI to sell it to Fiat Group in 1986.\nAlfa Romeo has since maintained its distinct identity and brand through several ownership changes, including Fiat's merger with the American Chrysler Group in 2014, forming Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), and FCA's subsequent merger in 2021 with the French PSA Group to form Stellantis.\nAlfa Romeo is heavily involved in various motorsports\u2014including Grand Prix motor racing, Formula One, sportscar racing, touring car racing, and rallies\u2014with achievements giving a sporty image to the marque. Enzo Ferrari founded the Scuderia Ferrari racing team in 1929 as an Alfa Romeo racing team, before forming his namesake luxury sports car maker in 1939.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nName.\nThe company's name is a combination of the original name, \"A.L.F.A.\" (\"Anonima Lombarda Fabbrica Automobili\" - \u201cLombardian Automobile Factory Corporation\u201d), and the last name of entrepreneur Nicola Romeo, who took control of the company in 1915.\nFoundation and early years.\nThe first factory building of A.L.F.A. was in the first-place property of Societ\u00e0 Anonima Italiana Darracq (SAID), founded in 1906 by the French automobile firm of Alexandre Darracq, with some Italian investors. One of them, Cavaliere Ugo Stella, an aristocrat from Milan, became chairman of the SAID in 1909. The firm's initial location was in Naples, but even before the construction of the planned factory had started, Darracq decided late in 1906 that Milan would be more suitable and accordingly a tract of land was acquired in the Milan suburb of Portello, where a new factory of was constructed. In late 1909, the Italian Darracq cars were selling slowly and the company was wound up. Ugo Stella, with the other Italian co-investors, founded a new company named A.L.F.A. (Anonima Lombarda Fabbrica Automobili), buying the assets of Italian Darracq that was up to dissolution. The first car produced by the company was the 1910 24 HP, designed by Giuseppe Merosi, hired in 1909 for designing new cars more suited to the Italian market. Merosi would go on to design a series of new A.L.F.A. cars, with more powerful engines such as the 40\u201360 HP. A.L.F.A. ventured into motor racing, with drivers Franchini and Ronzoni competing in the 1911 Targa Florio with two 24-hp models. In 1914, an advanced Grand Prix car was designed and built, the GP1914, with a four-cylinder engine, double overhead camshafts, four valves per cylinder, and twin ignition. However, the onset of the First World War halted automobile production at A.L.F.A. for three years.\nIn August 1915, the company came under the direction of Neapolitan entrepreneur Nicola Romeo, who converted the factory to produce military hardware for the Italian and Allied war efforts. Munitions, aircraft engines and other components, compressors, and generators based on the company's existing car engines were produced in a vastly enlarged factory during the war. After the war, Romeo invested his war profits in acquiring locomotive and railway carriage plants in Saronno (Costruzioni Meccaniche di Saronno), Rome (Officine Meccaniche di Roma), and Naples (Officine Ferroviarie Meridionali), which were added to his A.L.F.A. ownership.\nCar production had not been considered at first, but resumed in 1919 since parts for the completion of 105 cars had remained at the A.L.F.A. factory since 1915. In 1920, the name of the company was changed to Alfa Romeo with the Torpedo 20\u201330 HP the first car to be so badged. Their first success came in 1920 when Giuseppe Campari won at Mugello and continued with second place in the Targa Florio driven by Enzo Ferrari. Giuseppe Merosi continued as head designer, and the company continued to produce solid road cars as well as successful race cars (including the 40\u201360 HP and the RL Targa Florio).\nIn 1923, Vittorio Jano was lured from Fiat, partly due to the persuasion of a young Alfa racing driver named Enzo Ferrari, to replace Merosi as chief designer at Alfa Romeo. The first Alfa Romeo under Jano was the P2 Grand Prix car, which won Alfa Romeo the inaugural world championship for Grand Prix cars in 1925. For road cars, Jano developed a series of small-to-medium-displacement 4-, 6-, and 8-cylinder inline engines based on the P2 unit that established the architecture of the company's engines, with light alloy construction, hemispherical combustion chambers, centrally located plugs, two rows of overhead valves per cylinder bank and dual overhead cams. Jano's designs proved both reliable and powerful.\nEnzo Ferrari proved a better team manager than a driver, and when the factory team was privatised, it became Scuderia Ferrari. When Ferrari left Alfa Romeo, he went on to build his own cars. Tazio Nuvolari often drove for Alfa, winning many races before the Second World War.\nIn 1928, Nicola Romeo left, and in 1933 Alfa Romeo was rescued by the government, which then had effective control. Alfa Romeo became an instrument of Mussolini's Italy, a national emblem. During this period, it built bespoke vehicles for the wealthy, with bodies normally by Carrozzeria Touring or Pininfarina. This era peaked with the Alfa Romeo 2900B Type 35 racers.\nThe Alfa factory (converted during wartime to the production of Macchi C.202 Folgore engines: the Daimler-Benz 600 series built under license) was bombed during the Second World War and struggled to return to profitability after the war. The luxury vehicles were out. Smaller, mass-produced vehicles began to be produced beginning with the 1954 model year, with the introduction of the Giulietta series of \"berline\" (saloons/sedans), coupes and open two-seaters. All three varieties shared what would become the Alfa Romeo overhead Twin Cam four-cylinder engine, initially displacing 1300\u00a0cc. This engine would eventually be enlarged to 2000\u00a0cc and would remain in production until 1995.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I see an Alfa Romeo go by, I tip my hat.\u2014\u200a\nPost war.\nOnce motorsports resumed after the Second World War, Alfa Romeo proved to be the car to beat in Grand Prix events. The introduction of the new formula (Formula One) for single seat racing cars provided an ideal setting for Alfa Romeo's Tipo 158 Alfetta, adapted from a pre-war voiturette, and Giuseppe Farina won the first Formula One World Championship in 1950 in the 158. Juan Manuel Fangio secured Alfa's second consecutive championship in 1951.\nIn 1952, Alfa Romeo experimented with its first front-wheel-drive compact car, \"Project 13\u201361\". It had the same transverse-mounted, forward-motor layout as the modern front-wheel-drive automobile. Alfa Romeo made a second attempt in the late 1950s based on Project 13\u201361. It was to be called Tipo 103 and resembled the smaller version of its popular Alfa Romeo Giulia. However, due to the financial difficulties in post-war Italy, the Tipo 103 never saw production. Had Alfa Romeo produced it, it would have preceded the Mini as the first \"modern\" front-wheel-drive compact car. In the mid-1950s, Alfa Romeo entered into an agreement with Brazil's Matarazzo Group to create a company called Fabral (\"F\u00e1brica Brasileira de Autom\u00f3veis Alfa\", \"the Brazilian Alfa automobile factory\") to build the Alfa Romeo 2000 there. After having received government approval, Matarazzo pulled out under pressure from Brazil's President Juscelino Kubitschek with the state-owned FNM company instead commenced building the car as the \"FNM 2000\" there in 1960.\nDuring the 1960s, Alfa Romeo concentrated on motorsports using production-based cars, including the GTA (standing for Gran Turismo Allegerita), an aluminium-bodied version of the Bertone-designed coupe with a powerful twin-plug engine. Among other victories, the GTA won the inaugural Sports Car Club of America's Trans-Am championship in 1966. In the 1970s, Alfa Romeo concentrated on prototype sports car racing with the Tipo 33, with early victories in 1971. Eventually the Tipo 33TT12 gained the World Championship for Makes for Alfa Romeo in 1975 and the Tipo 33SC12 won the World Championship for Sports Cars in 1977.\nAs Alfa Romeo was a state-controlled company, they were often subject to political pressure. To help industrialize Italy's underdeveloped south, Alfa Romeo's new compact car was to be built at a new factory at Pomigliano d'Arco in Campania. Even the car's name, \"Alfa Sud\" (Alfa South), reflected where it was built. 18 January 1968, saw a new company named \"Industria Napoletana Costruzioni Autoveicoli Alfa Romeo-Alfasud S.p.A.\" being formed, 90% of which belonged to Alfa Romeo and 10% to Government controlled holding company Finmeccanica. This plant was built in the wake of France's 1968 protests and Italy's Hot Autumn and was never \"properly started.\" The employees had mainly construction backgrounds and were not trained for factory work, while industrial relations were troublesome throughout. Absenteeism rates in the Pomigliano factory ran at 16.5 percent through the 1970s, reaching as high as 28 percent.\nBy the 1970s, Alfa Romeo was again in financial trouble, with the company running at about sixty percent of capacity in 1980. Since Alfa Romeo was controlled by the Italian government owned Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI), a deal was made where about a quarter of worker's salaries were paid through state unemployment agencies to allow Alfa's plants to idle for two weeks every two months. An aging product lineup and very low productivity combined with near-permanent industrial unrest and Italy's high inflation rates kept Alfa Romeo firmly in the red. Other creative measures were attempted to shore up Alfa, including an ultimately unsuccessful joint venture with Nissan endorsed by Alfa's then-president, Ettore Massacesi, and Prime Minister Francesco Cossiga. By 1986, IRI was suffering heavy losses\u2014with Alfa Romeo having not been profitable for the last 13 years\u2014and IRI president Romano Prodi put Alfa Romeo up for sale. Finmeccanica, the mechanical holdings arm of IRI and its predecessors owned Alfa Romeo since 1932. Prodi first approached fellow Italian manufacturer Fiat, which offered to start a joint venture with Alfa.\nFiat takeover.\nFiat withdrew its plan for a joint venture with Alfa Romeo when Ford put in an offer to acquire part of Alfa Romeo and restructure the company, while increasing its stake over time. However, Fiat chose to put in a bid to acquire the entirety of Alfa Romeo and offer job guarantees to Italian workers, an offer that Ford was unwilling to match. It also did not hurt any of the parties involved that an acquisition by Fiat would keep Alfa Romeo in Italian hands. In 1986, the deal was concluded with Alfa Romeo merged with traditional rival Lancia into Fiat's Alfa Lancia Industriale S.p.A. Already in 1981, Alfa Romeo's then-President Ettore Massacesi had stated that Alfa would never use Fiat engines\u2014the engines being, to a large extent, Alfa Romeo's identity\u2014but would be happy to cooperate fully with everything else.\nModels produced from the 1990 onwards combined Alfa's traditional virtues of avant-garde styling and sporting panache with the economic benefits of product rationalisation, and include a \"GTA\" version of the 147 hatchback, the Giugiaro-designed Brera, and a high-performance exotic called the 8C Competizione (named after one of Alfa's most successful prewar sports and racing cars, the 8C of the 1930s).\nIn 2005, Maserati was bought back from Ferrari and was now under Fiat's full control. The Fiat Group then created a sports and luxury division from Maserati and Alfa Romeo. There is a planned strategic relationship between these two; engines, platforms and possibly dealers are shared.\nIn the beginning of 2007, Fiat Auto S.p.A. was reorganized and four new automobile companies were created; Fiat Automobiles S.p.A., Alfa Romeo Automobiles S.p.A., Lancia Automobiles S.p.A. and Fiat Light Commercial Vehicles S.p.A. These companies were fully owned by Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A. (from 2007 FCA Italy S.p.A.).\nOn 24 June 2010, Alfa Romeo celebrated 100 years from its foundation.\nRecent developments.\nAlfa Romeo has been suffering from falling sales. In 2010, it sold a total of about 112,000 units, which was significantly lower than Fiat CEO Marchionne's global sales target of 300,000. The company set about to achieve a sales target of 170,000 units in 2011, including 100,000 Giulietta and 60,000 MiTo models, but it actually sold 130,000 units that year. Its medium-term target was 500,000 units by 2014 including 85,000 from the North American market. In 2017 Alfa Romeo increased production by 62 percent, building a total of 150,722 vehicles at the company's three factories.\nOn 16 January 2021, the operations of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles and Groupe PSA were merged to form Stellantis and the company was renamed Stellantis Italy.\nIn spite of falling sales, Alfa Romeo CEO Jean-Philippe Imparato announced in 2021 that a new model would be launched every year between 2022 and 2026, starting with the much-delayed Tonale, with full electrification of new models from 2027.\nReturn to North America.\nAlfa Romeo was imported to the United States by Max Hoffman from the mid-1950s. The Giulietta Spider was developed on the request of Max Hoffman, who proposed an open top version of the Giulietta. In 1961 Alfa Romeo started exporting cars to the United States through its own dealer network.\nIn 1995, Alfa Romeo ceased exporting cars to the United States, the last model sold in that market being the 164 sedan.\nOn 5 May 2006, Alfa Romeo made its return to the US Market as announced by Fiat CEO Sergio Marchionne after a series of rumours. North American sales resumed in October 2008, with the launch of the limited production 8C Competizione coupe with Alfa Romeo models being imported by Fiat's US subsidiary Chrysler. Also in 2008, Alfa Romeo and Chrysler were reported to be in discussions over the possibility of producing Alfa Romeo cars in some Chrysler manufacturing plants that had shut down due to the company group's restructure and cost cutting. Instead, as reported by \"The Wall Street Journal\" in November 2009, Chrysler discontinued several Dodge and Jeep models while phasing in Alfa Romeo ones and the new Fiat 500.\nThe next significant milestones in Alfa Romeo's North American return occurred in 2014, with the launch of the more affordable two-seater 4C coupe. That year, Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A. confirmed that its original agreement with Mazda Motor Corporation, for the speculated manufacturing of a new Alfa Romeo Spider based on the Mazda MX-5 had been terminated mutually in December 2014. The proposed model for this joint venture became the Fiat 124 Spider convertible launched in 2015. In 2015, Alfa Romeo's return to this market was further bolstered by the automaker's display of the new Giulia at the Los Angeles Auto Show. In February 2017, Chrysler featured its Alfa Romeo brand exclusively in three ads during Super Bowl LI.\nAlfa Romeo's US importer, FCA US LLC, currently imports the Giulia, Stelvio, Tonale and 33 Stradale.\nDesign and technology.\nTechnological development.\nAlfa Romeo has introduced many technological innovations over the years, and the company has often been among the first users of new technologies. Its trademark double overhead cam engine was used for the first time in the 1914 Grand Prix car, the first road car with such an engine, the 6C 1500 Sport, appeared in 1928.\nAlfa Romeo tested one of the first electronic fuel injection systems (Caproni-Fuscaldo) in the Alfa Romeo 6C 2500 with \"Ala spessa\" body in 1940 Mille Miglia. The engine had six electrically operated injectors, fed by a semi-high pressure circulating fuel pump system.\n1969 models for the North American market had SPICA (Societ\u00e0 Pompe Iniezione Cassani &amp; Affini, a subsidiary of Alfa Romeo) mechanical fuel injection. According to Alfa Romeo, the engine's power output and performance were unchanged from the carburetted version. The SPICA system continued until the 1982 model year with the introduction of 2.0 liter Bosch electronic fuel injection.\nMechanical variable valve timing was introduced in the Alfa Romeo Spider, sold in the U.S. in 1980. All Alfa Romeo Spider models from 1983 onward used electronic VVT.\nThe 105 series Giulia was quite an advanced car, using technologies such as all-wheel disc brakes, and a plastic radiator header tank. It had also the lowest drag coefficient (Cd) in its class The same trend continued with the Alfetta 2000 and GTV, which had quirks such as 50:50 weight distribution, standard fit alloy wheels and transaxle.\nNewer innovations include complete CAD design process used in designing the Alfa Romeo 164 and an automated/paddle-shift transmission called \"Selespeed\" used in the 156; the 156 was also the world's first passenger car to use Common rail diesel engine. The Multiair -an electro-hydraulic variable valve actuation technology used in MiTo was introduced in 2009.&lt;ref name=\"www.italiaspeed.com/2009/cars\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 2016, the Alfa Romeo Giulia came with electrical brakes.\nBody design.\nMany famous automotive design houses in Italy have accepted commissions to produce concepts and production vehicle shapes for Alfa Romeo. These include:\nConstruction techniques used by Alfa Romeo has been imitated by other carmakers, and in this way, the Alfa Romeo body designs have often been very influential. The following is a list of innovations, and where appropriate, examples of imitation by other car manufacturers:\nConcept cars.\nSeveral concept cars have been made by Alfa Romeo:\nThe \"Berlina Aerodinamica Tecnica\" prototype cars were designed by Bertone as an exercise in determining whether streamlining and wind-tunnel driven designs would result in high performance on a standard chassis and whether the resulting vehicles would be palatable to the public. Alfa 1900 Sprint were the basis of the B.A.T. 5, 7 and 9.&lt;ref name=\"conceptcarz.com/vehicle\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The later B.A.T. 11 was based on the 8C Competizione.\nThe Tipo 33 racing car, with its high-revving 2000\u00a0cc V8 engine became the basis for a number of different concept cars during the 1960s and 1970s, two of which ultimately resulted in production vehicles. Most made their appearances at the Auto Salon Gen\u00e8ve. Here is a brief list:\nIn general, concept cars for Alfa Romeo have generally become production vehicles, after some modification to make them suitable for manufacture, and to provide driver and passenger safety. The Zagato SZ, GTV, and Spider, Brera, and 159 are all good examples of Alfa Romeo's stylistic commitment in this direction.\nLogos.\nOriginal logo.\nAlfa Romeo's logo incorporates two heraldic devices traditionally associated with its birthplace, the city of Milan: A red cross, from the emblem of Milan, and the \"biscione\", a big grass snake and a child emerging from its mouth\u2014emblem of the House of Visconti, rulers of the city in the 14th century.\nThe logo was originally designed in 1910 by a young Italian draughtsman from the A.L.F.A. technical office, Romano Cattaneo.\nOrigin.\nIn June 1910, the Societ\u00e0 Anonima Darracq became Anonima Lombarda Fabbrica Automobili, and was readying its first model, the 24 HP. The board asked chief engineer Giuseppe Merosi to devise a badge for the radiator shell of the new car; Merosi turned to his collaborators. One of them, Cattaneo, was inspired by the coat of arms he had seen on the gates of Castello Sforzesco to include the \"biscione\" in the logo. Merosi liked the idea, and together with Cattaneo came up with a sketch, then approved by managing director Ugo Stella; Cattaneo was entrusted with doing the final design.\nThe original badge was round, of enamelled brass, measuring in diameter, and carried already all the present day accoutrements: the red cross on a white field of Milan on the left, a green \"biscione\" on a light blue field on the right, all surrounded by a blue ring inscribed with the words \"ALFA\" at the top and \"MILANO\" at the bottom. In honour of the King of Italy, the two words were separated by two figure-eight knots\u2014named Savoy knots in Italian, and symbols of the then-reigning House of Savoy. Originally solid brass, the lettering was changed to white enamel in 1913. In 1918, after the company had been bought by Nicola Romeo, the wording \"ALFA\" was replaced with \"ALFA-ROMEO\".\nIn 1925, to commemorate the victory of the Alfa Romeo P2 in the inaugural World Manufacturers' Championship of 1925, a silver metal laurel wreath was added around the badge, used (in varying form) until 1982. The addition of the wreath had enlarged the badge to diameter; in 1930 it was reduced back to .\nPost-war evolution.\nIn 1946, after the abolition of the monarchy and proclamation of the Italian Republic, the figure-eight knots of the Savoy were replaced with two curvy lines. Concurrently the badge was completely redesigned, and further reduced in size to , a diameter unchanged ever since. Made of stamped steel, the new badge bore the traditional elements\u2014the scripts, the cross, a newly stylized \"biscione\" and a thin laurel wreath\u2014embossed in antique silver, over a uniform Alfa Red background, which had replaced the blue, white and light blue fields. This red-and-metal badge was used until 1950, when the company switched back to a traditionally enamelled and coloured one; in 1960 the badge was changed from brass to plastic, without substantial differences in design.\nAt the beginning of the 1970s the all-new Alfa Romeo Pomigliano d'Arco plant (near Naples) was completed. When in 1972 the Alfasud produced there became the first Alfa Romeo passenger car manufactured outside Milan, the word \"Milano\", the curved lines and the hyphen between \"Alfa\" and \"Romeo\" were eliminated from the badge on all Alfa Romeos. At the same time it was redesigned, most notably acquiring a modernised \"biscione\" and type face.\nAfter a mild restyling in 1982, which deleted the wreath and changed lettering and all chrome details to gold, this iteration of the badge remained in use until 2015.\n2015 redesign.\nOn 24 June 2015, 105th anniversary of the company, a new logo was unveiled at a press event at the Alfa Romeo Museum; together with the Alfa Romeo Giulia as part of the brand's relaunch plan. The redesign was carried out by Robilant Associati, who had previously reworked several other Fiat Group logos\u2014including Fiat Automobiles' and Lancia's.\nThe logo colors have been reduced from four to three: the green of the \"biscione\", the red of the cross, and the dark blue of the surrounding ring. Other changes are a new serif type face, and the absence of the split white and light blue fields, replaced by a single silver textured background.\nThe Quadrifoglio logo.\nSince 1923, the \"quadrifoglio\" logo (also called the 'cloverleaf') has been the symbol of Alfa Romeo racing cars and since WWII, it has also been used to designate the higher trim models of the range. The \"quadrifoglio\" is usually placed on the side panels of the car, above or behind the front wheels\u2014on the front wings in the case of modern vehicles. The logo consists of a green (or in some cases golden) cloverleaf with four leaves, contained with a white triangle.\nHistory of the emblem.\nThe \"quadrifoglio\" has been used on Alfa Romeo cars since the death of Ugo Sivocci in 1923. As a friend of Enzo Ferrari, Sivocci was hired by Alfa Romeo in 1920 to drive in the four-man works team\u2014Alfa Corse\u2014with Antonio Ascari, Giuseppe Campari, and Enzo Ferrari. Sivocci was thought to have enormous experience, but often hampered by bad luck and considered the eternal second-placer. To banish his bad luck, when the Targa Florio came around, the driver painted a white square with a green four-leaf clover (the \"quadrifoglio\") in the centre of the grille of his car. Sivocci had immediate success, crossing the finish line first. The \"quadrifoglio\" subsequently became the symbol of the racing Alfa Romeos with the victory at the Targa Florio. Almost as if to prove the magic effects of this symbol, Sivocci was killed while testing Merosi's new P1 at Monza, a few months after winning the Targa Florio. The Salerno driver's P1, which went off the track on a bend, did not have the \"quadrifoglio\". Since this period in 1923, the bodies of Alfa Romeo racing cars have been adorned with the \"quadrifoglio\" as a lucky charm. The white square was replaced with a triangle in memory of Ugo Sivocci.\nModern usage.\nThe first road car to bear the \"quadrifoglio\" was the 1963 Alfa Romeo Giulia TI Super, a variant of the Giulia saloon car devised for competition but put regularly on sale; it had green four-leaf clovers on its front wings, without the triangle. In the 1970s \"Quadrifoglio Verde\" or \"Green Cloverleaf\" became the trim level for each model's sportiest variant, equipped with the most powerful engine. The Alfasud, Sprint, 33, 75, 164 and 145 all had Quadrifoglio Verde versions. Also in the 1970s and through the 1980s golden four-leaf clover badges were used to denote the most luxurious and well-equipped variants of Alfa Romeo cars, named \"Quadrifoglio Oro\" or \"Gold Cloverleaf\". The Alfasud, Alfetta, Alfa 6, 90 and 33 had Quadrifoglio Oro versions. In recent times the \"quadrifoglio\" was revived on the 2007 Alfa Romeo 8C Competizione and Spider sports cars. With the Alfa Romeo MiTo and Giulietta, the Quadrifoglio Verde was reinstated as the sportiest trim level in the range, and green four-leaf clovers on the front wings are once again the hallmark of high-performance Alfa Romeos. Alfa Romeo's 2016 sport sedan, the all-new Giulia, was launched first in Quadrifoglio trim before the release of the base models.\nMotorsport.\nAlfa Romeo has been involved with motor racing since 1911, when it entered two 24 HP models in Targa Florio competition. Alfa Romeo won the first World Manufacturers' Championship in 1925 and the first AIACR European Championship in 1931 and it scored wins at many races and motoring events such as Targa Florio, Mille Miglia and Le Mans. Great success continued with Formula One, when Alfa Romeo won the first World Formula One Championship in 1950 and won the second Formula One Championship in 1951. The company also won international championships in Prototypes, Touring and Fast Touring categories in the 1960s and 1970s. Private drivers also entered some rally competitions, with good results. Alfa Romeo has competed both as a constructor and an engine supplier, via works entries Alfa Corse, Autodelta and private entries. Alfa Romeo's factory racing team was outsourced to Enzo Ferrari's Scuderia Ferrari between 1933 and 1938. Drivers included Tazio Nuvolari, who won the 1935 German Grand Prix at the N\u00fcrburgring.\nAlfa Romeo have been in a technical partnership with the Sauber F1 Team since 2018. In February 2019, Sauber announced that it would compete as Alfa Romeo Racing although the ownership, racing licence and management structure would remain unchanged. Alfa Romeo ended their partnership with Sauber and left Formula One after the 2023 season.\nAlfa Romeo has won five FIA European Formula 3 Championships and five FIA European Formula 3 Cups with the support from the Alfa Romeo stable Euroracing, who created the motor for the Formula 3 championship and with the support of Italian motor company Novamotor which work in the Formula 3 competition.\nProduction.\nIn the 1960s, the main Alfa Romeo factory was moved from inside Milan to a very large and nearby area extending over the municipalities of Arese, Lainate and Garbagnate Milanese. However, since then the factory was moved to Arese, as the offices and the main entrance of the area were located there.\nIn the late 1960s, a number of European automobile manufacturers established facilities in South Africa to assemble right hand drive vehicles. Fiat and other Italian manufacturers established factories along with these other manufacturers, Alfa-Romeos were assembled in Brits, outside Pretoria in the Transvaal Province of South Africa. With the imposition of sanctions by Western powers in the 1970s and 1980s, South Africa became self-sufficient, and in car production came to rely more and more on the products from local factories. This led to a set of circumstances where between 1972 and 1989, South Africa had the greatest number of Alfa Romeos on the road outside of Italy. The Alfa Romeos Brits plant was used from March 1983 until late 1985 to build Daihatsu Charades for local consumption, but also for export to Italy in order to skirt Italian limits on Japanese imports. For the last year the company was operating, the Daihatsu represented close to half of Alfa Romeo S.A. Ltd.'s total production.\nIn late 1985, with the impending Fiat takeover and an international boycott of the South African Apartheid government, Alfa Romeo withdrew from the market and closed the plant.\nDuring the 1990s, Alfa Romeo moved car production to other districts in Italy. The Pomigliano d\u2019Arco plant produced the 155, followed by the 145 and the 146, while the Arese plant manufactured the SZ and RZ sports cars, the 164, the new Spider and the GTV. The 156 was launched in 1997 and in 1998 was voted \"Car of the Year\". The same year a new flagship, the 166 (assembled in Rivalta, near Turin) was launched. At the beginning of the third millennium, the 147 was released, which won the title of \"European Car of the Year 2001\". In 2003 the Arese factory was closed while only having some offices and the Alfa Romeo Historical Museum.\nAutomobiles.\nList of Alfa Romeo Models.\nAlfa Romeos\nHistoric models.\nCarabinieri, Polizia, and the Italian government.\nIn the 1960s, Alfa Romeo became famous for models specifically designed for Italian police and Carabinieri (Italian national gendarmerie); among them the \"Giulia Super\" and the 2600 Sprint GT. The colours of the Alfa Romeos used by the police (Polizia) were/are green/blue with white stripes and writing, known as \"Pantera\" (Panthers). The Carabinieri Alfa Romeros are dark blue with white roofs and red stripes, known as the \"Gazzella\" (Gazelles), a nickname meant to denote the speed and agility of these \"Pattuglie\" (patrol cars). However, the term \"Pantera\" came to be used interchangeably to refer to both agencies' vehicles, and helped create a public perception of the cars as no-nonsense, determined and respected.\nSince then, Alfa Romeos remain the chosen vehicle of the Carabinieri, Polizia Autostradale (highway police), Guardia di Finanza (fiscal law enforcement) and the conventional police service (Polizia). The following Alfa Romeo cars have/can be found in service with the Italian police and/or government.\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo AR51\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo Giulia\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo Alfetta\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo Giulietta\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 33 (Polizia di Stato only)\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 75\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 164 (official vehicles)\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 155\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 156\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 166 (official vehicles)\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo 159\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo Giulietta\n\u2022 Alfa Romeo Giulia (Carabinieri, 2 Giulia Quadrifoglio - Polizia di Stato, 2 Giulia Veloce Q4)\nSince the 1960s, the Italian Prime Minister has used Alfa Romeos (and lately the new Maserati Quattroporte) as preferred government limousines. The 164 and 166 have found been particularly utilized in the last two decades.\nTrucks and light commercial vehicles.\nIn 1930, Alfa Romeo presented a light truck in addition to heavy LCVs based on B\u00fcssing constructions. In the Second World War Alfa Romeo also built trucks for the Italian army (\"35 tons anywhere\") and later also for the German Wehrmacht. After the war, commercial motor vehicle production was resumed.\nIn co-operation with FIAT and Saviem starting from the 1960s different light truck models were developed.\nThe production of heavy LCVs in Italy was terminated in 1967. Heavy trucks continued to be built for a few years in Brazil by Alfa Romeo subsidiary F\u00e1brica Nacional de Motores under the name FNM. The last Alfa Romeo vans were the Alfa Romeo AR6 and AR8, rebadged versions of Iveco Daily and Fiat Ducato. The company also produced trolleybuses for many systems in Italy, Latin America, Sweden, Greece, Germany, Turkey and South Africa. Later, Alfa Romeo concentrated only on passenger car manufacturing.\nOther production.\nAlthough Alfa Romeo is best known as automobile manufacturer it has also produced commercial vehicles of various size, railway locomotives, tractors, buses, trams, compressors, generators, an electric cooker, marine and aircraft engines.\nAircraft engines.\nAn Alfa engine was first used on an aircraft in 1910 on the Santoni-Franchini biplane. In 1932 Alfa Romeo built its first real aircraft engine, the D2 (240\u00a0bhp), fitted to Caproni 101 D2. In the 1930s when Alfa Romeo engines were used for aircraft on a larger scale; the Savoia Marchetti SM.74, Savoia-Marchetti SM.75, Savoia-Marchetti SM.79, Savoia Marchetti SM.81 and Cant Z506B Airone all used Alfa Romeo manufactured engines. In 1931, a competition was arranged where Tazio Nuvolari drove his Alfa Romeo 8C 3000 Monza against a Caproni Ca.100 airplane.\nAlfa Romeo built various aircraft engines during the Second World War; the best known was the RA.1000 RC 41-I Monsone, a licensed version of the Daimler-Benz DB 601. This engine made it possible to build efficient fighter aircraft like the Macchi C.202 Folgore for the Italian army. After the Second World War Alfa Romeo produced engines for Fiat, Aerfer and Ambrosini. In the 1960s Alfa Romeo mainly focused upgrading and maintaining Curtiss-Wright, Pratt &amp; Whitney, Rolls-Royce and General Electric aircraft engines.\nAlfa Romeo also built Italy's first turbine engine, installed to the Beechcraft King Air. Alfa Romeo's Avio division was sold to Aeritalia in 1988, from 1996 it was part of Fiat Avio. Alfa Avio was also part of developing team to the new T700-T6E1 engine to the NHI NH90 helicopter.\nMarine engines.\nAlfa Romeo also produced marine engines. The first marine engine was produced in 1929. Later, for three consecutive years: 1937-1938-1939 with remarkable affirmations, Alfa Romeo demonstrated its constructive efficiency by contributing to the development of marine engines.\nMarketing and sponsorship.\nDuring the years Alfa Romeo has been marketed with different slogans like: \"The family car that wins races\" used in the 1950s in Alfa Romeo 1900 marketing campaign, \"racing since 1911\" used on most 1960s Alfa advertisements. In the 1970s the Alfa Romeo 1750 GTV was marketed as \"if this kind of handling is good enough for our racing cars, it's good enough for you.\" The Giulia Sprint GTA was marketed as \"The car you drive to work is a champion\".\nMore recent slogans used are \"Mediocrity is a sin\", \"Driven by Passion\", \"Cuore Sportivo\", \"Beauty is not enough\" and present day \"Without heart we would be mere machines\". Also other more recent ones are: \"It's not a car, it's an Alfa Romeo.\", one of them after a couple argue in Italian.\nAs part of its marketing policy, Alfa Romeo sponsors a number of sporting events, such as the Mille Miglia rally. It has sponsored the SBK Superbike World Championship and Ducati Corse since 2007, and the Goodwood Festival of Speed for many years, and was one of the featured brands in 2010 when Alfa Romeo celebrated its 100th anniversary.&lt;ref name=\"www.italiaspeed.com/2009/cars/alfa_romeo\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Alfa Romeo Giulietta has been used since Monza 2010 race as the safety car in Superbike World Championship events. Alfa Romeo has been also shirt sponsor of Eintracht Frankfurt football club in period between 2013 and 2016.\nIn 2002, \"Alfa Romeo I\", the first Alfa Romeo super maxi yacht was launched. It finished first in at least 74 races including the 2002 Sydney\u2014Hobart Race. \"Alfa Romeo II\", commissioned in 2005, measures LOA. It set a new elapsed-time record for monohulls in the 2009 Transpac race, of 5 days, 14 hours, 36 minutes, 20 seconds. It finished first in at least 140 races. In mid-2008 \"Alfa Romeo III\" was launched for competitive fleet racing under the IRC rule. \"Alfa Romeo III\" measures LOA and features interior design styled after the Alfa Romeo 8C Competizione.\nThe BBC motoring show \"Top Gear\" repeatedly argued the significance of owning an Alfa Romeo car as a car enthusiast, stating that \"You can't be a true petrolhead if you have never owned/or wanted to own an Alfa Romeo\". Presenters Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May continuously praised Alfas for their beauty and driving characteristics even though Italian cars had a long-term bad reputation for unreliability. They argued that the owner build a personal relationship with the car despite all of its mechanical faults. Both Clarkson and May have previously owned Alfas (a GTV6 for Clarkson and an Alfa 164 for May) and both have stated that they regretted selling their Alfas the most.\nAs part of its U.S. relaunch, Alfa Romeo ran three commercials during Super Bowl LI; the brand was the sole marque advertised by FCA during the game, after exclusively focusing on its Jeep brand at Super Bowl 50.\nIn February 2013, Alfa Romeo sponsored University of St Andrews FS fashion show which saw luxury fashion designer Luke Archer and milliner George Jenkins win with their Alfa Romeo inspired garments.\nAlfa Romeo announced Zhou Guanyu as China's first Formula One racing driver for the 2022 season, hailed by both the team and the sport as a historic breakthrough in a key growth market.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "37528", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37528", "title": "Hoysala", "text": ""}
{"id": "37529", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37529", "title": "Commander Keen", "text": "Video game series by id Software\nCommander Keen is a series of side-scrolling platform video games developed primarily by id Software. The series consists of six main episodes, a \"lost\" episode, and a final game; all but the final game were released for MS-DOS in 1990 and 1991, while the 2001 \"Commander Keen\" was released for the Game Boy Color. The series follows the eponymous Commander Keen, the secret identity of the eight-year-old genius Billy Blaze, as he defends the Earth and the galaxy from alien threats with his homemade spaceship, rayguns, and pogo stick. \nThe first three episodes were developed by Ideas from the Deep, the precursor to id, and published by Apogee Software as the shareware title \"Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons\"; the \"lost\" episode 3.5 \"Commander Keen in Keen Dreams\" was developed by id and published as a retail title by Softdisk; episodes four and five were released by Apogee as the shareware \"Commander Keen in Goodbye, Galaxy\"; and the simultaneously developed episode six was published in retail by FormGen as \"Commander Keen in Aliens Ate My Babysitter\". Ten years later, an homage and sequel to the series was developed by David A. Palmer Productions and published by Activision as \"Commander Keen\". Another game was announced in 2019 as under development by ZeniMax Online Studios, but was not released.\n\"Invasion of the Vorticons\" was the only game developed by Ideas from the Deep, and was based on programmer John Carmack's creation of adaptive tile refresh, a technique that allowed IBM-compatible general-purpose computers to replicate the smooth scrolling of video game consoles such as the Nintendo Entertainment System. The game's success caused designer Tom Hall, programmers John Carmack and John Romero, and artist Adrian Carmack to found id Software. Their obligations to Softdisk, where they had worked during development of the game, led to the creation of \"Keen Dreams\" as a prototype for the second trilogy of episodes. The final episode was split off during development into a stand-alone retail title, and plans for a third trilogy were cancelled after the success of \"Wolfenstein 3D\" (1992) and development focus on 3D first-person shooters such as \"Doom\" (1993). The final \"Keen\" game ten years later had oversight but little development work from id.\nCritical reception and the series' legacy has focused on the two main trilogies of episodes, with \"Vorticons\" having large success as a shareware game and impacting the success of Apogee (now 3D Realms) and its shareware model. The second trilogy sold fewer copies, which was blamed by id and Apogee on its split into two parts, and the 2001 game received mixed reviews. The MS-DOS games have been re-released in several compilation packages, and all but the sixth episode are still sold through modern emulation releases on platforms such as Steam. References to the series have been made by dozens of other games, especially to the Dopefish, an enemy in the fourth episode, which has been termed one of the video game industry's biggest in-jokes. An active modding community has grown around the series, producing editing tools and unofficial sequels.\nTitles.\nCancelled and compilation releases.\nAfter the release of \"Goodbye, Galaxy\" and \"Aliens Ate My Babysitter\" in 1991, id Software planned to make a third set of episodes for the following December, titled \"Commander Keen in The Universe is Toast!\". Beyond the proposed title and release date, shown in the epilogue of the two games, no design work was completed before the game was cancelled due to the success of id's \"Wolfenstein 3D\" (1992) and development focus on 3D first-person shooters such as \"Doom\" (1993). John Carmack noted in 1999, when referencing the project that became the Game Boy Color game, that the original developers of \"Keen\" were unlikely to ever work together again on another game.\nIn June 2019, at Bethesda's E3 conference for iOS and Android devices, a new game in the series was announced, again titled \"Commander Keen\". Under development by ZeniMax Online Studios, the mobile game was said to include tactical strategy elements and have both single-player and multiplayer gameplay, and star Keen's twin son and daughter, Billy and Billie. It was planned for release in the summer of the same year, but no release or further announcements were made, and all references to the game were removed from Bethesda and ZeniMax websites by June 2020.\nIn addition to the initial releases of the games, several compilation releases have been published: the \"id Anthology\" compilation in 1996, which includes all seven episodes developed by id or Ideas from the Deep; a compilation release by Apogee in 1998 of the five episodes of \"Invasion of the Vorticons\" and \"Goodbye, Galaxy\"; and the \"3D Realms Anthology\" in 2014, which also includes \"Vorticons\" and \"Galaxy\". The Apogee-published episodes have also been released for modern computers through a DOS emulator, and sold through Steam since 2007 as the \"Commander Keen Complete Pack\".\nGameplay.\nAll of the games in the \"Commander Keen\" series are side-scrolling platform video games: the majority of the game features the player-controlled Commander Keen viewed from the side while moving on a two-dimensional plane. The player can move left and right and can jump; in every episode besides \"Keen Dreams\" they can also use a pogo stick to bounce continuously and jump higher than they can normally with the correct timing. The levels are composed of platforms on which Keen can stand, and some platforms allow Keen to jump up through them from below. Beginning with episode two, \"The Earth Explodes\", there are also moving platforms as well as switches which extend bridges over gaps in the floor. \"Keen Dreams\" and later games add fireman's poles that Keen can climb up or down, and with the exception of the 2001 \"Commander Keen\" also show the platforms viewed from slightly above so as to give a pseudo-3D effect. Throughout the series, once entered, the only way to exit a level is to reach the end, though for \"Keen Dreams\" and episodes four through six the player can save and return to the middle of a level, rather than only between levels like the other games. In between levels the player travels on a two-dimensional map, viewed from above; from the map the player can enter levels by approaching the entrance. Some levels are optional and can be bypassed, while others are secret and can only be reached by following specific procedures.\nThe episodes all contain a different set of enemies in their levels, which the player must kill, stun, or avoid. These enemies are typically aliens or robots. Levels can also include hazards, such as electricity or spikes; touching a hazard or most enemies causes Keen to lose a life, and the game is ended if all of Keen's lives are lost. \"Invasion of the Vorticons\" features a raygun that Keen can use ammo for to kill enemies; \"Keen Dreams\" exchanges this for flower power pellets that temporarily stun enemies when thrown, episodes four through six use a stun gun that permanently stuns enemies, and the 2001 \"Commander Keen\" has a stun gun that temporarily stuns enemies unless they are then killed with a pogo jump. The player can also find food items throughout the levels which grant points, with an extra life awarded with enough points. There are also colored keycards which grant access to locked parts of levels, collectable items that award an extra life beginning with episode four, and items that grant an instant extra life.\nPlot.\nIn the first episode, \"Marooned on Mars\", eight-year-old Billy Blaze, a child genius, builds a spaceship (the \"Beans with Bacon Megarocket\") and puts on his older brother's football helmet to become Commander Keen. One night while his parents are out of the house he flies to Mars to explore; while away from the ship the Vorticons steal four vital components and hide them in Martian cities. Keen journeys through Martian cities and outposts to find the components, despite the efforts of Martians and robots; the final component is guarded by a Vorticon. Keen returns to Earth\u2014discovering a Vorticon mothership in orbit\u2014and beats his parents home. In \"The Earth Explodes\" he travels through the mothership and disables its weapons, at the end discovering that the Vorticons are being mind-controlled by the mysterious Grand Intellect, who is actually behind the attack on Earth. In \"Keen Must Die\" he fights through the cities and outposts of the Vorticon home planet to reach the Grand Intellect, who is revealed to be his school rival Mortimer McMire, who he then defeats.\nIn \"Keen Dreams\", which is set outside of the main continuity, Keen falls asleep after dinner and wakes up in his pajamas in bed on top of a hill. After being told by potato soldiers that he is now the slave of King Boobus Toober, and being asked by another child to save them, he journeys through the vegetable-themed land to defeat the King, waking up in his bed at home afterwards.\nThe main series of games continues in \"Secret of the Oracle\", where Keen builds a faster-than-light radio and overhears plans by a race of aliens known as the Shikadi to destroy the galaxy. He flies off to the Oracle on the planet of Gnosticus IV, only to discover that the Gnosticenes that run the Oracle have been kidnapped by the Shikadi. Keen fights through the outposts and temples of the Shadowlands, rescuing the Gnosticenes, and the Oracle then tells Keen that the Shikadi are \"shadow beings from the far side of the galaxy\" who are building an Armageddon Machine at Korath III to blow up the galaxy and rebuild it as they wish afterwards.\nIn \"The Armageddon Machine\", Keen infiltrates the titular space station to disable it, destroying the subsystems of the machine located in each level. When he finishes, he finds that the \"Gannalech\" that was leading the Shikadi was the Grand Intellect McMire, who had escaped Keen in \"Vorticons\" by leaving behind an android in his place. A note left behind for Keen tells him that McMire plans to instead destroy the Universe. \"Aliens Ate My Babysitter\" is set around the same time, though it is unclear whether it is actually after the events of \"Goodbye, Galaxy\"; in it, the alien Bloogs of Fribbulus Xax kidnap Keen's babysitter and plan to eat her. Keen finds his way to her, and she reveals that she is McMire's sister, and that McMire was behind her kidnapping as a way to distract Keen while he plotted to destroy the universe. While the planned trilogy that would cover that plot, \"The Universe is Toast\", was never developed, the Game Boy Color \"Commander Keen\" has a sub-space anomaly disrupting life on Earth as an effect of a plot by the Bloogs, Shikadi, and Droidicus, led by McMire, to destroy the universe. Keen fights his way through the three races' planets to find the plasma crystals powering the Omegamatic station, only for McMire to escape after taunting Keen a final time.\nDevelopment.\n\"Invasion of the Vorticons\".\nIn September 1990, John Carmack, a game programmer for the \"Gamer's Edge\" video game subscription service and disk magazine at Softdisk in Shreveport, Louisiana, developed a way to create graphics which could smoothly scroll in any direction in a computer game. At the time, IBM-compatible general-purpose computers were not able to replicate the common feat of video game consoles such as the Nintendo Entertainment System, which were capable of redrawing the entire screen fast enough for a side-scrolling video game due to their specialized hardware. Carmack created adaptive tile refresh: a way to slide the majority of the visible screen to the side both horizontally and vertically when the player moved as if it had not changed, and only redraw the newly-visible portions of the screen. Other games had previously redrawn the whole screen in chunks, or like Carmack's earlier games were limited to scrolling in one direction. He discussed the idea with coworker Tom Hall, who encouraged him to demonstrate it by recreating the first level of the recent \"Super Mario Bros. 3\" on a computer. The pair did so in a single overnight session, with Hall recreating the graphics of the game\u2014replacing the player character of Mario with Dangerous Dave, a character from an eponymous previous Gamer's Edge game\u2014while Carmack optimized the code. The next morning on September 20, the resulting game, \"Dangerous Dave in Copyright Infringement\", was shown to their other coworker John Romero. Romero recognized Carmack's idea as a major accomplishment: Nintendo was one of the most successful companies in Japan, largely due to the success of their \"Mario\" franchise, and the ability to replicate the gameplay of the series on a computer could have large implications.\nRomero felt that the potential of Carmack's idea should not be \"wasted\" on Softdisk; while the other members of the Gamer's Edge team more or less agreed, he especially felt that their talents in general were wasted on the company, which needed the money their games brought in but in his opinion neither understood nor appreciated video game design as distinct from general software programming. The manager of the team and fellow programmer, Jay Wilbur, recommended that they take the demo to Nintendo itself, to position themselves as capable of building a PC version of \"Super Mario Bros.\" for the company. The group\u2014composed of Carmack, Romero, Hall, and Wilbur, along with Lane Roathe, the editor for Gamer's Edge, decided to build a full demo game for their idea to send to Nintendo. As they lacked the computers to build the project at home, and could not work on it at Softdisk, they \"borrowed\" their work computers over the weekend, taking them in their cars to a house shared by Carmack, Wilbur, and Roathe, and made a copy of the first level of the game over the next 72 hours. They credited the game to Ideas from the Deep, a name Romero had previously used for some Softdisk projects. The response from Nintendo a few weeks later was not as hoped for, however; while Nintendo was impressed with their efforts, they wanted the \"Mario\" series to remain exclusive to Nintendo consoles.\nAround the same time as the group was rejected by Nintendo, Romero was approached by Scott Miller of Apogee Software, who wanted him to publish more levels for his previous \"Pyramids of Egypt\u2014\"an adventure game where the player navigates mazes while avoiding Egyptian-themed traps and monsters\u2014through Apogee's shareware model. Miller was pioneering a model of game publishing where part of a game would be released for free, with the remainder of the game available for purchase from Apogee. Romero said he could not, as \"Pyramids of Egypt\" was owned by Softdisk, but that it did not matter as the game he was now working on was much better, and sent Miller the \"Mario\" demo. Miller was impressed, and the team agreed to create a new game for Apogee before Christmas of 1990\u2014only a few months away\u2014split into three parts to match Apogee's shareware model of giving away the first part for free to attract interest in the whole. Hall suggested a console-style platformer in the vein of \"Super Mario Bros.\", as they had the technology made for it; he further recommended a science fiction theme, and developed a short introduction that convinced the team to make \"Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Billy Blaze, eight-year-old genius, working diligently in his backyard clubhouse has created an interstellar starship from old soup cans, rubber cement and plastic tubing. While his folks are out on the town and the babysitter has fallen asleep, Billy travels into his backyard workshop, dons his brother's football helmet, and transforms into...\nCOMMANDER KEEN\u2014defender of Earth!\nIn his ship, the Bean-with-Bacon Megarocket, Keen dispenses galactic justice with an iron hand!\u2014\u200a\nThe Ideas from the Deep team could not afford to leave their jobs to work on the game full-time, so they continued to work at Softdisk, spending their time on the Gamer's Edge games during the day and on \"Commander Keen\" at night and weekends using Softdisk computers. The group split into different roles: Hall became the game designer and creative director, John Carmack and Romero were the programmers, and Wilbur the manager. They invited artist Adrian Carmack from Softdisk to join them late in development, while Roathe was soon removed from the group. Ideas from the Deep spent nearly every waking moment when they were not working at Softdisk from October through December 1990 working on \"Commander Keen\", with Wilbur forcing them to eat and take breaks.\nThe game's design was largely driven by Tom Hall: Romero and especially John Carmack were focused almost exclusively on the programming; Wilbur was not involved in the game's design; and Adrian Carmack joined late in development and found the project's \"cute\" art style, till then mostly created by Hall, far-removed from his preferred, darker, style. Hall's personal experiences and philosophies, therefore, strongly impacted the game: Keen's red shoes and Green Bay Packers football helmet were items Hall wore as a child, dead enemies left behind corpses due to his belief that child players should be taught that death had permanent consequences, and enemies were based loosely on his reading of Sigmund Freud's psychological theories, such as that of the id. Other influences on Hall for the game were \"Duck Dodgers in the 24\u00bdth Century\" and other Chuck Jones cartoons, and \"The Available Data on the Worp Reaction\", a short story about a child constructing a spaceship. Keen's \"Bean-with-Bacon\" spaceship was taken from a George Carlin skit about using bay leaves as deodorant so as to smell like soup. Keen was intended to be a reflection of Hall as he had wanted to be as a child. The team separated the game from its \"Super Mario Bros.\" roots by adding non-linear exploration and additional mechanics like the pogo stick. A suggestion from Miller that part of the popularity of \"Super Mario Bros\" was the presence of secrets and hidden areas in the game led Hall to add several secrets, such as an entire hidden level in the first episode, and the \"Galactic Alphabet\". The level maps were designed using a custom-made program called Tile Editor (TEd), which was first created for \"Dangerous Dave\" and was used for the entire \"Keen\" series as well as several other games.\nAs the game neared completion, Miller began to market the game to players. Strongly encouraged by the updates the team was sending him, he began heavily advertising the game in all of the bulletin board systems (BBS) and game magazines he had access to. The game was completed in early December 1990, and on the afternoon of December 14 Miller began uploading the completed first episode to BBSs, with the other two episodes listed as available for purchase as a mailed plastic bag with floppy disks for US$30 (~$ in 2024). After the arrival of the first royalty check from Apogee, the team planned to quit Softdisk and start their own company. When their boss and owner of Softdisk Al Vekovius confronted them on their plans, as well as their use of company resources to develop the game, the team made no secret of their intentions. Vekovius initially proposed a joint venture between the team and Softdisk, which fell apart when the other employees of the firm threatened to quit in response, and after a few weeks of negotiation the team agreed to produce a series of games for Gamer's Edge, one every two months.\n\"Keen Dreams\" and \"Goodbye, Galaxy\".\nIdeas from the Deep, now founded as id Software, used some of these games to prototype ideas for their own games, including in late spring of 1991 \"Keen Dreams\", which they used to develop new systems for their next set of major episodes of the series. They did not initially want to do a \"Keen\" game for Softdisk, but eventually decided that doing so would let them fulfill their obligations while also helping to improve the next full set of games for Apogee. The team reprised their roles from the first game, and prototyped an increase in graphical quality, a pseudo-3D view rather than a side-on view, ramps rather than solely flat surfaces, support for sound cards, and changes to the design based on player feedback. The game's plot, as a result, was designed to be a standalone game outside of the continuity of the main series, and not a true sequel. Once the game engine and design changes were completed, \"Keen Dreams\" was completed in less than a month even as the team simultaneously worked on another game.\nBeginning development in the June 1991, the team again reprised their roles for \"Goodbye, Galaxy\". Hall had received feedback from parents who did not like that the enemies in \"Vorticons\" left behind corpses instead of disappearing like in other games; he did not want the violence to have no effects, and so in \"Dreams\" had replaced the raygun with pellets that temporarily stunned enemies. He was not satisfied with this change, and while considering ways to remove Keen's parents during the introduction for \"Goodbye, Galaxy\", came up with a stun gun which would leave behind permanently stunned enemies. Additionally, music, which was missing in prior \"Keen\" games, was added to \"Goodbye, Galaxy\", composed by Bobby Prince. The game, episodes four though six, was intended to be published as a set named \"Goodbye, Galaxy\" in the same manner as the first one: released through Apogee, with episode four released for free in order to spur interest in purchasing the other two episodes. By August they had completed a beta version of episode four, \"Secret of the Oracle\", and Romero sent it off to a fan he had met from Canada, Mark Rein, who had offered to play-test the game. Romero was impressed with the list of bugs that Rein sent back, as well as with his business sense, and proposed bringing him in to the company as a probationary president for six months in order to help expand their business. Within a few weeks of being hired, Rein made a deal to get id into the commercial market: to take the sixth episode and make it a stand-alone game, published as a retail title through FormGen instead of part of a shareware trilogy. Id signed the deal, but Scott Miller of Apogee was dismayed; he felt that not having a full trilogy for the shareware game would hurt sales.\nAlso in August 1991, the team moved from Shreveport to Hall's hometown of Madison, Wisconsin, leaving behind Wilbur, who was unwilling to leave a stable job at Softdisk to fully join in with the startup, but picking up programmer Jason Blochowiak, who was working at the time at Softdisk. There, they worked on \"Goodbye, Galaxy\", their remaining Softdisk games, and the now standalone \"Commander Keen in Aliens Ate My Babysitter\" between August and December. Despite being listed numerically as the sixth episode, due to it having a different publisher and schedule \"Aliens Ate My Babysitter\" was developed after \"Secret of the Oracle\" but before \"The Armageddon Machine\"; the fifth episode, however, was created within one month. Another trilogy of episodes, titled \"The Universe Is Toast\", was planned for December 1992; id worked on it for a couple of weeks, before shifting focus to \"Wolfenstein 3D\" (1992). Hall proposed reviving the project after \"Wolfenstein\" was completed, but the team moved on to \"Doom\" (1993) instead. Id did not return to the series afterwards, instead continuing to focus on 3D first-person shooters.\nGame Boy Color title.\nIn October 1999 during an online question and answer session, John Carmack said that the original founders of id Software were unlikely to ever work together on a game again. Since the release of \"Goodbye, Galaxy\", most of the team had left the company, with Hall leaving after \"Doom\" and Romero leaving after \"Quake\" (1996). He said, however, that he was considering the idea of making a \"Commander Keen\" game for the Game Boy Color handheld game console.\nActivision formally announced at the start of May 2001 that a new \"Commander Keen\" game had been developed by David A. Palmer Productions, and would be released at the end of the month. An interview the following week with founder David A. Palmer explained that the original idea for the game came from id, who approached Activision to produce it; Activision in turn recommended Palmer as the developer for the project as they had been attempting to get an agreement with id and Activision for several years for his studio to make a Game Boy Color version of several of their games. While Palmer was the developer for the game, id collaborated with the studio, with id having approval over game design elements and artist Adrian Carmack making some tile artwork for the game.\nReception.\n\"Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons\" was an immediate hit for Apogee: the company's previous sales levels had been around US$7,000 per month, but by Christmas \"Keen\" already had sales of almost US$30,000. Miller described the game as \"a little atom bomb\" to magazine editors and BBS controllers when asked about it, and recruited his mother and hired his first employee to handle sales and phone calls from interested players. By June 1991, the game was bringing in over US$60,000 per month. Chris Parker of \"PC Magazine\" later in 1991 referred to the game's release as a \"tremendous success\". In 2009, Miller estimated the game's lifetime sales as between 50,000 and 60,000 units. A contemporary review by Barry Simon of \"PC Magazine\" praised the game's graphical capabilities as having a \"Nintendo feel\", though he termed the graphics as \"well drawn\" but \"not spectacular\" in terms of resolution. He noted that the game was very much an arcade game that players would not purchase for \"its scintillating plot or ground-breaking originality\", but said that all three episodes were very fun to play and that the scrolling graphics set it apart from similar games. A short summary of the trilogy in 1992 by \"PC World\" termed it \"one of the most spectacular games available\" and praised the \"superb\" sound and graphics, and a similar summary in \"CQ Amateur Radio\" described it as \"Nintendo comes to the PC\" and the \"best action/adventure game\" the reviewer had ever seen.\nAfter its release in December 1991, \"Goodbye, Galaxy\" met with sales \"about a third\" of the original trilogy. Scott Miller of Apogee blamed the falling sales on the lack of a third episode, which he felt undercut the shareware model of the game. Tom Hall has also claimed that the split hurt the sales of the shareware episodes, though he has said that \"they still did decently, though\". \"PC Zone\", in its first issue in 1993, quoted shareware distributors as saying \"Goodbye, Galaxy\" was one of the top shareware sellers of 1992, behind \"Wolfenstein 3D\". \"IGN\" has also referred to the pair of episodes as \"Apogee's hottest sellers\". Hall has claimed \"The Armageddon Machine\" as the best \"Commander Keen\" episode and his favorite. \"Aliens Ate My Babysitter\" also did not sell as well as hoped for by id, which the team partially blamed on what they felt was terrible box art done by a company that had previously designed packaging for Lipton tea. Despite this, the sales were strong enough that id agreed to use FormGen as a retail publisher for at least two more games. \"PC Zone\" also stated that the sales of \"Aliens\" through shareware distributors was one of the highest in the shareware market in 1993.\nIn October 1992, the Shareware Industry Awards gave the \"Commander Keen\" series the \"Best Entertainment Software and Best Overall\" award. A review of the entire \"Commander Keen\" series in 1993 by Sandy Petersen in the first \"Eye of the Monitor\" column for \"Dragon\" described the series as action games with \"hilarious graphics\". Acknowledging its debt to \"Super Mario Bros.\", he called it, especially \"Goodbye, Galaxy\", \"one of the best games of its type\" and praised it for not being \"mindlessly hard\", instead requiring some thought to play through, and especially for the humor in the graphics and gameplay. According to Steam Spy, as of June 2016 there are approximately 200,000 owners of the 2007 \"Commander Keen Complete Pack\" on Steam, and approximately 80,000 owners of the \"Keen Dreams\" release.\nThe 2001 \"Commander Keen\" received mixed reviews from critics. The graphics were both praised and criticized; reviewers praised the art style and the \"bright and colorful\" graphics, but disparaged the \"busy\" backgrounds and lackluster animations as making the game feel \"choppy\", and complained that the graphical updates did not reflect the ten years since the last releases. The gameplay similarly received mixed opinions; reviewers were split between praising the difficult, \"old school\" gameplay as a successful adaptation of the originals and dismissing the \"aging\" gameplay as sound but not comparing well to more recent games. Reviewers concluded that the game was an \"acquired taste\" best suited for fans of the original series or younger players.\nLegacy.\nIdeas from the Deep's first royalty check from Apogee in January 1991 convinced them that they no longer needed their day jobs at Softdisk but could devote themselves full-time to their own ideas, leading to the founding of id Software in February. In the summer of 1991, id hosted a seminar for game developers with the intention of licensing the \"Commander Keen\" engine; they did so, forming the spiritual predecessor to both QuakeCon and id's standard of licensing their game engines.\nOne of the enemies created for \"Secret of the Oracle\", the Dopefish, has since the game's release become one of the video game industry's biggest in-jokes, making cameo appearances in other games. The Dopefish, which Hall describes as \"just a stupid green fish\", is described in \"Secret of the Oracle\" as \"the second-dumbest creature in the universe\". It has appeared in dozens of other games since its initial appearance, as references, images, or the phrase \"Dopefish Lives\".\nThe Standard Galactic Alphabet, a writing system used to depict alien languages in the galaxy throughout the series, is used for textual signs and directions and was created by Tom Hall beginning with \"Invasion of the Vorticons\" as a way to pass hidden messages to players. It is a substitution cipher to the Latin alphabet, including the letters A\u2013Z, opening and closing quotation marks, and a full stop. In 2019, it was added to the Under-ConScript Unicode Registry, using the codepoints to , and is included in the GNU Unifont CSUR extension. The Standard Galactic Alphabet also appears in the game \"Minecraft\" as the script and symbols used for its Enchanting Table.\nIn January 2018, John Romero and Tom Hall stated on Twitter that Billy Blaze is the grandson of \"Wolfenstein\" protagonist William \"B.J.\" Blazkowicz and the father of Doomguy from \"Doom\". Commander Keen himself has appeared or has been referenced in many other video games over the years, including \"Doom II\", \"Duke Nukem\", \"Bio Menace\" and \"Doom\" (2016).\nA number of fan-made \"Commander Keen\" games have been created since the publication of the original titles, with a fan website, the Public Commander Keen Forum, devoted to their creation, announcement, and discussion. Since the release of utilities to modify the levels and graphics in the original \"Keen\" series in 2002, more than fifty mods have been made, most of which feature Commander Keen as the protagonist. These mods include \"Commander Genius\", an engine, released for multiple platforms, which interprets the episodes as a \"retro-evolved\" game, with re-polished graphics, a multiplayer compatibility, and a level editor, ports and remakes on different platforms, and \"The Universe Is Toast!\" mod, an unofficial sequel trilogy of games.\nIn January 2013, Tom Hall began development of \"Worlds of Wander\", a tool for creating platform games, and the following month began a Kickstarter campaign for the tool and associated game, \"Secret Spaceship Club\", which he described as a spiritual successor to \"Commander Keen\". The project was unsuccessful in reaching its goal, though Hall said that he planned to continue working on it in his spare time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37530", "revid": "10841396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37530", "title": "Tornado", "text": "Violently rotating column of air\nA tornado, also known as a twister, is a rapidly rotating column of air that extends vertically from the surface of the Earth to the base of a cumulonimbus or cumulus cloud. Tornadoes are often (but not always) visible in the form of a condensation funnel originating from the cloud base, with a cloud of rotating debris and dust close to the ground. Most tornadoes have wind speeds less than , are about across, and travel several kilometers (a few miles) before dissipating. The most extreme tornadoes can attain wind speeds of more than , can be more than in diameter, and can stay on the ground for more than .\nTypes of tornadoes include the multiple-vortex tornado, landspout, and waterspout. Waterspouts are characterized by a spiraling funnel-shaped wind current, connecting to a large cumulus or cumulonimbus cloud. They are generally classified as non-supercellular tornadoes that develop over bodies of water, but there is disagreement about whether to classify them as true tornadoes. These spiraling columns of air often develop in tropical areas close to the equator and are less common at high latitudes. Similar phenomena in nature include the gustnado, dust devil, fire whirl, and steam devil.\nTornadoes most commonly occur in North America (particularly in central and southeastern regions of the United States colloquially known as Tornado Alley; the United States has by far the most tornadoes of any country in the world). Tornadoes also occur in South Africa, much of Europe (except most of the Alps), western and eastern Australia, New Zealand, Bangladesh and adjacent eastern India, Japan, the Philippines, and southeastern South America (Uruguay and Argentina). Tornadoes can be detected before or as they occur through the use of pulse-Doppler radar by recognizing patterns in velocity and reflectivity data, such as hook echoes or debris balls, as well as through the efforts of storm spotters.\nRating.\nThere are several scales for rating the strength of tornadoes. The Fujita scale rates tornadoes by damage caused and has been replaced in some countries by the updated Enhanced Fujita Scale. An F0 or EF0 tornado, the weakest category, damages trees, but not substantial structures. An F5 or EF5 tornado, the strongest category, rips buildings off their foundations and can deform large skyscrapers. The similar TORRO scale ranges from T0 for extremely weak tornadoes to T11 for the most powerful known tornadoes. The International Fujita scale is also used to rate the intensity of tornadoes and other wind events based on the severity of the damage they cause. Doppler radar data, photogrammetry, and ground swirl patterns (trochoidal marks) may also be analyzed to determine intensity and assign a rating.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"tornado\" comes from the Spanish (meaning 'thunderstorm', past participle of \"tronar\" 'to thunder', itself in turn from the Latin \"ton\u0101re\" 'to thunder'). The metathesis of the r and o in the English spelling was influenced by the Spanish \"tornado\" (past participle of \"tornar\" 'to twist, turn,', from Latin \"torn\u014d\" 'to turn'). \nA linguistically related convective wind phenomena, that unlike the relatively small concentrated area of a tornado, is the widespread, straight-line derecho (, from , 'straight'). \nDefinitions.\nA tornado is a violently rotating column of air, in contact with the ground, either pendant from a cumuliform cloud or underneath a cumuliform cloud, and often (but not always) visible as a funnel cloud. For a vortex to be classified as a tornado, it must be in contact with both the ground and the cloud base. The term is not precisely defined; for example, there is disagreement as to whether separate touchdowns of the same funnel constitute separate tornadoes. \"Tornado\" refers to the vortex of wind, not the condensation cloud.\nTornados are sometimes colloquially referred to as cyclones. However, in meteorology, the word \"cyclone\" specifically refers to a large weather system that rotates around a center of low atmospheric pressure counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. Cyclones do not feature cloud funnels. \nFunnel cloud.\nA tornado is not necessarily visible; however, the intense low pressure caused by the high wind speeds (as described by Bernoulli's principle) and rapid rotation (due to cyclostrophic balance) usually cause water vapor in the air to condense into cloud droplets due to adiabatic cooling. This results in the formation of a visible funnel cloud or condensation funnel.\nThere is some disagreement over the definition of a funnel cloud and a condensation funnel. According to the \"Glossary of Meteorology\", a funnel cloud is any rotating cloud pendant from a cumulus or cumulonimbus, and thus most tornadoes are included under this definition. Among many meteorologists, the \"funnel cloud\" term is strictly defined as a rotating cloud which is not associated with strong winds at the surface, and condensation funnel is a broad term for any rotating cloud below a cumuliform cloud.\nTornadoes often begin as funnel clouds with no associated strong winds at the surface, and not all funnel clouds evolve into tornadoes. Most tornadoes produce strong winds at the surface while the visible funnel is still above the ground, so it is difficult to discern the difference between a funnel cloud and a tornado from a distance.\nOutbreaks and families.\nOccasionally, a single storm will produce more than one tornado, either simultaneously or in succession. Multiple tornadoes produced by the same storm cell are referred to as a \"tornado family\". Several tornadoes are sometimes spawned from the same large-scale storm system. If there is no break in activity, this is considered a tornado outbreak (although the term \"tornado outbreak\" has various definitions). A period of several successive days with tornado outbreaks in the same general area (spawned by multiple weather systems) is a tornado outbreak sequence, occasionally called an extended tornado outbreak.\nCharacteristics.\nSize and shape.\nMost tornadoes take on the appearance of a narrow funnel, a few hundred meters (yards) across, with a small cloud of debris near the ground. Tornadoes may be obscured completely by rain or dust. These tornadoes are especially dangerous, as even experienced meteorologists might not see them.\nSmall, relatively weak landspouts may be visible only as a small swirl of dust on the ground. Although the condensation funnel may not extend all the way to the ground, if associated surface winds are greater than , the circulation is considered a tornado. A tornado with a nearly cylindrical profile and relatively low height is sometimes referred to as a \"stovepipe\" tornado. Large tornadoes which appear wider than their cloud-to-ground height can look like large wedges stuck into the ground, and so are known as \"wedge tornadoes\" or \"wedges\". The \"stovepipe\" classification is also used for this type of tornado if it otherwise fits that profile. A wedge can be so wide that it appears to be a block of dark clouds, wider than the distance from the cloud base to the ground. Even experienced storm observers may not be able to tell the difference between a low-hanging cloud and a wedge tornado from a distance. Many, but not all major tornadoes are wedge tornados.\nTornadoes in the dissipating stage can resemble narrow tubes or ropes, and often curl or twist into complex shapes. These tornadoes are said to be \"roping out\", or becoming a \"rope tornado\". When they rope out, the length of their funnel increases, which forces the winds within the funnel to weaken due to conservation of angular momentum. Multiple-vortex tornadoes can appear as a family of swirls circling a common center, or they may be completely obscured by condensation, dust, and debris, appearing to be a single funnel.\nIn the United States, tornadoes are around across on average. However, there is a wide range of tornado sizes. Weak tornadoes, or strong yet dissipating tornadoes, can be exceedingly narrow, sometimes only a few feet or couple meters across. One tornado was reported to have a damage path only long. On the other end of the spectrum, wedge tornadoes can have a damage path a mile (1.6\u00a0km) wide or more. A tornado that affected Hallam, Nebraska on May 22, 2004, was up to wide at the ground, and a tornado in El Reno, Oklahoma on May 31, 2013, was approximately wide, the widest on record.\nTrack length.\nIn the United States, the average tornado travels on the ground for . However, tornadoes are capable of both much shorter and much longer damage paths: one tornado was reported to have a damage path only long, while the record-holding tornado for path length\u2014the Tri-State Tornado, which affected parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana on March 18, 1925\u2014was on the ground continuously for . Many tornadoes which appear to have path lengths of or longer are composed of a family of tornadoes which have formed in quick succession; however, there is no substantial evidence that this occurred in the case of the Tri-State Tornado. A 2007 reanalysis of the path suggests that the tornado may have begun further west than previously thought.\nAppearance.\nTornadoes can have a wide range of colors, depending on the environment in which they form. Those that form in dry environments can be nearly invisible, marked only by swirling debris at the base of the funnel. Condensation funnels that pick up little or no debris can be gray to white. While traveling over a body of water (as a waterspout), tornadoes can turn white or even blue. Slow-moving funnels, which ingest a considerable amount of debris and dirt, are usually darker, taking on the color of debris. Tornadoes in the Great Plains can turn red because of the reddish tint of the soil, and tornadoes in mountainous areas can travel over snow-covered ground, turning white.\nLighting conditions are a major factor in the appearance of a tornado. A tornado which is \"back-lit\" (viewed with the sun behind it) appears very dark. The same tornado, viewed with the sun at the observer's back, may appear gray or brilliant white. Tornadoes which occur near the time of sunset can be many different colors, appearing in hues of yellow, orange, and pink.\nDust kicked up by the winds of the parent thunderstorm, heavy rain and hail, and the darkness of night are all factors that can reduce the visibility of tornadoes. Tornadoes occurring in these conditions are especially dangerous, since only weather radar observations, or possibly the sound of an approaching tornado, serve as any warning to those in the storm's path. Most significant tornadoes form under the storm's \"updraft base\", which is rain-free, making them visible. Also, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, when the bright sun can penetrate even the thickest clouds.\nThere is mounting evidence, including Doppler on Wheels mobile radar images and eyewitness accounts, that most tornadoes have a clear, calm center with extremely low pressure, akin to the eye of tropical cyclones. Lightning is said to be the source of illumination for those who claim to have seen the interior of a tornado.\nRotation.\nTornadoes normally rotate cyclonically (when viewed from above, this is counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere). While large-scale storms always rotate cyclonically due to the Coriolis effect, thunderstorms and tornadoes are so small that the direct influence of the Coriolis effect is negligible, as indicated by their large Rossby numbers. Supercells and tornadoes rotate cyclonically in numerical simulations even when the Coriolis effect is neglected. Low-level mesocyclones and tornadoes owe their rotation to complex processes within the supercell and ambient environment.\nApproximately 1\u00a0percent of tornadoes rotate in an anticyclonic direction in the northern hemisphere. Typically, systems as weak as landspouts and gustnadoes can rotate anticyclonically, and usually only those which form on the anticyclonic shear side of the descending rear flank downdraft (RFD) in a cyclonic supercell. On rare occasions, anticyclonic tornadoes form in association with the mesoanticyclone of an anticyclonic supercell, in the same manner as the typical cyclonic tornado, or as a companion tornado either as a satellite tornado or associated with anticyclonic eddies within a supercell.\nSound and seismology.\nTornadoes emit widely on the acoustics spectrum and the sounds are caused by multiple mechanisms. Various sounds of tornadoes have been reported, mostly related to familiar sounds for the witness and generally some variation of a whooshing roar. Popularly reported sounds include a freight train, rushing rapids or waterfall, a nearby jet engine, or combinations of these. Many tornadoes are not audible from much distance; the nature of and the propagation distance of the audible sound depends on atmospheric conditions and topography.\nThe winds of the tornado vortex and of constituent turbulent eddies, as well as airflow interaction with the surface and debris, contribute to the sounds. Funnel clouds also produce sounds. Funnel clouds and small tornadoes are reported as whistling, whining, humming, or the buzzing of innumerable bees or electricity, or more or less harmonic, whereas many tornadoes are reported as a continuous, deep rumbling, or an irregular sound of \"noise\".\nSince many tornadoes are audible only when very near, sound is not to be thought of as a reliable warning signal for a tornado. Tornadoes are also not the only source of such sounds in severe thunderstorms; any strong, damaging wind, a severe hail volley, or continuous thunder in a thunderstorm may produce a roaring sound.\nTornadoes also produce identifiable inaudible infrasonic signatures.\nUnlike audible signatures, tornadic signatures have been isolated; due to the long-distance propagation of low-frequency sound, efforts are ongoing to develop tornado prediction and detection devices with additional value in understanding tornado morphology, dynamics, and creation. Tornadoes also produce a detectable seismic signature, and research continues on isolating it and understanding the process.\nElectromagnetic, lightning, and other effects.\nTornadoes emit on the electromagnetic spectrum, with sferics and E-field effects detected. There are observed correlations between tornadoes and patterns of lightning. Tornadic storms do not produce more lightning than other storms and some tornadic cells never produce lightning at all. More often than not, overall cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning activity decreases as a tornado touches the surface and returns to the baseline level when the tornado dissipates. In many cases, intense tornadoes and thunderstorms exhibit an increased and anomalous dominance of positive polarity CG discharges.\nIn addition to winds, tornadoes also exhibit changes in atmospheric variables such as temperature, moisture, and atmospheric pressure. For example, on June 24, 2003, near Manchester, South Dakota, a probe measured a pressure decrease. The pressure dropped gradually as the vortex approached then dropped extremely rapidly to in the core of the violent tornado before rising rapidly as the vortex moved away, resulting in a V-shape pressure trace. Temperature tends to decrease and moisture content to increase in the immediate vicinity of a tornado.\nLife cycle.\nSupercell relationship.\nTornadoes often develop from a class of thunderstorms known as supercells. Supercells contain mesocyclones, an area of organized rotation a few kilometers/miles up in the atmosphere, usually across. Most intense tornadoes (EF3 to EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale) develop from supercells. In addition to tornadoes, very heavy rain, frequent lightning, strong wind gusts, and hail are common in such storms.\nMost tornadoes from supercells follow a recognizable life cycle which begins when increasing rainfall drags with it an area of quickly descending air known as the rear flank downdraft (RFD). This downdraft accelerates as it approaches the ground, and drags the supercell's rotating mesocyclone towards the ground with it.\nFormation.\nAs the mesocyclone lowers below the cloud base, it begins to take in cool, moist air from the downdraft region of the storm. The convergence of warm air in the updraft and cool air causes a rotating wall cloud to form. The RFD also focuses the mesocyclone's base, causing it to draw air from a smaller and smaller area on the ground. As the updraft intensifies, it creates an area of low pressure at the surface. This pulls the focused mesocyclone down, in the form of a visible condensation funnel.\nAs the funnel descends, the RFD also reaches the ground, fanning outward and creating a gust front that can cause severe damage at a considerable distance from the tornado. Usually, the funnel cloud begins causing damage on the ground (becoming a tornado) within a few minutes of the RFD reaching the ground. Many other aspects of tornado formation (such as why some storms form tornadoes while others do not, or what precise role downdrafts, temperature, and moisture play in tornado formation) are still poorly understood.\nMaturity.\nInitially, the tornado has a good source of warm, moist air flowing inward to power it, and it grows until it reaches the \"mature stage\". This can last from a few minutes to more than an hour, and during that time a tornado often causes the most damage, and in rare cases can be more than across. The low pressured atmosphere at the base of the tornado is essential to the endurance of the system. Meanwhile, the RFD, now an area of cool surface winds, begins to wrap around the tornado, cutting off the inflow of warm air which previously fed the tornado.\nThe flow inside the funnel of the tornado is downward, supplying water vapor from the cloud above. This is contrary to the upward flow inside hurricanes, supplying water vapor from the warm ocean below. Therefore, the energy of the tornado is supplied from the cloud above.\nDissipation.\nAs the RFD completely wraps around and chokes off the tornado's air supply, the vortex begins to weaken, becoming thin and rope-like. This is the \"dissipating stage\", often lasting no more than a few minutes, after which the tornado ends. During this stage, the shape of the tornado becomes highly influenced by the winds of the parent storm, and can be blown into fantastic patterns. Even though the tornado is dissipating, it is still capable of causing damage. The storm is contracting into a rope-like tube and, due to conservation of angular momentum, winds can increase at this point.\nAs the tornado enters the dissipating stage, its associated mesocyclone often weakens as well, as the rear flank downdraft cuts off the inflow powering it. Sometimes, in intense supercells, tornadoes can develop cyclically. As the first mesocyclone and associated tornado dissipate, the storm's inflow may be concentrated into a new area closer to the center of the storm and possibly feed a new mesocyclone. If a new mesocyclone develops, the cycle may start again, producing one or more new tornadoes. Occasionally, the old (occluded) mesocyclone and the new mesocyclone produce a tornado at the same time.\nAlthough this is a widely accepted theory for how most tornadoes form, live, and die, it does not explain the formation of smaller tornadoes, such as landspouts, long-lived tornadoes, or tornadoes with multiple vortices. These each have different mechanisms which influence their development\u2014however, most tornadoes follow a pattern similar to this one.\nTypes.\nMultiple vortex.\nA \"multiple-vortex tornado\" is a type of tornado in which two or more columns of spinning air rotate about their own axes and at the same time revolve around a common center. A multi-vortex structure can occur in almost any circulation, but is very often observed in intense tornadoes. These vortices often create small areas of heavier damage along the main tornado path. This is a phenomenon that is distinct from a satellite tornado, which is a smaller tornado that forms very near a large, strong tornado contained within the same mesocyclone. The satellite tornado may appear to \"orbit\" the larger tornado (hence the name), giving the appearance of one, large multi-vortex tornado. However, a satellite tornado is a distinct circulation, and is much smaller than the main funnel.\nWaterspout.\nA \"waterspout\" is defined by the National Weather Service as a tornado over water. However, researchers typically distinguish \"fair weather\" waterspouts from tornadic (i.e. associated with a mesocyclone) waterspouts. Fair weather waterspouts are less severe but far more common, and are similar to dust devils and landspouts. They form at the bases of cumulus congestus clouds over tropical and subtropical waters. They have relatively weak winds, smooth laminar walls, and typically travel very slowly. They occur most commonly in the Florida Keys and in the northern Adriatic Sea. In contrast, tornadic waterspouts are stronger tornadoes over water. They form over water similarly to mesocyclonic tornadoes, or are stronger tornadoes which cross over water. Since they form from severe thunderstorms and can be far more intense, faster, and longer-lived than fair weather waterspouts, they are more dangerous. In official tornado statistics, waterspouts are generally not counted unless they affect land, though some European weather agencies count waterspouts and tornadoes together.\nLandspout.\nA \"landspout\", or \"dust-tube tornado\", is a tornado not associated with a mesocyclone. The name stems from their characterization as a \"fair weather waterspout on land\". Waterspouts and landspouts share many defining characteristics, including relative weakness, short lifespan, and a small, smooth condensation funnel that often does not reach the surface. Landspouts also create a distinctively laminar cloud of dust when they make contact with the ground, due to their differing mechanics from true mesoform tornadoes. Though usually weaker than classic tornadoes, they can produce strong winds which could cause serious damage.\nSimilar circulations.\nGustnado.\nA \"gustnado\", or \"gust front tornado\", is a small, vertical swirl associated with a gust front or downburst. Because they are not connected with a cloud base, there is some debate as to whether or not gustnadoes are tornadoes. They are formed when fast-moving cold, dry outflow air from a thunderstorm is blown through a mass of stationary, warm, moist air near the outflow boundary, resulting in a \"rolling\" effect (often exemplified through a roll cloud). If low level wind shear is strong enough, the rotation can be turned vertically or diagonally and make contact with the ground. The result is a gustnado. They usually cause small areas of heavier rotational wind damage among areas of straight-line wind damage.\nDust devil.\nA \"dust devil\" (also known as a whirlwind) resembles a tornado in that it is a vertical swirling column of air. However, they form under clear skies and are no stronger than the weakest tornadoes. They form when a strong convective updraft is formed near the ground on a hot day. If there is enough low-level wind shear, the column of hot, rising air can develop a small cyclonic motion that can be seen near the ground. They are not considered tornadoes because they form during fair weather and are not associated with any clouds. However, they can, on occasion, result in major damage.\nFire whirls.\nSmall-scale, tornado-like circulations can occur near any intense surface heat source. Those that occur near intense wildfires are called \"fire whirls\". They are not considered tornadoes, except in the rare case where they connect to a pyrocumulus or other cumuliform cloud above. Fire whirls usually are not as strong as tornadoes associated with thunderstorms. They can, however, produce significant damage.\nSteam devils.\nA \"steam devil\" is a rotating updraft between wide that involves steam or smoke. These formations do not involve high wind speeds, only completing a few rotations per minute. Steam devils are very rare. They most often form from smoke issuing from a power plant's smokestack. Hot springs and deserts may also be suitable locations for a tighter, faster-rotating steam devil to form. The phenomenon can occur over water, when cold arctic air passes over relatively warm water.\nIntensity and damage.\nThe Fujita scale, Enhanced Fujita scale (EF), and International Fujita scale rate tornadoes by damage caused. The EF scale was an update to the older Fujita scale, by expert elicitation, using engineered wind estimates and better damage descriptions. The EF scale was designed so that a tornado rated on the Fujita scale would receive the same numerical rating, and was implemented starting in the United States in 2007. An EF0 tornado will probably damage trees but not substantial structures, whereas an EF5 tornado can rip buildings off their foundations leaving them bare and even deform large skyscrapers. The similar TORRO scale ranges from a T0 for extremely weak tornadoes to T11 for the most powerful known tornadoes. Doppler weather radar data, photogrammetry, and ground swirl patterns (cycloidal marks) may also be analyzed to determine intensity and award a rating.\nTornadoes vary in intensity regardless of shape, size, and location, though strong tornadoes are typically larger than weak tornadoes. The association with track length and duration also varies, although longer track tornadoes tend to be stronger.&lt;ref name=\"width/length intensity relationship\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In the case of violent tornadoes, only a small portion of the path is of violent intensity, most of the higher intensity from subvortices.\nIn the United States, 80% of tornadoes are EF0 and EF1 (T0 through T3) tornadoes. The rate of occurrence drops off quickly with increasing strength\u2014less than 1% are violent tornadoes (EF4, T8 or stronger). Current records may significantly underestimate the frequency of strong (EF2-EF3) and violent (EF4-EF5) tornadoes, as damage-based intensity estimates are limited to structures and vegetation that a tornado impacts. A tornado may be much stronger than its damage-based rating indicates if its strongest winds occur away from suitable damage indicators, such as in an open field. Outside Tornado Alley, and North America in general, violent tornadoes are extremely rare. This is likely attributable to the lesser number of tornadoes overall, as research shows that tornado intensity distributions are fairly similar worldwide. A few significant tornadoes occur annually in Europe, Asia, southern Africa, and southeastern South America.\nClimatology.\nThe United States has the most tornadoes of any country, nearly four times more than estimated in all of Europe, excluding waterspouts. This is mostly due to the unique geography of the continent. North America is a large continent that extends from the tropics north into arctic areas, and has no major east\u2013west mountain range to block air flow between these two areas. In the middle latitudes, where most tornadoes of the world occur, the Rocky Mountains block moisture and buckle the atmospheric flow, forcing drier air at mid-levels of the troposphere due to downsloped winds, and causing the formation of a low pressure area downwind to the east of the mountains. Increased westerly flow off the Rockies force the formation of a dry line when the flow aloft is strong, while the Gulf of Mexico fuels abundant low-level moisture in the southerly flow to its east. This unique topography allows for frequent collisions of warm and cold air, the conditions that breed strong, long-lived storms throughout the year.\nA large portion of these tornadoes form in an area of the central United States known as Tornado Alley. This area extends into Canada, particularly Ontario and the Prairie Provinces, although southeast Quebec, the interior of British Columbia, and western New Brunswick are also tornado-prone. Tornadoes also occur across northeastern Mexico.\nThe United States averages about 1,200 tornadoes per year, followed by Canada, averaging 62 reported per year. NOAA's has a higher average 100 per year in Canada. The Netherlands has the highest average number of recorded tornadoes per area of any country (more than 20, or annually), followed by the UK (around 33, per year), although those are of lower intensity, briefer and cause minor damage.\nTornadoes kill an average of 179 people per year in Bangladesh, the highest number in the world. Reasons for this include the region's high population density, poor construction quality, and lack of tornado safety knowledge. Other areas of the world that have frequent tornadoes include South Africa, the La Plata Basin area, portions of Europe, Australia and New Zealand, and far eastern Asia.\nTornadoes are most common in spring and least common in winter, but tornadoes can occur any time of year that favorable conditions occur. Spring and fall experience peaks of activity as those are the seasons when stronger winds, wind shear, and atmospheric instability are present. Tornadoes are focused in the right front quadrant of landfalling tropical cyclones, which tend to occur in the late summer and autumn. Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices, which persist until landfall. Tornados can even form during snow squalls events with no rain present.\nTornado occurrence is highly dependent on the time of day, because of solar heating. Worldwide, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, between 15:00 (3\u00a0pm) and 19:00 (7\u00a0pm) local time, with a peak near 17:00 (5\u00a0pm). Destructive tornadoes can occur at any time of day. The Gainesville Tornado of 1936, one of the deadliest tornadoes in history, occurred at 8:30\u00a0am local time.\nOf all countries, the United Kingdom has the highest incidence of tornadoes per unit area of land. These tornadoes form at all times of the year due to the frequency of unsettled conditions and movement of weather fronts. The United Kingdom has at least 34 tornadoes per year and possibly as many as 50. Most tornadoes in the United Kingdom are weak, but they are occasionally destructive. For example, the Birmingham tornado of 2005 and the London tornado of 2006 both registered F2 on the Fujita scale and both caused significant damage and injury.\nAssociations with climate and climate change.\nAssociations with various climate and environmental trends exist. For example, an increase in the sea surface temperature of a source region (e.g. Gulf of Mexico and Mediterranean Sea) increases atmospheric moisture content. Increased moisture can fuel an increase in severe weather and tornado activity, particularly in the cool season.\nSome evidence does suggest that the Southern Oscillation is weakly correlated with changes in tornado activity, which vary by season and region, as well as whether the ENSO phase is that of El Ni\u00f1o or La Ni\u00f1a. Research has found that fewer tornadoes and hailstorms occur in winter and spring in the U.S. central and southern plains during El Ni\u00f1o, and more occur during La Ni\u00f1a, than in years when temperatures in the Pacific are relatively stable. Ocean conditions could be used to forecast extreme spring storm events several months in advance.\nClimatic shifts may affect tornadoes via teleconnections in shifting the jet stream and the larger weather patterns. The climate-tornado link is confounded by the forces affecting larger patterns and by the local, nuanced nature of tornadoes. Although it is reasonable to suspect that global warming may affect trends in tornado activity, any such effect is not yet identifiable due to the complexity, local nature of the storms, and database quality issues. Any effect would vary by region.\nDetection.\nRigorous attempts to warn of tornadoes began in the United States in the mid-20th century. Before the 1950s, the only method of detecting a tornado was by someone seeing it on the ground. Often, news of a tornado would reach a local weather office after the storm. However, with the advent of weather radar, areas near a local office could get advance warning of severe weather. The first public tornado warnings were issued in 1950 and the first tornado watches and convective outlooks came about in 1952. In 1953, it was confirmed that hook echoes were associated with tornadoes. By recognizing these radar signatures, meteorologists could detect thunderstorms probably producing tornadoes from several miles away.\nRadar.\nToday most developed countries have a network of weather radars, which serves as the primary method of detecting hook signatures that are likely associated with tornadoes. In the United States and a few other countries, Doppler weather radar stations are used. These devices measure the velocity and radial direction (towards or away from the radar) of the winds within a storm, and so can spot evidence of rotation in storms from over away. When storms are distant from a radar, only areas high within the storm are observed and the important areas below are not sampled. Data resolution also decreases with distance from the radar. Some meteorological situations leading to tornadogenesis are not readily detectable by radar and tornado development may occasionally take place more quickly than radar can complete a scan and send the batch of data. Doppler weather radar systems can detect mesocyclones within a supercell thunderstorm, which allows meteorologists to predict tornado formations within thunderstorms.\nStorm spotting.\nSpotters are usually trained by the NWS on behalf of their respective organizations, and report to them. The organizations activate public warning systems such as sirens and the Emergency Alert System (EAS), and they forward the report to the NWS.\nThere are more than 230,000 trained Skywarn weather spotters across the United States.\nIn Canada, a similar network of volunteer weather watchers, called Canwarn, helps spot severe weather, with more than 1,000 volunteers. In Europe, several nations are organizing spotter networks under the auspices of Skywarn Europe and the Tornado and Storm Research Organisation (TORRO) has maintained a network of spotters in the United Kingdom since 1974.\nStorm spotters are required because radar systems such as NEXRAD detect signatures that suggest the presence of tornadoes, rather than tornadoes as such. Radar may give a warning before there is any visual evidence of a tornado or an imminent one, but ground truth from an observer can give definitive information. The spotter's ability to see what radar cannot is especially important as distance from the radar site increases, because the radar beam becomes progressively higher in altitude further away from the radar, chiefly due to curvature of Earth, and the beam also spreads out.\nVisual evidence.\nStorm spotters seek to determine whether a storm seen at a distance is a supercell. They typically look to its rear, the main region of updraft and inflow. Under that updraft is a rain-free base, and the next step of tornadogenesis is the formation of a rotating wall cloud. The vast majority of intense tornadoes occur with a wall cloud on the backside of a supercell.\nEvidence of a supercell is based on the storm's shape and structure, and cloud tower features such as a hard and vigorous updraft tower, a persistent, large overshooting top, a hard anvil (especially when backsheared against strong upper level winds), and a corkscrew look or striations. Under the storm and closer to where most tornadoes are found, evidence of a supercell and the likelihood of a tornado includes inflow bands (particularly when curved) such as a \"beaver tail\", and other clues such as strength of inflow, warmth and moistness of inflow air, how outflow- or inflow-dominant a storm appears, and how far is the front flank precipitation core from the wall cloud. Tornadogenesis is most likely at the interface of the updraft and rear flank downdraft, and requires a balance between the outflow and inflow.\nOnly wall clouds that rotate spawn tornadoes, and they usually precede the tornado between five and thirty minutes. Rotating wall clouds may be a visual manifestation of a low-level mesocyclone. Barring a low-level boundary, tornadogenesis is highly unlikely unless a rear flank downdraft occurs, which is usually visibly evidenced by evaporation of cloud adjacent to a corner of a wall cloud. A tornado often occurs as this happens or shortly afterwards. First, a funnel cloud dips which in nearly all cases develops a surface swirl by the time it reaches halfway down to the ground, signifying that a tornado is on the ground before condensation connects the surface circulation to the storm. Tornadoes may also develop without wall clouds, under flanking lines and on the leading edge. Spotters watch all areas of a storm, and the cloud base and surface.\nExtremes.\nThe Tri-State Tornado, which occurred on March 18, 1925 and affected parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana, holds several tornado records. It was likely an F5 on the Fujita Scale, although this tornado pre-dates the use of scales for rating tornado intensity. It holds the record for the longest path length at 352 km (219 miles), and the longest duration at approximately 3+1\u20442 hours. As of 2025, it is considered to be the deadliest single tornado in United States history (695 dead). In 2000, it was estimated to be the third costliest tornado when adjusted for inflation.\nAs of 2025, the deadliest tornado in world history was the Daultipur-Salturia Tornado in Bangladesh on April 26, 1989, which killed approximately 1,300 people. Bangladesh has had at least 24 tornadoes in its history that killed more than 100 people, almost half of the total for the rest of the world.\nOne of the most extensive tornado outbreaks on record was the 1974 Super Outbreak, which affected a large area of the central United States and extreme southern Ontario on April 3 and 4, 1974. The outbreak featured 148 tornadoes in 18 hours, many of which were violent; seven of F5 intensity, and twenty-three peaking at F4 intensity. Sixteen tornadoes were on the ground at the same time during its peak. More than 300\u00a0people, possibly as many as 330, were killed.\nDirect measurement of the windspeeds of the most violent tornados is nearly impossible because conventional anemometers cannot withstand the intense winds and flying debris. Some tornadoes have been scanned by mobile Doppler radar units, which can provide a good estimate of the tornado's wind speed. As of 2025, the record for the fastest wind speed ever logged (using Doppler radar) was produced by the 1999 Bridge Creek-Moore tornado, with an estimated wind speed of 486 \u00b1 32 km/h (302 \u00b1 20 mph).\nStorms that produce tornadoes can feature intense updrafts, sometimes exceeding 240 km/h (150 mph). Debris from a tornado can be lofted into the parent storm and carried a very long distance, a phenomenon known as debris fallout. A tornado which affected Great Bend, Kansas, in November 1915, was an extreme case, where a \"rain of debris\" occurred from the town, a sack of flour was found away, and a cancelled check from the Great Bend bank was found in a field outside of Palmyra, Nebraska, to the northeast. Waterspouts and tornadoes have been advanced as an explanation for instances of raining fish and other animals.\nSafety.\nThough tornadoes can strike in an instant, there are precautions and preventative measures that can be taken to increase the chances of survival. Authorities such as the Storm Prediction Center in the United States advise having a pre-determined plan should a tornado warning be issued. When a warning is issued, going to a basement or an interior first-floor room of a sturdy building greatly increases chances of survival. In tornado-prone areas, many buildings have underground storm cellars, which have saved thousands of lives.\nSome countries have meteorological agencies which distribute tornado forecasts and increase levels of alert of a possible tornado (such as tornado watches and warnings in the United States and Canada). Weather radios provide an alarm when a severe weather advisory is issued for the local area, mainly available only in the United States. Unless the tornado is far away and highly visible, meteorologists advise that drivers park their vehicles far to the side of the road (so as not to block emergency traffic), and find a sturdy shelter. If no sturdy shelter is nearby, getting low in a ditch is the next best option. Highway overpasses are one of the worst places to take shelter during tornadoes, as the constricted space can be subject to increased wind speed and funneling of debris underneath the overpass.\nMyths and misconceptions.\nFolklore often identifies a green sky with tornadoes, and though the phenomenon may be associated with severe weather, there is no evidence linking it specifically with tornadoes. It is often thought that opening windows will lessen the damage caused by the tornado. While there is a large drop in atmospheric pressure inside a strong tornado, the pressure difference is unlikely to cause significant damage. Opening windows may instead increase the severity of the tornado's damage. A violent tornado can destroy a house whether its windows are open or closed.\nAnother commonly held misconception is that highway overpasses provide adequate shelter from tornadoes. This belief is partly inspired by widely circulated video captured during the 1991 tornado outbreak near Andover, Kansas, where a news crew and several other people took shelter under an overpass on the Kansas Turnpike and safely rode out a tornado as it passed nearby. However, a highway overpass is a dangerous place during a tornado, and the subjects of the video remained safe due to an unlikely combination of events: the storm in question was a weak tornado, the tornado did not directly strike the overpass, and the overpass itself was of a unique design. Due to the Venturi effect, tornadic winds are accelerated in the confined space of an overpass. Indeed, in the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak of May 3, 1999, three highway overpasses were directly struck by tornadoes, and at each of the three locations there was a fatality, along with many life-threatening injuries. By comparison, during the same tornado outbreak, more than 2,000 homes were completely destroyed and another 7,000 damaged, and yet only a few dozen people died in their homes.\nAn old belief is that the southwest corner of a basement provides the most protection during a tornado. The safest place is the side or corner of an underground room opposite the tornado's direction of approach (usually the northeast corner), or the central-most room on the lowest floor. Taking shelter in a basement, under a staircase, or under a sturdy piece of furniture such as a workbench further increases the chances of survival.\nThere are areas which people believe to be protected from tornadoes, whether by being in a city, near a major river, hill, or mountain. Tornadoes have been known to cross major rivers, climb mountains, affect valleys, and have damaged several city centers. As a general rule, no area is safe from tornadoes, though some areas are more susceptible than others.\nOngoing research.\nMeteorology is a relatively young science and the study of tornadoes is newer still. Although researched for about 140 years and intensively so for around 60 years, there are still aspects of tornadoes which remain a mystery. Meteorologists have a fairly good understanding of the development of thunderstorms and mesocyclones, and the meteorological conditions conducive to their formation. However, the step from supercell, or other respective formative processes, to tornadogenesis and the prediction of tornadic vs. non-tornadic mesocyclones is not yet well known and is the focus of much research.\nAlso under study are the low-level mesocyclone and the stretching of low-level vorticity which tightens into a tornado, in particular, what are the processes and what is the relationship of the environment and the convective storm. Intense tornadoes have been observed forming simultaneously with a mesocyclone aloft (rather than succeeding mesocyclogenesis) and some intense tornadoes have occurred without a mid-level mesocyclone.\nIn particular, the role of downdrafts, particularly the rear-flank downdraft, and the role of baroclinic boundaries, are intense areas of study.\nReliably predicting tornado intensity and longevity remains a problem, as do details affecting characteristics of a tornado during its life cycle and tornadolysis. Other rich areas of research are tornadoes associated with mesovortices within linear thunderstorm structures and within tropical cyclones.\nMeteorologists still do not know the exact mechanisms by which most tornadoes form, and occasional tornadoes still strike without a tornado warning being issued. Analysis of observations including both stationary and mobile (surface and aerial) in-situ and remote sensing (passive and active) instruments generates new ideas and refines existing notions. Numerical modeling also provides new insights as observations and new discoveries are integrated into our physical understanding and then tested in computer simulations which validate new notions as well as produce entirely new theoretical findings, many of which are otherwise unattainable. Importantly, development of new observation technologies and installation of finer spatial and temporal resolution observation networks have aided increased understanding and better predictions.\nResearch programs, including field projects such as the VORTEX projects (Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment), deployment of TOTO (the TOtable Tornado Observatory), Doppler on Wheels (DOW), and dozens of other programs, hope to solve many questions that still plague meteorologists. Universities, government agencies such as the National Severe Storms Laboratory, private-sector meteorologists, and the National Center for Atmospheric Research are some of the organizations very active in research; with various sources of funding, both private and public, a chief entity being the National Science Foundation. The pace of research is partly constrained by the number of observations that can be taken; gaps in information about the wind, pressure, and moisture content throughout the local atmosphere; and the computing power available for simulation.\nSolar storms similar to tornadoes have been recorded, but it is unknown how closely related they are to their terrestrial counterparts.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37532", "revid": "90192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37532", "title": "Tap beer", "text": ""}
{"id": "37533", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37533", "title": "Indian Institute of Science", "text": "Public university in Bengaluru, India\nThe Indian Institute of Science (IISc) is a public, deemed, research university for higher education and research in science, engineering, design, and management. It is located in Bengaluru, Karnataka. The institute was established in 1909 with active support from Jamsetji Tata and thus is also locally known as the Tata Institute. It was granted a deemed university status in 1958 and recognized as an Institute of Eminence in 2018.\nHistory.\nFoundations and early history.\nAfter an accidental meeting between Jamsetji Tata and Swami Vivekananda, on a ship in 1893 where they discussed Tata's plan of bringing the steel industry to India, Tata wrote to Vivekananda five years later: \"I trust, you remember me as a fellow-traveller on your voyage from Japan to Chicago. I very much recall at this moment your views on the growth of the ascetic spirit in India... I recall these ideas in connection with my scheme of Research Institute of Science for India, of which you have doubtless heard or read.\"\nImpressed by Vivekananda's views on science and leadership abilities, Tata wanted him to guide his campaign. Vivekananda endorsed the project with enthusiasm, and Tata, with the aim of advancing the scientific capabilities of the country, constituted a provisional committee to prepare a plan for setting up of an institute of research and higher education. The committee presented a draft proposal to Viceroy George Curzon on 31 December 1898. Subsequently, Sir William Ramsay, a Nobel Laureate, was called on to propose a suitable place for such an institution who suggested Bangalore as the best location.\nThe land and other facilities for the institution were donated by Maharaja Krishnaraja Wadiyar IV and Tata. The maharaja donated about of land; Tata gave several buildings towards the creation of IISc. This land included the former village of Medaraninganahalli. A Kannada inscription dated to 1669 CE records the donation of Medaraninganahalli to the Mallapura Mallikarjuna temple by the Maratha king Ekoji I. More information about this inscription can be found here. The maharaja also granted Rs 5,00,000 towards capital expenditure and Rs 50,000 for annual expense. Nizam Osman Ali Khan also contributed, which amounted to around Rs 3,00,000 over a period of 31 years.\nThe constitution of the institute was approved by Viceroy Gilbert Elliot-Murray-Kynynmound, and the necessary \"vesting order\" to enable it to function was signed on 27 May 1909. Early in 1911, the maharaja laid the foundation stone of the institute, and on 24 July, the first batch of students were admitted to the Departments of General and Applied Chemistry under Norman Rudolf and Electro-Technology under Alfred Hay. Within two months, the Department of Organic Chemistry was opened. In 1958, the institute was deemed a university by the University Grants Commission of India.\nAt the time of the inception of IISc in 1909, Morris Travers, Sir William Ramsay's co-worker in the discovery of the noble gases, became its first director. For Travers, this was a natural continuation of his work on the institute, since he had played a role in its founding. The first Indian director was the Nobel Laureate Sir C.V. Raman.\nThe institute was the first to introduce a master's programs in engineering. It has also started integrated doctoral programmes in biological, chemical, physical, and mathematical sciences for natural science graduates.\nRecent history.\nOn 28 December 2005, two terrorists started firing indiscriminately inside the IISc campus. Munish Chander Puri, a professor from IIT Delhi, died in the attack. Four others were injured.\nIn 2018, the IISc was one of the first six institutes to be awarded the Institute of Eminence status. In 2019, the IISc launched its brand statement: \"Discover and Innovate; Transform and Transcend; Serve and Lead\".\nIn 2022, the IISc received a private donation of 425 crore Indian Rupees, the largest in its history, to establish a postgraduate medical institute.\nCampus.\nThe institute's Main Campus is fully residential and is spread over 400 acres of land in the heart of Bangalore city. It is located in the north of Bangalore, about 6 kilometres from Bangalore City Railway Station and Kempegowda Bus Station, on the way to Yeshwantpur. It is connected with city's Namma Metro Sandal Soap Factory metro station and by various bus stations of Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation. The institute is about 30 kilometres southwest of Kempegowda International Airport. As a research hub, it is in the vicinity of a number of other research institutes, Raman Research Institute, Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Wood Research Institute and Central Power Research Institute (CPRI), are close to IISc. Most of these institutes are connected to IISc by a regular shuttle bus service. \nThe main campus houses more than 40 departments marked by routes such as the Gulmohar Marga, the Mahogany Marga, the Badami Marga, the Tala Marga, the Ashoka Marga, the Nilgiri Marg, the Silver Oak Marg, the Amra Marga and the Arjuna Marga. The campus features six canteens (cafeterias), a gymkhana (gymnasium and sports complex), a football ground and a cricket ground, five dining messes (halls), one multi cuisine restaurant, nine men's and five women's hostels (dormitories), an air strip, a library, two shopping centers and residences of the faculty members and other staff, besides other amenities.\nThe IISc campus harbours both exotic and indigenous plant species with about 110 species of woody plants. The roads on the campus are named after the dominant avenue tree species.\nThe architecture of the Main Building, which today houses the administration and the Faculty Hall, is classical in style, fronted by a grey, handsome tower. In front of it stands the work of Gilbert Bayes, a monument erected in the memory of J. N. Tata. At its feet is an inscription that serves to remind future generations of the generosity of Jamsetji Tata and the persistence with which he worked for the welfare of India. The building, as one of the prominent landmarks of Bangalore, was designed by C. F. Stevens and Company of Bombay in 1912\u201313.\nJ. R. D. Tata Memorial Library.\nJ. R. D. Tata Memorial Library is the main library of IISc. Apart from the main library, the institute also has independent departmental libraries. The library moved into the present premises in January 1965, built out of grants provided by University Grants Commission (UGC), in commemoration of the golden jubilee celebrations of the institute in 1959. In 1995, the library was renamed as \"J. R. D. Tata Memorial Library\". The National Board for Higher Mathematics (NBHM) has recognised this library as Regional Center for Mathematics for the south region and continued to award a special grant towards subscription of Journals in Mathematics.\nThe annual budget of the library is over Rs. 100\u00a0million (almost US$2,500,000) of which subscription towards periodicals alone is about Rs. 90\u00a0million. The library currently receives over 1,734 periodical titles, of which 1381 are subscribed, while the remaining titles are received as gratis or on an exchange basis. About 600 titles are accessible through the library subscription. In addition, over 10,000 journals are accessible online, thanks to INDEST subscription. The total holdings of the library exceed 411,000 documents.\nThe buildings for the metallurgy and aerospace departments were designed by the German architect Otto K\u00f6nigsberger in 1940.\nHistorical artifacts on campus.\nA 10th century \"hulibete veeragallu\", or hero stone commemorating a fight with a tiger, was discovered on the IISc campus in the late 1970s by two children of a professor who lived there. Veeragallus were typically erected to honor individuals who died in acts of valor, usually civilians. They are found mostly in the Karnataka region, dating from the 8th to 17th centuries. Those with inscriptions are especially helpful to historians as they provide more context about the event and martyr.\nWhile the IISc veeragallu lacks an inscription, experts believe it dates to the 10th century when the Western Gangas ruled Bangalore. The sculpture is partially damaged, but you can still see the martyr's left hand gripping a bow and his right hand about to shoot an arrow at an attacking tiger.\nThis is one of only three known \"hulibete veeragallus\" in Bangalore. The others are located at Bangalore University (7th or 8th century) and in Madivala (14th century).\nChallakere Campus.\nA second campus is in Challakere, on a lot of land. Research centres and labs here include the Talent Development Centre, Skill Development Centre funded by HAL under CSR Act, Solar Power Research Center and a Climate Observatory. The Centre for Sustainable Technologies has commenced its activities here under the project \"C-BELT\" i.e., the Centre for Bio-energy and Low-Carbon Technologies.\nJanardhana Swamy, then Member of Parliament from the Chitradurga Lok Sabha as well as a notable alumnus of IISc and Amalan Biswas, then DC of Chitradurga District played significant roles in setting up the IISc's new campus at Challakere. They were instrumental in identifying all the required 1500 acres of land for the new campus, getting the existing building leased from the Sheep Farm, obtaining the various needed approvals from the government, and having the initial funds released from the State.\nOrganisation and administration.\nAcademic divisions, departments, and centres.\nFor academic purposes, departments and centres in the institute are broadly assigned to either the Science Faculty or the Engineering Faculty. For administrative purposes (such as faculty recruitment, assessment and promotion), departments and centres are classified into six divisions, each headed by a chairperson. Each department or centre is administered by a chairperson.\n \nThe following centres are directly under the director (without a divisional chairman):\nAutonomous Societies and Centres based in the Institute:\nAcademics.\nAcademic programs.\nPost-graduate research programs.\nResearch students constitute more than 60 % of the students on the campus. PhD degrees offered in 40 different disciplines. Research programs leading to doctoral degrees are the main thrust in many departments. The program has a limited amount of course work, essentially to prepare the student to carry out the research, but the main emphasis is on the thesis work. The annual intake of research students is approximately 575 with several candidates sponsored from educational institutions and industries (through External Registration Program). \nThe Integrated PhD program is designed to offer opportunities to 3-year BSc graduates for pursuing advanced research in areas of biological, chemical, mathematical, and physical Sciences, leading to the PhD degree. In 2024, IISc launched new short courses on Computational Structural Reliability.\nPost-graduate coursework programs.\nThe two-year M.Tech. program is available in almost all engineering departments. Most MTech programs have a set of hard core courses specified as an essential requirement whereas students can take rest of the credits from many courses available in their parent or other departments and also do a dissertation work on the topic of their choice.\nMaster's degrees offered by the institute are classified into two categories: degrees by coursework (M.Tech., M.Mgt., and M.Des.) and degrees by research (M.Tech. research).\nThe Department of Management Studies offers a Master of Management program exclusively for engineering graduates. The Center for Product Design and Manufacturing offers the Master of Design (M.Des.) course. Started in 1996, the M.Des. program is a two-year, full-time postgraduate program.\nIn keeping with India's recent National Education Policy (NEP 2020), IISc has launched the Master of Technology (Online) degree program, a fully online program, for practicing engineers and scientists from academic year 2022\u20132023. The degree program is for professionals who are sponsored by organisations, who already have a BE/BTech/Equivalent degree and wish to upskill or re-skill themselves in streams like Data Science and Business Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Electronics and Communication Engineering.\nThe institute has recently announced MSc program in life sciences and chemical sciences starting from academic year of 2022\u201323. These 2 years master's degree programs consist of foundational and flexible coursework and hands-on laboratory training. The design is aimed to develop experimental skills in advanced techniques for research, leading to an independent thesis research project. Students enrolled in the M Sc programs can personalize their coursework and research projects.\nUndergraduate program.\nAn undergraduate program in science for students after Class XII was conceived during the Centenary Celebrations in 2009. The first batch of students was admitted in 2011. The program offers a four-year Bachelor of Science (Research) and a five-year integrated Master of Science course in six disciplines: Biology, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Material Science, Mathematics, and Physics. The course aims at exposing the students to the inter-disciplinary nature in which scientific research is done in many upcoming fields.\nA new undergraduate program B.Tech. in Mathematics and Computing seeks to enter a niche area with the aim of producing future leaders who will be at the forefront of research, development, and innovation in futuristic disciplines and next generation technologies that require deep use of mathematics, computer science, and data science.\nAdmission to the undergraduate programs is through one of two channels: The JEE Advanced and the IISER Aptitute Test (as of 2025).\nCentral computing facility.\nThe Computer Centre, established in 1970 as a central computing facility, became Supercomputer Education and Research Centre (SERC) in 1990 to provide computing facility to the faculty and students of the institute. SERC was created and fully funded by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India to commemorate the platinum jubilee of the institute. It houses India's first petascale supercomputer Cray XC40, the erstwhile fastest supercomputer in India.\nApart from functioning as a central computing facility of IISc, the SERC is engaged in education and research programs in areas relating to supercomputer development and application. The centre is also involved in several sponsored research projects in collaboration with several high-profile government and private agencies.\nAcademic and industrial collaborations.\nThe Indian Institute of Science collaborates with various government organisations like the Indian Ordnance Factories, DRDO, the ISRO, Bharat Electronics Limited, Aeronautical Development Agency, National Aerospace Laboratories, CSIR, Department of IT (Government of India), Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, etc. IISc also works in collaboration with private industry and research labs. A few organisations have been incubated by the Society for Innovation and Development (SID) on campus, including Morphing Machines and SandI, while Gamma Porite is currently under incubation. IISc actively promotes and supports ventures by the faculty, the students and alumni. Strand Life Sciences and Ittiam are some success stories of this initiative. In March 2016, a science start-up, incubated at the IISc, built the world's first food-grade DNA/RNA stain. This might cut the time taken to diagnose conditions such as HIV to a day, from 45 days at present. An Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Technology Park (ARTPARK) with a seed money of Rs 230 crore was launched at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) in Bengaluru\nRankings.\nInternationally, IISc was ranked 211th in the world by the \"QS World University Rankings\" of 2025 and 58th in Asia in the \"QS World University Rankings\" of 2024. It was ranked 201\u2013250 in the world and 32 in Asia by the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" in 2024. In addition, it was ranked 18 among emerging economies universities by the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" in 2022. It was ranked 401\u2013500 in the world in 2024 by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\".\nIn India, IISc was also ranked 2nd in the overall category, 1st among research institutions, and 1st among universities by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in 2024.\nIn India, IISc has secured the second position in the https://.\nCampus life.\nEvents.\nPravega is the annual science, technology and cultural festival of Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. Started in 2013 by the undergraduates of IISc, the fest is usually held on the third weekend of January.\nVijyoshi, an annual national science camp for secondary school and undergraduate students, is hosted by IISc.\nIISc also has active sports teams, major ones being in cricket, football, badminton and volleyball. They participate each year in the IISM (inter IISER sports meet) and a number of other tournaments and events.\nAlumni associations.\nIISc has a parent alumni association (AA) in Bangalore and several branches elsewhere including USA (IISCAANA). Of recent parent association is involved in several disputes. One of the reasons appears to be efforts by some to allow Non-IISc degree holders to become a part of the AA. Similar situation is created in IISCAANA\nby allowing several non-IISc members to be active in the team. IIScAANA allows those who did not complete degree to become members by adding a clause\n'completed at least one semester of course work in IISc' for membership eligibility.\nMusic Club.\nThe oldest and currently active music club of IISc.\nRhythmica members are students of IISc (Undergraduate, Masters and PhD) as well as professors.\nIISc also hosts a local branch of the Society for the Promotion of Indian Classical Music and Culture Amongst Youth (SPIC MACAY) that was started around 1984.\nNotable people.\nNotable faculty.\nTwo former directors, C. V. Raman and C. N. R. Rao, have been awarded India's highest civilian honour Bharat Ratna. Four former directors, Sir A. G. Bourne, Sir Martin O. Forster, C. V. Raman and J. C. Ghosh, have been knighted. Among the IISc alumni, there are three Rhodes Scholars, several Fellows of the Royal Society, and thousands of members of Indian and foreign Academy of Sciences. Hundreds of IISc faculty members have also received the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize for Science and Technology awarded to Indians who have made outstanding contributions under 45 years of age. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37534", "revid": "50489825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37534", "title": "Hyderabad", "text": "Capital of Telangana, India\nHyderabad is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Telangana. It occupies on the Deccan Plateau along the banks of the Musi River, in the northern part of Southern India. With an average altitude of , much of Hyderabad is situated on hilly terrain around artificial lakes, including the Hussain Sagar lake, predating the city's founding, in the north of the city centre. According to the 2011 census of India, Hyderabad is the fourth-most populous city in India with a population of 6.9 million residents within the city limits, and has a population of 9.7 million residents in the metropolitan region, making it the sixth-most populous metropolitan area in India.\nThe Qutb Shahi dynasty's Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah established Hyderabad in 1591 to extend the capital beyond the fortified Golconda. In 1687, the city was annexed by the Mughals. In 1724, Asaf Jah I, the Mughal viceroy, declared his sovereignty and founded the Asaf Jahi dynasty, also known as the Nizams. Hyderabad served as the imperial capital of the Asaf Jahis from 1769 to 1948. As the capital of the princely state of Hyderabad, the city housed the British Residency and cantonment until Indian independence in 1947. Hyderabad was annexed by the Indian Union in 1948 and continued as a capital of Hyderabad State from 1948 to 1956. After the introduction of the States Reorganisation Act of 1956, Hyderabad was made the capital of the newly formed Andhra Pradesh. In 2014, Andhra Pradesh was split to form the state of Telangana, and Hyderabad became the joint capital of the two states until 2024. Since 1956, the city has housed the Rashtrapati Nilayam, the winter office of the president of India.\nRelics of the Qutb Shahi and Nizam eras remain visible today; the Charminar has come to symbolise the city. By the end of the early modern era, the Mughal Empire had declined in the Deccan, and the Nizam's patronage attracted men of letters from various parts of the world. A distinctive culture arose from the amalgamation of local and migrated artisans, with painting, handicraft, jewellery, literature, dialect and clothing prominent even today. For its cuisine, the city is listed as a creative city of gastronomy by UNESCO. The Telugu film industry based in the city is the highest-grossing film industry in India as of 2021[ [update]].\nUntil the 19th century, Hyderabad was known for its pearl industry and was nicknamed the \"City of Pearls\", and was the only trading centre for Golconda diamonds in the world. Many of the city's historical and traditional bazaars remain open. Hyderabad's central location between the Deccan Plateau and the Western Ghats, and industrialisation throughout the 20th century attracted major Indian research, manufacturing, educational and financial institutions. Since the 1990s, the city has emerged as an Indian hub of pharmaceuticals and biotechnology and information technology. The formation of the special economic zones of Hardware Park and HITEC City, dedicated to information technology, has encouraged leading multinationals to set up operations in Hyderabad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nToponymy.\nThe name \"Hyderabad\" means \"Haydar's City\" or \"Lion City\", from \"Haydar\" 'lion' and \"\u0101b\u0101d\" 'city', after Caliph Ali Ibn Abi Talib, also known as Haydar because of his lion-like valour in battle. The city was originally called \"Baghnagar\" (city of gardens). The European travellers von Poser and Th\u00e9venot found both names in use in the 17th century. \nA popular legend suggests that the founder of the city, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, named it \"Bhagya-nagar\" (\"fortunate city\") after Bhagmati, a local \"nautch\" (dancing girl) whom he married. She converted to Islam and adopted the title \"Hyder Mahal\", the city being subsequently named \"Hyderabad\" in her honour.\nIn the year 1597, Hyderabad gained the epithet \"Farkhunda Bunyad\" (lit.\u2009'Of Auspicious Foundation'). Following the Mughal conquest of Hyderabad, emperor Aurangzeb changed the epithet to \"Dar-ul-Jihad\" (lit.\u2009'Abode of Holy War'), a title which appears on coins minted in the city during the reigns of Aurangzeb and Kam Bakhsh. The later Mughal emperor Shah Alam returned the city to its older epithet of \"Farkhunda Bunyad\", and consequently Mughal coins of Shah Alam and Muhammad Shah feature this title as the city's mint-name.\nEarly and medieval history.\nThe discovery of Megalithic burial sites and cairn circles in the suburbs of Hyderabad, in 1851 by Philip Meadows Taylor, a polymath in the service of the Nizam, had provided evidence that the region in which the city stands has been inhabited since the Stone Age. In 2008, Archaeologists excavating near the city have unearthed Iron Age sites that may date from 500\u00a0BCE. The region comprising modern Hyderabad and its surroundings was ruled by the Chalukya dynasty from 624\u00a0CE to 1075\u00a0CE. Following the dissolution of the Chalukya empire into four parts in the 11th century, Golconda\u2014now part of Hyderabad\u2014came under the control of the Kakatiya dynasty from 1158, whose seat of power was at Warangal\u2014 northeast of modern Hyderabad. The Kakatiya ruler Ganapatideva (1199\u20131262) built a hilltop outpost\u2014later known as Golconda Fort\u2014to defend their western region.\nThe Kakatiya dynasty was reduced to a vassal of the Khalji dynasty in 1310 after its defeat by Sultan Alauddin Khalji of the Delhi Sultanate. This lasted until 1321 when the Kakatiya dynasty was annexed by Malik Kafur, Khalji's general. During this period, Khalji took the \"Koh-i-Noor\" diamond, which is said to have been mined from the Kollur Mines of Golconda, to Delhi. Muhammad bin Tughluq succeeded to the Delhi sultanate in 1325, bringing Warangal under the rule of the Tughlaq dynasty; Malik Maqbul Tilangani was appointed its governor. In 1336 the regional chieftains Musunuri Nayakas\u2014who revolted against the Delhi sultanate in 1333\u2014took Warangal under their direct control and declared it as their capital. In 1347 when Ala-ud-Din Bahman Shah, a governor under bin Tughluq, rebelled against Delhi and established the Bahmani Sultanate in the Deccan Plateau, with Gulbarga\u2014 west of Hyderabad\u2014as its capital, both the neighbouring rulers Musunuri Nayakas of Warangal and Bahmani Sultans of Gulbarga engaged in many wars until 1364\u201365 when a peace treaty was signed and the Musunuri Nayakas ceded Golconda Fort to the Bahmani Sultan. The Bahmani Sultans ruled the region until 1518 and were the first independent Muslim rulers of the Deccan.\nIn 1496 Sultan Quli was appointed as a Bahmani governor of Telangana. He rebuilt, expanded and fortified the old mud fort of Golconda and named the city \"Muhammad Nagar\". In 1518, he revolted against the Bahmani Sultanate and established the Qutb Shahi dynasty. The fifth Qutb Shahi sultan, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, established Hyderabad on the banks of the Musi River in 1591, to avoid water shortages experienced at Golconda. During his rule, he had the Charminar and Mecca Masjid built in the city. On 21 September 1687, the Golconda Sultanate came under the rule of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb after a year-long siege of the Golconda Fort. The annexed city \"Hyderabad\" was renamed \"Darul Jihad\" (House of War), whereas the main territories of the Golconda Sultanate were incorporated into the Mughal empire as the province Hyderabad Subah. Mughal rule in Hyderabad was administered by three main governors: Jan Sipar Khan (1688\u20131700), his son Rustam Dil Khan (1700\u201313) and Mubariz Khan (1713\u201324).\nModern history.\nIn 1713, Mughal emperor Farrukhsiyar appointed Mubariz Khan as Governor of Hyderabad. During his tenure, he fortified the city and controlled the internal and neighbouring threats. In 1714 Farrukhsiyar appointed Asaf Jah I as Viceroy of the Deccan\u2014(administrator of six Mughal governorates) with the title \"Nizam-ul-Mulk\" (Administrator of the Realm). In 1721, he was appointed as Prime Minister of the Mughal Empire. His differences with the court nobles led him to resign from all the imperial responsibilities in 1723 and leave for Deccan. Under the influence of Asaf Jah I's opponents, Mughal Emperor Muhammad Shah issued a decree to Mubariz Khan, to stop Asaf Jah I which resulted in the Battle of Shakar Kheda. In 1724, Asaf Jah I defeated Mubariz Khan to establish autonomy over the \"Deccan\", named the region \"Hyderabad Deccan\", and started what came to be known as the Asaf Jahi dynasty. Subsequent rulers retained the title \"Nizam ul-Mulk\" and were referred to as Asaf Jahi Nizams, or Nizams of Hyderabad. The death of Asaf Jah I in 1748 resulted in a period of political unrest as his sons and grandson\u2014Nasir Jung (1748\u20131750), Muzaffar Jang (1750\u20131751) and Salabat Jung (1751\u20131762)\u2014contended for the throne backed by opportunistic neighbouring states and colonial foreign forces. The accession of Asaf Jah II, who reigned from 1762 to 1803, ended the instability. In 1768 he signed the Treaty of Masulipatam\u2014by which the East India Company in return for a fixed annual rent, got the right to control and collect the taxes at Coromandel Coast.\nIn 1769 Hyderabad city became the formal capital of the Asaf Jahi Nizams. In response to regular threats from Hyder Ali (Dalwai of Mysore), Baji Rao I (Peshwa of the Maratha Empire), and Basalath Jung (Asaf Jah II's elder brother, who was supported by French General the Marquis de Bussy-Castelnau), the Nizam signed a subsidiary alliance with the East India Company in 1798, allowing the British Indian Army to be stationed at Bolarum (modern Secunderabad) to protect the state's capital, for which the Nizams paid an annual maintenance to the British.\nUntil 1874 there were no modern industries in Hyderabad. With the introduction of railways in the 1880s, four factories were built to the south and east of Hussain Sagar lake, and during the early 20th century, Hyderabad was transformed into a modern city with the establishment of transport services, underground drainage, running water, electricity, telecommunications, universities, industries, and Begumpet Airport. The Nizams ruled the princely state of Hyderabad during the British Raj.\nPost-Independence.\nAfter India gained independence, the Nizam declared his intention to remain independent rather than become part of the Indian Union or newly formed Dominion of Pakistan. The Hyderabad State Congress, with the support of the Indian National Congress and the Communist Party of India, began agitating against Nizam VII in 1948. On 17 September that year, the Indian Army took control of Hyderabad State after an invasion codenamed Operation Polo. With the defeat of his forces, Nizam VII capitulated to the Indian Union by signing an Instrument of Accession, which made him the \"Rajpramukh\" (Princely Governor) of the state until it was abolished on 31 October 1956.\nBetween 1946 and 1951, the Communist Party of India fomented the Telangana uprising against the feudal lords of the Telangana region. The Constitution of India, which became effective on 26 January 1950, made Hyderabad State one of the part B states of India, with Hyderabad city continuing to be the capital. In his 1955 report \"Thoughts on Linguistic States\", B. R. Ambedkar, then chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian Constitution, proposed designating the city of Hyderabad as the second capital of India because of its amenities and strategic central location.\nOn 1 November 1956 the states of India were reorganised by language. Hyderabad state was split into three parts, which were merged with neighbouring states to form Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. The nine Telugu- and Urdu-speaking districts of Hyderabad State in the Telangana region were merged with the Telugu-speaking Andhra State to create Andhra Pradesh, with Hyderabad as its capital. Several protests, known collectively as the Telangana movement, attempted to invalidate the merger and demanded the creation of a new Telangana state. Major actions took place in 1969 and 1972, and a third began in 2010. On 30 July 2013 the government of India declared that part of Andhra Pradesh would be split off to form a new Telangana state and that Hyderabad city would be the capital city and part of Telangana, while the city would also remain the capital of Andhra Pradesh for no more than ten years. On 3 October 2013 the Union Cabinet approved the proposal, and in February 2014 both houses of Parliament passed the Telangana Bill. With the final assent of the President of India, Telangana state was formed on 2 June 2014.\nGeography.\nHyderabad is south of Delhi, southeast of Mumbai, and north of Bangalore by road. It is situated in the southern part of Telangana in southeastern India, along the banks of the Musi River, a tributary of Krishna River located on the Deccan Plateau in the northern part of South India. Greater Hyderabad covers , making it one of the largest metropolitan areas in India. With an average altitude of , Hyderabad lies on predominantly sloping terrain of grey and pink granite, dotted with small hills, the highest being Banjara Hills at . The city has numerous lakes sometime referred to as \"sagar\", meaning \"sea\". Examples include artificial lakes created by dams on the Musi, such as Hussain Sagar (built-in 1562 near the city centre), Osman Sagar and Himayat Sagar. As of 1996[ [update]], the city had 140 lakes and 834 water tanks (ponds).\nClimate.\nHyderabad has a tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw\") bordering on a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BSh\"). The annual mean temperature is ; monthly mean temperatures are . Summers (March\u2013June) are hot and dry, with average highs in the mid-to-high 30s Celsius; maximum temperatures often exceed between April and June. The coolest temperatures occur in December and January when the lowest temperature occasionally dips to . May is the hottest month when daily temperatures range from ; December, the coldest, has temperatures varying from .\nHeavy rain from the south-west summer monsoon falls between June and October, supplying Hyderabad with most of its mean annual rainfall. Since records began in November 1891, the heaviest rainfall recorded in a 24-hour period was on 24 August 2000. The highest temperature ever recorded was on 2 June 1966, and the lowest was on 8 January 1946. The city receives 2,731\u00a0hours of sunshine per year; maximum daily sunlight exposure occurs in February.\nHyderabad has been ranked 21st best \"National Clean Air City\" (under Category 1 &gt;10L Population cities) in India according to 'Swachh Vayu Survekshan 2024 Results'\nConservation.\nHyderabad's lakes and the sloping terrain of its low-lying hills provide habitat for an assortment of flora and fauna. As of 2016[ [update]], the tree cover is 1.7% of the total city area, a decrease from 2.7% in 1996. The forest region in and around the city encompasses areas of ecological and biological importance, which are preserved in the form of national parks, zoos, mini-zoos and a wildlife sanctuary. Nehru Zoological Park, the city's largest zoo, is the first in India to have a lion and tiger safari park. Hyderabad has three national parks (Mrugavani National Park, Mahavir Harina Vanasthali National Park and Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park), and the Manjira Wildlife Sanctuary is about from the city.\nThe other environmental reserves of Hyderabad are Kotla Vijayabhaskara Reddy Botanical Gardens, Ameenpur Lake, Shamirpet Lake, Hussain Sagar, Fox Sagar Lake, Mir Alam Tank and Patancheru Lake, which is home to regional birds and attracts seasonal migratory birds from different parts of the world. Organisations engaged in environmental and wildlife preservation include the Telangana Forest Department, Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), the Animal Welfare Board of India, the Blue Cross of Hyderabad and the University of Hyderabad.\nAdministration.\nCommon capital status.\nAccording to the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 part 2 Section 5: \"(1) On and from the appointed day, Hyderabad in the existing State of Andhra Pradesh, shall be the common capital of the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh for such period not exceeding ten years. (2) After the expiry of the period referred to in subsection (1), Hyderabad shall be the capital of the State of Telangana and there shall be a new capital for the State of Andhra Pradesh.\"\nThe same sections also define that the common capital includes the existing area designated as the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation under the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955. As stipulated in sections 3 and 18(1) of the Reorganisation Act, city MLAs are members of the Telangana state assembly.\nLocal government.\nThe Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) oversees the civic infrastructure of the city, there are six administrative zones of GHMC: South Zone\u2013(Charminar), East Zone\u2013(L. B. Nagar), West Zone\u2013(Serilingampally), North Zone\u2013(Kukatpally), Northeast Zone\u2013(Secunderabad) and Central Zone\u2013(Khairatabad); these zones consist of 30 \"circles\", which together encompass 150 municipal wards. Each ward is represented by a corporator, elected by popular vote, as of 2020[ [update]] the city has 7,400,000 voters of which 3,850,000 are male and 3,500,000 are female. The corporators elect the Mayor, who is the titular head of GHMC; executive powers rest with the Municipal Commissioner, appointed by the state government. The GHMC carries out the city's infrastructural work such as building and maintenance of roads and drains, town planning including construction regulation, maintenance of municipal markets and parks, solid waste management, the issuing of birth and death certificates, the issuing of trade licences, collection of property tax, and community welfare services such as mother and child healthcare, and pre-school and non-formal education. The GHMC was formed in April 2007 by merging the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad (MCH) with 12 municipalities of the Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy and Medak districts covering a total area of . The Secunderabad Cantonment Board is a civic administration agency overseeing an area of , where there are several military camps. The Osmania University campus is administered independently by the university authority. Appointed in February 2021, Gadwal Vijayalakshmi of Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) is serving as the mayor of GHMC.\nIn Hyderabad police jurisdiction is divided into three commissionerates: Hyderabad (established in 1847 AD, the oldest police commissionerate in India), Cyberabad, and Rachakonda, each headed by a commissioner of police, who are Indian Police Service (IPS) officers. The Hyderabad police is a division of the Telangana Police, under the state Home Ministry.\nThe jurisdictions of the city's administrative agencies are, in ascending order of size: the Hyderabad Police area, Hyderabad district, the GHMC area (\"Hyderabad city\"), and the area under the Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority (HMDA). The HMDA is an apolitical urban planning agency that covers the GHMC and its suburbs, extending to 54 \"mandals\" in five districts encircling the city. It coordinates the development activities of GHMC and suburban municipalities and manages the administration of bodies such as the Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (HMWSSB).\nHyderabad is the seat of the Government of Telangana, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the President of India's winter retreat Rashtrapati Nilayam, as well as the Telangana High Court and various local government agencies. The Lower City Civil Court and the Metropolitan Criminal Court are under the jurisdiction of the High Court. The GHMC area contains 24 State Legislative Assembly constituencies, which form five constituencies of the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Parliament of India).\nUtility services.\nThe HMWSSB (Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply &amp; Sewage Board) regulates rainwater harvesting, sewerage services, and water supply. In 2005, the HMWSSB started operating a water supply pipeline from Nagarjuna Sagar Dam to meet increasing demand. The Telangana Southern Power Distribution Company Limited (TSPDCL) manages electricity supply. As of 2014[ [update]], there were 15 fire stations in the city, operated by the Telangana State Disaster and Fire Response Department. The government-owned India Post has five head post offices and many sub-post offices in Hyderabad, which are complemented by private courier services.\nPollution control.\nHyderabad produces around 4,500\u00a0tonnes of solid waste daily, which is transported from collection units in Imlibun, Yousufguda and Lower Tank Bund to the dumpsite in Jawaharnagar. Disposal is managed by the Integrated Solid Waste Management project which was started by the GHMC in 2010. Rapid urbanisation and increased economic activity has led to increased industrial waste, air, noise and water pollution, which is regulated by the Telangana Pollution Control Board (TPCB). The contribution of different sources to air pollution in 2006 was: 20\u201350% from vehicles, 40\u201370% from a combination of vehicle discharge and road dust, 10\u201330% from industrial discharges and 3\u201310% from the burning of household rubbish. Deaths resulting from atmospheric particulate matter are estimated at 1,700\u20133,000 each year. The city's \"VIP areas\", the Assembly building, Secretariat, and Telangana chief minister's office, have particularly low air quality index ratings, suffering from high levels of PM2.5's. Ground water around Hyderabad, which has a hardness of up to 1000 ppm, around three times higher than is desirable, is the main source of drinking water but the increasing population and consequent increase in demand has led to a decline in not only ground water but also river and lake levels. This shortage is further exacerbated by inadequately treated effluent discharged from industrial treatment plants polluting the water sources of the city.\nHealthcare.\nThe Commissionerate of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for planning, implementation and monitoring of all facilities related to health and preventive services. As of 2010[ [update]]\u201311, the city had 50 government hospitals, 300 private and charity hospitals and 194 nursing homes providing around 12,000 hospital beds, fewer than half the required 25,000. For every 10,000 people in the city, there are 17.6 hospital beds, 9 specialist doctors, 14 nurses and 6 physicians. The city has about 4,000 individual clinics. Private clinics are preferred by many residents because of the distance to, poor quality of care at and long waiting times in government facilities, despite the high proportion of the city's residents being covered by government health insurance: 24% according to a National Family Health Survey in 2005. As of 2012[ [update]], many new private hospitals of various sizes were opened or being built. Hyderabad has outpatient and inpatient facilities that use Unani, homoeopathic and Ayurvedic treatments.\nIn the 2005 National Family Health Survey, it was reported that the city's total fertility rate is 1.8, which is below the replacement rate. Only 61% of children had been provided with all basic vaccines (BCG, measles and full courses of polio and DPT), fewer than in all other surveyed cities except Meerut. The infant mortality rate was 35 per 1,000 live births, and the mortality rate for children under five was 41 per 1,000 live births. The survey also reported that a third of women and a quarter of men are overweight or obese, 49% of children below 5 years are anaemic, and up to 20% of children are underweight, while more than 2% of women and 3% of men suffer from diabetes.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhen the GHMC was created in 2007, the area occupied by the municipality increased from to . Consequently, the population increased by 87%, from 3,637,483 as of 2001[ [update]] census to 6,809,970 as of 2011[ [update]] census, 24% of which are migrants from elsewhere in India, making Hyderabad the nation's fourth most populous city. As of 2011[ [update]], the population density is and the Hyderabad urban agglomeration had a population of 7,749,334 making it the sixth most populous urban agglomeration in the country. as of 2011[ [update]] census, there are 3,500,802 male and 3,309,168 female citizens\u2014a sex ratio of 945 females per 1000 males, higher than the national average of 926 per 1000. Among children aged 0\u20136 years, 373,794 are boys and 352,022 are girls\u2014a ratio of 942 per 1000. Literacy stands at 83% (male 86%; female 80%), higher than the national average of 74.04%. The socio-economic strata consist of 20% upper class, 50% middle class and 30% working class.\nEthnicity.\nReferred to as \"Hyderabadi\", the residents of Hyderabad are predominantly Telugu and Urdu speaking people, with minority Arab, Marathi, Marwari, and Pathan communities.\nHyderabadi Muslims are a unique community who owe much of their history, language, cuisine, and culture to Hyderabad, and the various dynasties who previously ruled. Hadhrami Arabs, African Arabs, Armenians, Abyssinians, Iranians, Pathans and Turkish people were present before 1948; these communities, of which the Hadhrami Arabs are the largest, declined after Hyderabad State became part of the Indian Union, as they lost the patronage of the Asaf Jahi Nizams.\nReligion.\nHindus are in the majority. Muslims form a very large minority and are present throughout the city and predominate in and around the Old City of Hyderabad. There are also Christian, Sikh, Jain, Buddhist and Parsi communities and iconic churches, mosques and temples. According to the 2011[ [update]] census, the religious make-up of Greater Hyderabad was: Hindus (64.9%), Muslims (30.1%), Christians (2.8%), Jains (0.3%), Sikhs (0.3%) and Buddhists (0.1%); 1.5% did not state any religion.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelugu and Urdu are both official languages of the city, and most Hyderabadis are bilingual. The Telugu dialect spoken in Hyderabad is called Telangana Mandalika, and the Urdu spoken is called Deccani. English is a \"Secondary official language\" is pervasive in business and administration, and it is an important medium of instruction in education and publications.\nSlums.\nAs of 2012, in the greater metropolitan area, 13% of the population live below the poverty line. According to a 2012 report submitted by GHMC to the World Bank, Hyderabad has 1,476 slums with a total population of 1.7\u00a0million, of whom 66% live in 985 slums in the \"core\" of the city (the part that formed Hyderabad before the April 2007 expansion) and the remaining 34% live in 491 suburban tenements. About 22% of the slum-dwelling households had migrated from different parts of India in the last decade of the 20th century, and 63% claimed to have lived in the slums for more than 10 years. Overall literacy in the slums is 60\u201380% and female literacy is 52\u201373%. A third of the slums have basic service connections, and the remainder depend on general public services provided by the government. There are 405 government schools, 267 government-aided schools, 175 private schools, and 528 community halls in the slum areas. According to a 2008 survey by the Centre for Good Governance, 87.6% of the slum-dwelling households are nuclear families, 18% are very poor, with an income up to per annum, 73% live below the poverty line (a standard poverty line recognised by the Andhra Pradesh Government is per annum), 27% of the chief wage earners (CWE) are casual labour and 38% of the CWE are illiterate. About 3.7% of the slum children aged 5\u201314 do not go to school and 3.2% work as child labour, of whom 64% are boys and 36% are girls. The largest employers of child labour are street shops and construction sites. Among the working children, 35% are engaged in hazardous jobs.\nCityscape.\nNeighbourhoods.\nThe historic city established by Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah on the southern side of the Musi River forms the heritage region of Hyderabad called the \"Purana Shahar\" (Old City), while the \"New City\" encompasses the urbanised area on the northern banks. The two are connected by many bridges across the river, the oldest of which is Purana Pul\u2014(\"old bridge\") built in 1578 AD. Hyderabad is twinned with neighbouring Secunderabad, to which it is connected by Hussain Sagar.\nMany historic and heritage sites lie in south central Hyderabad, such as the Charminar, Mecca Masjid, Salar Jung Museum, Nizam Museum, Telangana High Court, Falaknuma Palace, Chowmahalla Palace and the traditional retail corridor comprising the Pearl Market, Laad Bazaar and Madina Circle. North of the river are hospitals, colleges, major railway stations and business areas such as Begum Bazaar, Koti, Abids, Sultan Bazar and Moazzam Jahi Market, along with administrative and recreational establishments such as the Telangana Secretariat, the India Government Mint, the Telangana Legislature, the Public Gardens, Shahi Masjid, the Nizam Club, the Ravindra Bharathi, the State Museum, the Birla Temple and the Birla Planetarium.\nNorth of central Hyderabad lies Hussain Sagar, Tank Bund Road, Rani Gunj and the Secunderabad railway station. Most of the city's parks and recreational centres, such as Sanjeevaiah Park, Indira Park, Lumbini Park, NTR Gardens, the Buddha statue and Tankbund Park are located here. In the northwest part of the city there are upscale residential and commercial areas such as Banjara Hills, Jubilee Hills, Begumpet, Khairtabad, Tolichowki, Jagannath Temple and Miyapur. The northern end contains industrial areas such as Kukatpally, Sanathnagar, Moosapet, Balanagar, Patancheru and Chanda Nagar. The northeast end is dotted with residential areas such as Malkajgiri, Neredmet, A. S. Rao Nagar and Uppal. In the eastern part of the city lie many defence research centres and Ramoji Film City. The west and southwest regions of the city, dubbed \"Cyberabad\", have grown rapidly since the 1990s and are home to several information technology and bio-pharmaceutical companies. Numerous skyscrapers and high-rise buildings have been constructed in key economic corridors such as Gachibowli, the Financial District, HITEC City, and Kukatpally. The rapid vertical development in these localities has propelled Hyderabad to become the city with the second-highest number of skyscrapers in India. Several landmarks such as the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, Osman Sagar, Himayath Sagar and Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park are also located in the west and southwest regions of the city.\nLandmarks.\nHeritage buildings constructed during the Qutb Shahi and Nizam eras showcase Indo-Islamic architecture influenced by Medieval, Mughal and European styles. After the 1908 flooding of the Musi River, the city was expanded and civic monuments constructed, particularly during the rule of Mir Osman Ali Khan (the VIIth Nizam), whose patronage of architecture led to him being referred to as the maker of modern Hyderabad. In 2012, the government of India declared Hyderabad the first \"Best heritage city of India\".\nQutb Shahi architecture of the 16th and early 17th centuries followed classical Persian architecture featuring domes and colossal arches. The oldest surviving Qutb Shahi structure in Hyderabad is the ruins of the Golconda Fort built in the 16th century. Most of the historical bazaars that still exist were constructed on the street north of Charminar towards the fort. The Charminar has become an icon of the city; located in the centre of old Hyderabad, it is a square structure with sides long and four grand arches each facing a road. At each corner stands a -high minaret. The Charminar, Golconda Fort and the Qutb Shahi tombs are considered to be monuments of national importance in India; in 2010 the Indian government proposed that the sites be listed for UNESCO World Heritage status.\nAmong the oldest surviving examples of Nizam architecture in Hyderabad is the Chowmahalla Palace, which was the seat of royal power. It showcases a diverse array of architectural styles, from the Baroque Harem to its Neoclassical royal court. The other palaces include Falaknuma Palace (inspired by the style of Andrea Palladio), Purani Haveli, King Kothi Palace and Bella Vista Palace all of which were built at the peak of Nizam rule in the 19th century. During Mir Osman Ali Khan's rule, European styles, along with Indo-Islamic, became prominent. These styles are reflected in the Indo-Saracenic style of architecture seen in many civic monuments such as the Hyderabad High Court, Osmania Hospital, City College and the Kacheguda railway station, all designed by Vincent Esch. Other landmark structures of the city constructed during his regin are the State Central Library, the Telangana Legislature, the State Archaeology Museum, Jubilee Hall, and Hyderabad railway station. Other landmarks of note are Paigah Palace, Asman Garh Palace, Basheer Bagh Palace, Errum Manzil and the Spanish Mosque, all constructed by the Paigah family.\nEconomy.\nRecent estimates of the economy of Hyderabad's metropolitan area have ranged from US$40-US$74\u00a0billion (PPP GDP), and have ranked it either fifth- or sixth- most productive metro area of India. Hyderabad is the largest contributor to the gross domestic product (GDP), tax and other revenues, of Telangana, and the sixth largest deposit centre and fourth largest credit centre nationwide, as ranked by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in June 2012. Its per capita annual income in 2011 was . As of 2006[ [update]], the largest employers in the city were the state government (113,098 employees) and central government (85,155). According to a 2005 survey, 77% of males and 19% of females in the city were employed. The service industry remains dominant in the city, and 90% of the employed workforce is engaged in this sector.\nHyderabad's role in the pearl trade has given it the name \"City of Pearls\" and up until the 18th century, the city was the only global trading centre for diamonds known as Golconda diamonds. Industrialisation began under the Nizams in the late 19th century, helped by railway expansion that connected the city with major ports. From the 1950s to the 1970s, Indian enterprises, such as Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC), National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC), Bharat Electronics (BEL), Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL), Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), State Bank of Hyderabad (SBH) and Andhra Bank (AB) were established in the city. The city is home to Hyderabad Securities formerly known as Hyderabad Stock Exchange (HSE), and houses the regional office of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). In 2013, the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) facility in Hyderabad was forecast to provide operations and transactions services to BSE-Mumbai by the end of 2014. The growth of the financial services sector has helped Hyderabad evolve from a traditional manufacturing city to a cosmopolitan industrial service centre. Since the 1990s, the growth of information technology (IT), IT-enabled services (ITES), insurance and financial institutions has expanded the service sector, and these primary economic activities have boosted the ancillary sectors of trade and commerce, transport, storage, communication, real estate and retail. As of 2021[ [update]], the IT exports from Hyderabad were \u20b9 1,45,522\u00a0crore (US$19.66\u00a0billion), the city houses 1500 IT and TES companies that provide 628,615 jobs.\nHyderabad's commercial markets are divided into four sectors: central business districts, sub-central business centres, neighbourhood business centres and local business centres. Many traditional and historic bazaars are located throughout the city, Laad Bazaar being the prominent among all is popular for selling a variety of traditional and cultural antique wares, along with gems and pearls.\nThe establishment of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), a public sector undertaking, in 1961 was followed over the decades by many national and global companies opening manufacturing and research facilities in the city. As of 2010[ [update]], the city manufactured one third of India's bulk drugs and 16% of biotechnology products, contributing to its reputation as \"India's pharmaceutical capital\" and the \"Genome Valley of India\". Hyderabad is a global centre of information technology, for which it is known as \"Cyberabad\" (Cyber City). As of 2013[ [update]], it contributed 15% of India's and 98% of Andhra Pradesh's exports in IT and ITES sectors and 22% of NASSCOM's total membership is from the city. The development of HITEC City, a township with extensive technological infrastructure, prompted multinational companies to establish facilities in Hyderabad. The city is home to more than 1300 IT and ITES firms that provide employment for 407,000 individuals; the global conglomerates include Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, Google, IBM, Yahoo!, Oracle Corporation, Dell, Facebook, CISCO, and major Indian firms including Tech Mahindra, Infosys, Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), Polaris, Cyient and Wipro. In 2009 the World Bank Group ranked the city as the second best Indian city for doing business. The city and its suburbs contain the highest number of special economic zones of any Indian city.\nThe Automotive industry in Hyderabad is also emerging and making it an automobile hub. Automobile companies including as Hyundai, Hyderabad Allwyn, Praga Tools, HMT Bearings, Ordnance Factory Medak, Deccan Auto and Mahindra &amp; Mahindra have units in the Hyderabad economic zone. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Maruti Suzuki and Triton Energy will invest in Hyderabad.\nLike the rest of India, Hyderabad has a large informal economy that employs 30% of the labour force. According to a survey published in 2007, it had 40\u201350,000 street vendors, and their numbers were increasing. Among the street vendors, 84% are male and 16% female, and four fifths are \"stationary vendors\" operating from a fixed pitch, often with their own stall. Most are financed through personal savings; only 8% borrow from moneylenders. Vendor earnings vary from to per day. Other unorganised economic sectors include dairy, poultry farming, brick manufacturing, casual labour and domestic help. Those involved in the informal economy constitute a major portion of the urban poor.\nIn 2024, the World Economic Forum established a Centre for Fourth Industrial Revolution (C4IR), in the city. Which it describes as a hub to leverage the latest technology in advancing the life sciences and health sectors.\nCulture.\nHyderabad emerged as the foremost centre of culture in India with the decline of the Mughal Empire. After the fall of Delhi in 1857, the migration of performing artists to the city particularly from the north and west of the Indian subcontinent, under the patronage of the Nizam, enriched the cultural milieu. This migration resulted in a mingling of North and South Indian languages, cultures and religions, which has since led to a co-existence of Hindu and Muslim traditions, for which the city has become noted. A further consequence of this north\u2013south mix is that both Telugu and Urdu are official languages of Telangana. The mixing of religions has resulted in many festivals being celebrated in Hyderabad such as Ganesh Chaturthi, Diwali and Bonalu of Hindu tradition and Eid ul-Fitr and Eid al-Adha by Muslims.\nTraditional Hyderabadi garb reveals a mix of Muslim and Hindu influences with men wearing \"sherwani\" and \"kurta\u2013paijama\" and women wearing \"khara dupatta\" and \"salwar kameez\". Most Muslim women wear \"burqa\" and \"hijab\" outdoors. In addition to the traditional Hindu and Muslim garments, increasing exposure to western cultures has led to a rise in the wearing of western style clothing among youths.\nLiterature.\nIn the past, Qutb Shahi rulers and Asaf Jahi Nizams attracted artists, architects, and men of letters from different parts of the world through patronage. The resulting ethnic mix popularised cultural events such as \"mushairas\" (poetic symposia), \"Qawwali\" (devotional songs) and \"Dholak ke Geet\" (traditional folk songs). The Qutb Shahi dynasty particularly encouraged the growth of Deccani literature leading to works such as the \"Deccani Masnavi\" and \"Diwan poetry\", which are among the earliest available manuscripts in Urdu. \"Lazzat Un Nisa\", a book compiled in the 15th century at Qutb Shahi courts, contains erotic paintings with diagrams for secret medicines and stimulants in the eastern form of ancient sexual arts. The reign of the Asaf Jahi Nizams saw many literary reforms and the introduction of Urdu as a language of court, administration and education. In 1824, a collection of Urdu \"Ghazal\" poetry, named \"Gulzar-e-Mahlaqa\", authored by Mah Laqa Bai\u2014the first female Urdu poet to produce a Diwan\u2014was published in Hyderabad. Hyderabad has continued with these traditions in its annual Hyderabad Literary Festival, held since 2010, showcasing the city's literary and cultural creativity. Organisations engaged in the advancement of literature include the Sahitya Akademi, the Urdu Academy, the Telugu Academy, the National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language, the Comparative Literature Association of India, and the Andhra Saraswata Parishad. Literary development is further aided by state institutions such as the State Central Library, the largest public library in the state which was established in 1891, and other major libraries including the Sri Krishna Devaraya Andhra Bhasha Nilayam, the British Library and the Sundarayya Vignana Kendram.\nMusic and films.\nSouth Indian music and dances such as the Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam styles are popular in the Deccan region. As a result of their cultural policies, North Indian music and dance gained popularity during the rule of the Mughals and Nizams, and it was also during their reign that it became a tradition among the nobility to associate themselves with tawaif (courtesans). These courtesans were revered as the epitome of etiquette and culture and were appointed to teach singing, poetry, and classical dance to many children of the aristocracy. This gave rise to certain styles of court music, dance and poetry. Besides western and Indian popular music genres such as filmi music, the residents of Hyderabad play city-based \"marfa music\", \"Dholak ke Geet\" (household songs based on local folklore), and qawwali, especially at weddings, festivals and other celebratory events. The state government organises the Golconda Music and Dance Festival, the Taramati Music Festival and the Premavathi Dance Festival to further encourage the development of music.\nAlthough the city is not particularly noted for theatre and drama, the state government promotes theatre with multiple programmes and festivals in such venues as the Ravindra Bharathi, Shilpakala Vedika, Lalithakala Thoranam and Lamakaan. Although not a purely music-oriented event, Numaish, a popular annual exhibition of local and national consumer products, does feature some musical performances.\nThe city is home to the Telugu film industry, popularly known as Tollywood\u2014as of 2021[ [update]] it is the highest-grossing Indian film industry. In the 1970s, Deccani language realist films by globally acclaimed Shyam Benegal started a movement of coming of age art films in India, which came to be known as parallel cinema. The Deccani film industry (\"Dollywood\") produces films in the local Hyderabadi dialect, which have gained regional popularity since 2005. The city has hosted international film festivals such as the International Children's Film Festival and the Hyderabad International Film Festival. In 2005, \"Guinness World Records\" declared Ramoji Film City to be the world's largest film studio.\nArt and handicrafts.\nThe region is well known for its Golconda and Hyderabad painting styles which are branches of Deccan painting. Developed during the 16th century, the Golconda style is a native style blending foreign techniques and bears some similarity to the Vijayanagara paintings of neighbouring Mysore. A significant use of luminous gold and white colours is generally found in the Golconda style. The Hyderabad style originated in the 17th century under the Nizams. Highly influenced by Mughal painting, this style makes use of bright colours and mostly depicts regional landscape, culture, costumes, and jewellery.\nAlthough not a centre for handicrafts itself, the patronage of the arts by the Mughals and Nizams attracted artisans from the region to Hyderabad. Such crafts include: Wootz steel, Filigree work, Bidriware, a metalwork handicraft from neighbouring Karnataka, which was popularised during the 18th century and has since been granted a Geographical Indication (GI) tag under the auspices of the WTO act; and Zari and Zardozi, embroidery works on textile that involve making elaborate designs using gold, silver and other metal threads. Chintz\u2014a glazed calico textiles was originated in Golconda in 16th century. and another example of a handicraft drawn to Hyderabad is Kalamkari, a hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile that comes from cities in Andhra Pradesh. This craft is distinguished in having both a Hindu style, known as Srikalahasti and entirely done by hand, and an Islamic style, known as Machilipatnam which uses both hand and block techniques. Examples of Hyderabad's arts and crafts are housed in various museums including the Salar Jung Museum (housing \"one of the largest one-man-collections in the world\"), the Telangana State Archaeology Museum, the Nizam Museum, the City Museum and the Birla Science Museum.\nCuisine.\nHyderabadi cuisine comprises a broad repertoire of rice, wheat and meat dishes and the skilled use of various spices. Hyderabad is listed by UNESCO as a creative city of gastronomy. Hyderabadi \"biryani\" and Hyderabadi \"haleem\", with their blend of Mughlai and Arab cuisines, carry the national Geographical Indications tag. Hyderabadi cuisine is influenced to some extent by French, but more by Arabic, Turkish, Iranian and native Telugu and Marathwada cuisines. Popular native dishes include \"nihari\", \"chakna\", \"baghara baingan\" and the desserts \"qubani ka meetha\", \"double ka meetha\" and \"kaddu ki kheer\" (a sweet porridge made with sweet gourd).\nMedia.\nOne of Hyderabad's earliest newspapers, \"The Deccan Times\", was established in the 1780s. Major Telugu dailies published in Hyderabad are \"Eenadu\", \"Sakshi\" and \"Namasthe Telangana\", while major English papers are \"The Times of India\", \"The Hindu\" and \"Deccan Chronicle\". The major Urdu papers include \"The Siasat Daily\", \"The Munsif Daily\" and \"Etemaad\". The Secunderabad Cantonment Board established the first radio station in Hyderabad State around 1919. Deccan Radio was the first radio public broadcast station in the city starting on 3 February 1935, with FM broadcasting beginning in 2000. The available channels in Hyderabad include All India Radio, Radio Mirchi, Radio City, Red FM, Big FM and Fever FM.\nTelevision broadcasting in Hyderabad began in 1974 with the launch of \"Doordarshan\", the government of India's public service broadcaster, which transmits two free-to-air terrestrial television channels and one satellite channel. Private satellite channels started in July 1992 with the launch of Star TV. Satellite TV channels are accessible via cable subscription, direct-broadcast satellite services or internet-based television. Hyderabad's first dial-up internet access became available in the early 1990s and was limited to software development companies. The first public internet access service began in 1995, with the first private sector internet service provider (ISP) starting operations in 1998. In 2015, high-speed public WiFi was introduced in parts of the city.\nEducation.\nPublic and private schools in Hyderabad are governed by the Board of Secondary Education, Telangana or Central Board of Secondary Education, depending on the affiliation and follow a \"10+2+3\" plan. About two-thirds of pupils attend privately run institutions. Languages of instruction include English, Hindi, Telugu and Urdu. Depending on the institution, students are required to sit the Secondary School Certificate or the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education. After completing secondary education, students enrol in schools or junior colleges with higher secondary facilities. Admission to professional graduation colleges in Hyderabad, many of which are affiliated with either Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Hyderabad (JNTUH) or Osmania University (OU), is through the Engineering Agricultural and Medical Common Entrance Test (EAM-CET).\nThere are 13 universities in Hyderabad: six private universities, two deemed universities, six state universities, and three central universities. The central universities are the University of Hyderabad (Hyderabad Central University, HCU), Maulana Azad National Urdu University and the English and Foreign Languages University. Osmania University, established in 1918, was the first university in Hyderabad and as of 2012[ [update]] is India's second most popular institution for international students. The Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Open University, established in 1982, is the first distance-learning open university in India.\nHyderabad is home to a number of centres specialising in particular fields such as biomedical sciences, biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, such as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD) and National Institute of Nutrition (NIN). Hyderabad has five major medical schools\u2014Osmania Medical College, Gandhi Medical College, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Deccan College of Medical Sciences and Shadan Institute of Medical Sciences\u2014and many affiliated teaching hospitals. An All India Institute of Medical Sciences has been sanctioned in the outskirts of Hyderabad. The Government Nizamia Tibbi College is a college of Unani medicine. Hyderabad is also the headquarters of the Indian Heart Association, a non-profit foundation for cardiovascular education.\nNotable central institutions in Hyderabad include the NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad (NLU), Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), National Geophysical Research Institute, National Institute of Rural Development, Indian Air Force Academy, National Industrial Security Academy, Central Institute of Tool Design, Institute of Public Enterprise, Administrative Staff College of India and the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy. Technical and research institutions include the International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad (IIITH), Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani \u2013 Hyderabad (BITS Pilani), Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Hyderabad (TIFR-H) and Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad (IIT-H) as well as agricultural engineering institutes such as the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Acharya N. G. Ranga Agricultural University.Hyderabad also has schools of fashion design including NIFT Hyderabad, management schools including the Indian School of Business, ICFAI Foundation for Higher Education, and the National Academy of Agricultural Research Management (NAARM) offering undergraduate and postgraduate courses.\nSports.\nAt the professional level, the city has hosted national and international sports events such as the 2002 National Games of India, the 2003 Afro-Asian Games, the 2004 AP Tourism Hyderabad Open women's tennis tournament, the 2007 Military World Games, the 2009 World Badminton Championships and the 2009 IBSF World Snooker Championship. The city hosts several venues suitable for professional competition such as the Swarnandhra Pradesh Sports Complex for field hockey, the G. M. C. Balayogi Stadium in Gachibowli for athletics and football, and for cricket, the Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium and Rajiv Gandhi International Cricket Stadium, home ground of the Hyderabad Cricket Association. Hyderabad has hosted many international cricket matches, including matches in the 1987 and the 1996 ICC Cricket World Cups. The Hyderabad cricket team competes in the first-class cricket tournament Ranji Trophy, List A Vijay Hazare Trophy and Twenty20 Syed Mushtaq Ali Trophy. Hyderabad is home to the Indian Premier League (IPL) franchise Sunrisers Hyderabad, champion of 2016 Indian Premier League. Previous franchise Deccan Chargers was the champion of 2009 Indian Premier League. The former professional football club of the city Hyderabad FC competed in Indian Super League (ISL) and were the champions of 2021\u201322 Indian Super League.\nDuring British rule, Secunderabad became a well-known sporting centre and many race courses, parade grounds and polo fields were built. Many elite clubs formed by the Nizams and the British such as the Secunderabad Club, the Nizam Club and the Hyderabad Race Club, which is known for its horse racing especially the annual Deccan derby, still exist. In more recent times, motorsports has become popular with the Andhra Pradesh Motor Sports Club organising popular events such as the Deccan &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 Mile Drag, TSD Rallies and 4x4 off-road rallying. The 2023 Hyderabad ePrix, at the Hyderabad Street Circuit, was the first FIA Formula E World Championship race in India.\nTransport.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], the most commonly used forms of medium-distance transport in Hyderabad include government-owned services such as light railways and buses, as well as privately operated taxis and auto rickshaws. These altogether serve 3.5\u00a0million passengers daily. Bus services operate from the Mahatma Gandhi Bus Station in the city centre with a fleet of 3800 buses serving 3.3\u00a0million passengers.\nHyderabad Metro, a light-rail rapid transit system, was inaugurated in November 2017. As of 2020[ [update]] it is a 3-track network spread upon with 57 stations and is the third-largest metro rail network in India after Delhi Metro and Namma Metro. Hyderabad's Multi-Modal Transport System (MMTS), is a three-line suburban rail service with 121 services carrying 180,000 passengers daily. Complementing these government services are minibus routes operated by Setwin (Society for Employment Promotion &amp; Training in Twin Cities). Intercity rail services operate from Hyderabad; the main, and largest, station is Secunderabad railway station, which serves as Indian Railways' South Central Railway zone headquarters and a hub for both buses and MMTS light rail services connecting Secunderabad and Hyderabad. Other major railway stations in Hyderabad are Hyderabad Deccan, Kacheguda, Begumpet, Malkajgiri and Lingampalli.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], there are over 5.3\u00a0million vehicles operating in the city, of which 4.3\u00a0million are two-wheelers and 1.04\u00a0million four-wheelers. The large number of vehicles coupled with relatively low road coverage\u2014roads occupy only 9.5% of the total city area\u2014has led to widespread traffic congestion especially since 80% of passengers and 60% of freight are transported by road. The Inner Ring Road, the Outer Ring Road, the Hyderabad Elevated Expressway, the longest flyover in India, and various interchanges, overpasses and underpasses were built to ease congestion. Maximum speed limits within the city are for two-wheelers and cars, for auto rickshaws and for light commercial vehicles and buses.\nHyderabad sits at the junction of three National Highways linking it to six other states: NH-44 runs from Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, in the north to Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu, in the south; NH-65, runs east-west between Machilipatnam, Andhra Pradesh connects Hyderabad and Suryapet with Pune, Maharashtra; NH-163 links Hyderabad and Bhopalpatnam, Chhattisgarh; NH-765 links Hyderabad to Srisailam, Andhra Pradesh. Five state highways, SH-1 links Hyderabad, to Ramagundam, SH-2, SH-4, and SH-6, either start from, or pass through, Hyderabad.\nAir traffic was previously handled via Begumpet Airport established in 1930, but this was replaced by Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) () in 2008, capable of handling 25\u00a0million passengers and 150,000\u00a0metric-tonnes of cargo per annum. In 2020, Airports Council International, an autonomous body representing the world's airports, judged RGIA the Best Airport in Environment and Ambience and the Best Airport by Size and Region in the 15-25 million passenger category.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37535", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37535", "title": "Metropolitan Museum of Art", "text": "Art museum in New York City\n}}trains at 86th Street\nThe Metropolitan Museum of Art, colloquially referred to as the Met, is an encyclopedic art museum in New York City. By floor area, it is the fourth-largest museum in the world and the largest art museum in the Americas. With 5.727,258 million visitors in 2024, it is the most-visited museum in the United States and the fourth-most visited art museum in the world.\nIn 2000, its permanent collection had over two million works; it currently lists a total of 1.5 million works. The collection is divided into 17 curatorial departments. The main building at 1000 Fifth Avenue, along the Museum Mile on the eastern edge of Central Park on Manhattan's Upper East Side, is by area one of the world's largest art museums. The first portion of the approximately building was built in 1880. A much smaller second location, The\u00a0Cloisters at Fort Tryon Park in Upper Manhattan, contains an extensive collection of art, architecture, and artifacts from medieval Europe.\nThe Metropolitan Museum of Art was founded in 1870, the museum was established by a group of Americans, including philanthropists, artists, and businessmen, with the goal of creating a national institution that would inspire and educate the public. The museum's permanent collection consists of works of art ranging from the ancient Near East and ancient Egypt, through classical antiquity to the contemporary world. It includes paintings, sculptures, and graphic works from many European Old Masters, as well as an extensive collection of American, modern, and contemporary art. The Met also maintains extensive holdings of African, Asian, Oceanian, Byzantine, and Islamic art. The museum is home to encyclopedic collections of musical instruments, costumes, and decorative arts and textiles, as well as antique weapons and armor from around the world. Several notable interiors, ranging from 1st-century Rome through modern American design, are installed in its galleries.\nCollections.\nThe Met's permanent collection is curated by seventeen separate departments, each with a specialized staff of curators and scholars, as well as six dedicated conservation departments and a Department of Scientific Research. The permanent collection includes works of art from classical antiquity and ancient Egypt; paintings and sculptures from nearly all the European masters; and an extensive collection of American and modern art. The Met maintains extensive holdings of African, Asian, Oceanian, Byzantine, and Islamic art. The museum is also home to encyclopedic collections of musical instruments, costumes and accessories, and antique weapons and armor from around the world. A great number of period rooms, ranging from first-century Rome through modern American design, are permanently installed in the Met's galleries. Since the late 1800s, the Museum has been collecting diverse materials from all over the world. Its outreach to \"exhibition designers, architects, graphic designers, lighting designers, and production designers\" helps the museum to maintain its collection in good condition.\nGeographically designated collections.\nAncient Near Eastern art.\nBeginning in the late 19th century, the Met started acquiring ancient art and artifacts from the Near East. From a few cuneiform tablets and seals, the museum's collection of Near Eastern art has grown to more than 7,000 pieces. Representing a history of the region beginning in the Neolithic Period and encompassing the fall of the Sasanian Empire and the end of Late Antiquity, the collection includes works from the Sumerian, Hittite, Sasanian, Assyrian, Babylonian, and Elamite cultures (among others), as well as an extensive collection of unique Bronze Age objects. The highlights of the collection include the Sumerian Stele of Ushumgal, the Elamite silver Kneeling Bull with Vessel, the Pratt Ivories, and a set of monumental stone \"lamassu\", or guardian figures, from the Northwest Palace of the Assyrian king Ashurnasirpal II.\nArts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas.\nThough the Met first acquired a group of Peruvian antiquities in 1882, in addition to Mesoamerican antiquities, the museum did not begin a concerted effort to collect works from Africa, Oceania, and the Americas until 1969, when American businessman, philanthropist and then NY Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller donated his more than 3,000-piece collection to the museum. Before Rockefeller's collection was gifted to the Met, Rockefeller founded The Museum of Primitive Art in New York City with the intention of displaying these works, after the Met had previously shown little interest in his art collection. In 1968, the Met had agreed to a temporary exhibition of Rockefeller's work. However, the Met then requested to include the arts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas in their permanent collection. The arts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas opened to the public in 1982, under the title, \"The Michael C. Rockefeller Wing\". This wing is named after Nelson Rockefeller's son, Michael Rockefeller, who died while collecting works in New Guinea.\nToday, the Met's collection contains more than 11,000 pieces from sub-Saharan Africa, the Pacific Islands, and the Americas and is housed in the Rockefeller Wing on the south end of the museum. The Wing exhibits Non-Western works of art created from \u00a0BCE \u2013 present, including a wide range of particular cultural traditions. Significantly, this work was regarded as art, judged on aesthetic terms, in a Western art museum. Before then, objects from Africa, Oceania, and the Americas were often considered to be the work of \"primitives\" or ethnographic work, rather than art.\nThe Wing exhibits the arts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas in an exhibition separated by geographical locations. The collection ranges from 40,000-year-old indigenous Australian rock paintings, to a group of memorial poles carved by the Asmat people of New Guinea, to a priceless collection of ceremonial and personal objects from the Nigerian Court of Benin donated by Klaus Perls. The range of materials represented in the Africa, Oceania, and Americas collection is undoubtedly wide, in comparison to other departments at the Met. It includes everything from precious metals to porcupine quills.\nCurator of African Art Susan Mullin Vogel discussed a famous Benin artifact acquired by the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1972. It was originally auctioned in April 1900 by a lieutenant named Augustus Pitt Rivers at the price of 37 guineas.\nIn December 2021, the Met began its $70 million (~$ in 2024) renovation of The Michael C. Rockefeller Wing's African, ancient American, and Oceanic art galleries, originally planned to begin in 2020 but now set for completion in 2024. The 40,000 square-feet renovation includes the reinstallation of an exterior glass curtain, which had deteriorated, as well as the galleries in their entirety, which house 3,000 works.\nAsian art.\nThe Met's Asian department holds a collection of Asian art, of more than 35,000 pieces, that is arguably the most comprehensive in the US. The collection dates back almost to the founding of the museum: many of the philanthropists who made the earliest gifts to the museum included Asian art in their collections. Today, an entire wing of the museum is dedicated to the Asian collection, and spans 4,000 years of Asian art. Major Asian civilizations are well-represented in the Met's Asian department. The pieces on display represent diverse types of decorative art, from painting and printmaking to sculpture and metalworking. The department is well known for its comprehensive collection of Cambodian, Indian, and Chinese art (including calligraphy and painting), as well as for its Nepalese and Tibetan works, and the arts of Burma (Myanmar), and Thailand. Three ancient religions of India\u2014Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism\u2014are well represented in these sculptures. However, not only \"art\" and ritual objects are represented in the collection; many of the best-known pieces are functional objects. The Asian wing also contains the Astor Court, a complete Ming Dynasty-style garden court, modeled on a courtyard in the Master of the Nets Garden in Suzhou. Maxwell K. Hearn has been the current department chairman of Asian Art since 2011.\nEgyptian art.\nThough the majority of the Met's initial holdings of Egyptian art came from private collections, items uncovered during the museum's own archeological excavations, carried out between 1906 and 1941, constitute almost half of the current collection. More than 26,000 separate pieces of Egyptian art from the Paleolithic era through the Ptolemaic era constitute the Met's Egyptian collection, and almost all of them are on display in the museum's massive wing of 40 Egyptian galleries. Among the rarest pieces in the Met's Egyptian collection are 13 wooden models (of the total 24 models found together, 12 models and 1 offering bearer figure is at the Met, while the remaining 10 models and 1 offering bearer figure are in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo), discovered in a tomb in the Southern Asasif in western Thebes in 1920. These models depict, in unparalleled detail, a cross-section of Egyptian life in the early Middle Kingdom: boats, gardens, and scenes of daily life are represented in miniature. William the Faience Hippopotamus is a miniature that has become the informal mascot of the museum. Other notable items in the Egyptian collection include the Chair of Reniseneb, the Lotiform Chalice, and the Metternich Stela.\nHowever, the popular centerpiece of the Egyptian Art department continues to be the Temple of Dendur. Dismantled by the Egyptian government as part of the International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia to save it from rising waters caused by the building of the Aswan High Dam, the large sandstone temple was given to the United States in 1965 and assembled in a new wing at the Met in 1978. Situated in a large room and partially surrounded by a reflecting pool and illuminated by a wall of windows opening onto Central Park, the Temple of Dendur has been one of the Met's most enduring attractions. Among the oldest items at the Met, a set of Archeulian flints from Deir el-Bahri which date from the Lower Paleolithic period (between 300,000 and 75,000 BCE), are part of the Egyptian collection. The first curator was Albert Lythgoe, who directed several Egyptian excavations for the museum. Since 2013 the curator has been Diana Craig Patch.\nIn 2018, the museum built an exhibition around the golden-sheathed 1st-century BCE coffin of Nedjemankh, a high-ranking priest of the ram-headed god Heryshaf of Heracleopolis. Investigators determined that the artifact had been stolen in 2011 from Egypt, and the museum returned it.\nEuropean paintings.\nIn 2012 the Met's collection of European paintings numbered \"more than 2,500 works of art from the thirteenth through the early twentieth century.\" As of December 2021, it had 2,625. These paintings are housed in the Old Masters galleries (newly installed in 2023), the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Century galleries reinstalled in 2007 (both on the second floor of the main building), the Robert Lehman Collection, and the Jack and Belle Linsky Collection (both on the first floor); a number of paintings also hang in other departmental galleries. Some of the medieval paintings are permanently exhibited at the Met Cloisters. The current curator in charge of the European Paintings department is Stephan Wolohojian.\nOld Master paintings.\nThe collection began when 174 paintings were purchased from European dealers in 1871. Almost two-thirds of these paintings have been deaccessioned, but quality paintings by Jordaens, Van Dyck, Poussin, the Tiepolos, Guardi, and some other artists remain in the collection. Major gifts from Henry Gurdon Marquand in 1889, 1890 and 1891 gave the Met a much more solid foundation. Additionally, his example helped to create a taste for collecting Old Master paintings. In 1913, the Benjamin Altman bequest had sufficient range and depth to put the Met's collection of paintings on the map. In 1949, the Jules Bache gift added more great paintings. The Robert Lehman Collection, which came to the museum in 1975, included many significant paintings, and is particularly strong in early Renaissance material. Over a period of decades, Charles and Jayne Wrightsman donated 94 works of unusually high quality to the Department of European Paintings, the last of which came with Mrs. Wrightsman's bequest in 2019. Notwithstanding the contributions made by Marquand, Altman, Bache, and Lehman, it has been written that \"the Wrightsman paintings are highest in overall quality and condition.\" The latter \"collected expertise as well as art,\" and advanced technology made better choices possible. Additionally, the Wrightsmans had the Met's curators at their disposal, for whom they served as a virtual \"auxiliary purchase fund for objects the Met curators coveted, but could not afford.\"\nPlein Air, Impressionist, and Post-Impressionist Painting.\nThe Met's plein air painting collection, which it calls \"unrivaled\", was the last large section of the European Paintings collection to have a home at the museum. The sale of a Monet and the construction of small scale galleries ultimately resulted in the acquisition of 220 European paintings (most of them plein-air sketches) from two collections. The Monet was used to purchase a half share of Wheelock \"Lock\" Whitney III's collection in 2003 (the remainder came as a promised gift), and when Eugene V. Thaw (1927\u20132018) saw how good they looked in the Met's new, purpose built galleries, he and his wife Clare donated their substantially larger collection to the Met (much of it a joint gift to the Morgan Library). The Met easily has the best collection of this material in the nation, and one of the three or four best in the world. Thus the Met's collection, hitherto top-heavy with famous French artists, \"became uniquely diverse,\" with \"many little-known artists from France, as well as numerous artists from other European nations;\" many of which are not otherwise represented in U.S. museums. The plein-air collection forms a bridge \"to what became the avant-garde,\" the Impressionists and their successors.\nAs noted by the museum, \"a work by Renoir entered the Museum as early as 1907 (today the Museum has become one of the world's great repositories of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art).\" The museum terms its nineteenth-century French paintings \"second only to the museums of Paris,\" with strengths in \"Gustave Courbet, Edgar Degas, \u00c9douard Manet, Claude Monet, Paul C\u00e9zanne, Vincent van Gogh, and others.\"\nThe foundation of the museum's great Impressionist and Post-Impressionist collection was laid by the Louisine (1855\u20131929) and Henry Osborne Havemeyer (1847\u20131907) collection. The most important portion of their immense collection came to the museum after the death of Louisine in 1929. It was particularly strong in works by Courbet, Corot, Manet, Monet, and, above all, Degas. The other remarkable gift of this material came from Walter H. and Leonore Annenberg, who, before they promised their collection to the Met in 1991, annually loaned it to the Met for half a year at a time. Walter Annenberg described his choice of gifting his collection to the Met as an example of \"strength going to strength.\" The two collections are highly complementary: \"The Annenberg collection serves as a second, complementary core collection of blue chip Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings. Most importantly, it strengthened the Met's relatively sparse holdings of Gauguin and Toulouse-Lautrec, it added needed late works by C\u00e9zanne and Monet as well as a rare Seurat, and it brought a very impressive group of Van Goghs to a collection already rich in works by the Dutchman.\"\nEuropean sculpture and decorative arts.\nThe European Sculpture and Decorative Arts collection is one of the largest departments at the Met, holding in excess of 50,000 separate pieces from the 15th through the early 20th centuries. Although the collection is particularly concentrated in Renaissance sculpture\u2014much of which can be seen \"in situ\" surrounded by contemporary furnishings and decoration\u2014it also contains comprehensive holdings of furniture, jewelry, glass and ceramic pieces, tapestries, textiles, and timepieces and mathematical instruments. In addition to its outstanding collections of English and French furniture, visitors can enter dozens of completely furnished period rooms, transplanted in their entirety into the Met's galleries. The collection even includes an entire 16th-century patio from the Spanish castle of V\u00e9lez Blanco, reconstructed in a two-story gallery, and the intarsia \"studiolo\" from the ducal palace at Gubbio. Sculptural highlights of the sprawling department include Bernini's \"Bacchanal\", a cast of Rodin's \"The Burghers of Calais\", and several unique pieces by Houdon, including his \"Bust of Voltaire\" and his famous portrait of his daughter Sabine.\nAmerican Wing.\nThe museum's collection of American art returned to view in new galleries on January 16th, 2012. The new installation provides visitors with the history of American art from the 18th through the early 20th century. The new galleries encompasses for the display of the museum's collection. The curator in charge of the American Wing since September 2014 is Sylvia Yount.\nIn July 2018, \"Art of Native America\" opened in the American Wing. This marked the first appearance of Indigenous American art in the museum's vast American wing. \"Art of Native America\" was accompanied by a statement from the institution. \"The American Wing acknowledges the sovereign Native American and Indigenous communities dispossessed from the lands and waters of this region. We affirm our intentions for ongoing relationships with contemporary Native American and Indigenous artists and the original communities whose ancestral and aesthetic items we care for.\" Contrary to this public statement, the museum came under immense scrutiny for the hazy provenance of the displayed items. This was followed by the hiring of a new curator of Indigenous American art for the museum, Dr. Patricia Marroquin Norby, who is of Pur\u00e9pecha descent.\nGreek and Roman art.\nThe Met's collection of Greek and Roman art contains more than 17,000 objects. The Greek and Roman collection dates back to the founding of the museum\u2014in fact, the museum's first accessioned object was a Roman sarcophagus, still currently on display. Though the collection naturally concentrates on items from ancient Greece and the Roman Empire, these historical regions represent a wide range of cultures and artistic styles, from classic Greek black-figure and red-figure vases to carved Roman tunic pins.\nHighlights of the collection include the monumental Amathus sarcophagus and a magnificently detailed Etruscan chariot known as the \"Monteleone chariot\". The collection also contains many pieces from far earlier than the Greek or Roman empires\u2014among the most remarkable are a collection of early Cycladic sculptures from the mid-third millennium BCE, many so abstract as to seem almost modern. The Greek and Roman galleries also contain several large classical wall paintings and reliefs from different periods, including an entire reconstructed bedroom from a noble villa in Boscoreale, excavated after its entombment by the eruption of Vesuvius in \u00a0CE. In 2007, the Met's Greek and Roman galleries were expanded to approximately , allowing the majority of the collection to be on permanent display.\nIslamic art.\nThe Metropolitan Museum owns one of the world's largest collection of works of art of the Islamic world. The collection also includes artifacts and works of art of cultural and secular origin from the time period indicated by the rise of Islam predominantly from the Near East and in contrast to the Ancient Near Eastern collections. The biggest number of miniatures from the \"Shahnameh\" list prepared under the reign of Shah Tahmasp I, the most luxurious of all the existing Islamic manuscripts, also belongs to this museum. Other rarities include the works of Sultan Muhammad and his associates from the Tabriz school \"The Sade Holiday\", \"Tahmiras kills divs\", \"Bijan and Manijeh\", and many others.\nThe Met's collection of Islamic art is not confined strictly to religious art, though a significant number of the objects in the Islamic collection were originally created for religious use or as decorative elements in mosques. Much of the 12,000 strong collection consists of secular items, including ceramics and textiles, from Islamic cultures ranging from Spain to North Africa to Central Asia. The Islamic Art department's collection of miniature paintings from Iran and Mughal India are a highlight of the collection. Calligraphy both religious and secular is well represented in the Islamic Art department, from the official decrees of Suleiman the Magnificent to a number of Quran manuscripts reflecting different periods and styles of calligraphy. Modern calligraphic artists also used a word or phrase to convey a direct message, or they created compositions from the shapes of Arabic words. Others incorporated indecipherable cursive writing within the body of the work to evoke the illusion of writing.\nIslamic Arts galleries had been undergoing refurbishment since 2001 and reopened on November 1, 2011, as the New Galleries for the Art of the Arab Lands, Turkey, Iran, Central Asia, and Later South Asia. Until that time, a narrow selection of items from the collection had been on temporary display throughout the museum. As with many other departments at the Met, the Islamic Art galleries contain many interior pieces, including the entire reconstructed \"Nur Al-Din Room\" from an early 18th-century house in Damascus.\nIn September 2022 the Met revealed that it had received a substantial gift from Qatar Museums on the occasion of its 10th anniversary of the opening of its Galleries for the Art of the Arab Lands, Turkey, Iran, Central Asia and Later South Asia, which would benefit its Department of Islamic Art and some of the museum's other principal projects. As a token of its appreciation the name \"Qatar Gallery\" was adopted for the museum's Gallery of the Umayyad and Abbasid Periods. This followed the announcement that the Met and Qatar Museums had entered into a partnership to foster their exchange with regards to exhibitions, activities, and scholarly cooperation.\nNon-geographically designated collections.\nArms and armor.\nThe Met's Department of Arms and Armor is one of the museum's most popular collections. Several early trustees of the museum were armor enthusiasts. The 1904 purchase of the collection of Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord, duc de Dino, served as the foundational collection. It became a great collection with the gift and bequest of the Henry Riggs collection of 2,000 pieces, which was one of the finest assembled by a single person. It came to the museum in 1913 and 1925. Another collection landmark took place in 1936, when George Cameron Stone bequeathed 3,000 pieces of Asian armor. Bashford Dean, the first arms curator, did much to build up the collection, including with gifts he and his friends made directly to the Met, which enabled the purchase of his personal collection.\nStephen V. Grancsay, the second arms curator at the museum, ably added to the collection, and he even purchased important works from Clarence H. Mackay (the greatest contemporary private collector of this material, who was wiped out by the Great Depression). Grancsay later resold some of these important works to the museum at cost.\nThe department's focus on \"outstanding craftsmanship and decoration,\" including pieces intended solely for display, means that the collection is strongest in late medieval European pieces and Japanese pieces from the 5th through 19th centuries. However, these are not the only cultures represented in Arms and Armor; the collection spans more geographic regions than almost any other department, including weapons and armor from dynastic Egypt, ancient Greece, the Roman Empire, the ancient Near East, Africa, Oceania, and the Americas, as well as American firearms (especially Colt firearms) from the 19th and 20th centuries. Among the collection's 14,000 objects are the oldest items in the museum: flint bifaces which date to 700,000\u2013200,000 BCE. There are also many pieces made for and used by kings and princes, including armor belonging to Henry VIII of England, Henry II of France, and Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor. A. Hyatt Mayor called the Met's collection \"the only single collection from which one might illustrate the whole history of the subject.\nThe distinctive \"parade\" of armored figures on horseback installed in the first-floor Arms and Armor gallery is one of the most recognizable images of the museum, which was organized in 1975 with the help of the Russian immigrant and arms and armor scholar, Leonid Tarassuk (1925\u201390).\nIn 2020 the Met announced Ronald S. Lauder's promised gift of 91 objects from his collection, describing it as \"the most significant grouping of European arms and armor given to the Museum since 1942,\" one that is \"outstanding for the exceptional rarity and quality of the objects, their illustrious origins, and their typological variety.\" Lauder, who noted that he had begun collecting with the assistance of curator Grancsay almost 55 years earlier, also donated money for the study and presentation of arms and armor. The 11 galleries were named in Lauder's honor.\nCostume Institute.\nThe Museum of Costume Art was founded by Aline Bernstein and Irene Lewisohn. In 1946, with the financial support of the fashion industry, the Museum of Costume Art merged with The Metropolitan Museum of Art as The Costume Institute, and in 1959 became a curatorial department. Today, its collection contains more than 35,000 costumes and accessories. The Costume Institute used to have a permanent gallery space in what was known as the \"Basement\" area of the Met because it was downstairs at the bottom of the Met facility. However, due to the fragile nature of the items in the collection, the Costume Institute does not maintain a permanent installation. Instead, every year it holds two separate shows in the Met's galleries using costumes from its collection, with each show centering on a specific designer or theme. The Costume Institute is known for hosting the annual Met Gala and in the past has presented summer exhibitions such as Savage Beauty and .\nIn past years, Costume Institute shows organized around designers such as Crist\u00f3bal Balenciaga, Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent, and Gianni Versace; and style doyenne like Diana Vreeland, Mona von Bismarck, Babe Paley, Jayne Wrightsman, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Nan Kempner, and Iris Apfel have drawn significant crowds to the Met. The Costume Institute's annual Benefit Gala, co-chaired by \"Vogue\" editor-in-chief Anna Wintour, is an extremely popular, if exclusive, event in the fashion world; in 2007, the 700 available tickets started at $6,500 (~$ in 2024) per person.\nExhibits displayed over the past decade in the Costume Institute include: Rock Style, in 1999, representing the style of more than 40 rock musicians, including Madonna, David Bowie, and the Beatles; Extreme Beauty: The Body Transformed, in 2001, which exposes the transforming ideas of physical beauty over time and the bodily contortion necessary to accommodate such ideals and fashion; The Chanel Exhibit, displayed in 2005, acknowledging the skilled work of designer Coco Chanel as one of the leading fashion names in history; Superheroes: Fashion and Fantasy, exhibited in 2008, suggesting the metaphorical vision of superheroes as ultimate fashion icons; the 2010 exhibit on the American Woman: Fashioning a National Identity, which exposes the revolutionary styles of the American woman from the years 1890 to 1940, and how such styles reflect the political and social sentiments of the time. The theme of the 2011 event was \"Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty\". Each of these exhibits explores fashion as a mirror of cultural values and offers a glimpse into historical styles, emphasizing their evolution into today's own fashion world. On January 14, 2014, the Met named the Costume Institute complex after Anna Wintour. The curator is Andrew Bolton.\nDrawings and prints.\nThough other departments contain significant numbers of drawings and prints, the Drawings and Prints department specifically concentrates on North American pieces and Western European works produced after the Middle Ages. The first gift of Old Master drawings, comprising 670 sheets, was presented as a single group in 1880 by Cornelius Vanderbilt II, though most proved to be misattributed. The Vanderbilt gift launched the collection, and the Department of Paintings also eventually acquired drawings (including by Michelangelo and Leonardo). In the meantime, the Met library began to collect prints. Harris Brisbane Dick's donation of thirty-five hundred works on paper (mostly nineteenth-century etchings) and a fund for acquisitions led to the hiring of William M. Ivins Jr. in 1916.\nAs the museum's first curator of prints, Ivans established the mission of collecting images that would reveal \"the whole gamut of human life and endeavor, from the most ephemeral of courtesies to the loftiest pictorial presentation of man's spiritual aspirations.\" Over the next 30 years, he built what is credited as the best collection in the nation. Ivans opened three galleries and a study room in 1971. He curated almost sixty exhibitions, and his influential publications included \"How Prints Look\" (1943) and \"Prints and Visual Communication\" (1953), in addition to almost two hundred articles for the museum's \"Bulletin\". Ivans and his successor A. Hyatt Mayor (hired 1932, 1946\u201366 Curator of Prints) collected hundreds of thousands of works, including photographs, books, architectural drawings, modern artworks on paper, posters, trade cards, and other ephemera. Important early donors to the department include: Junius Spencer Morgan II, who presented a broad range of material, mainly 16th century, including woodblocks and many prints by Albrecht D\u00fcrer in 1919; Gothic woodcuts and Rembrandt etchings from the Felix M. Warburg family; James Clark McGuire's transformative bequest brought over seven hundred fifteenth-century woodcuts; prints by Rembrandt, Edgar Degas, and Mary Cassatt with the H.O. Havemeyer Collection in 1929. Ivans also purchased five albums from the auction of the Earl of Pembroke's collection, and the 2,200 prints in these albums provided a nucleus of Italian prints.\nMeanwhile, acquisitions of drawings, including an album of 50 Goyas (thanks to Ivans, the Met collected almost 300 works by Goya on paper) continued to be processed through the Department of Paintings. In 1960, a Department of Drawings was established under Jacob Bean, who served as curator until 1992, during which time the museum's collection of drawings nearly doubled in size, with strengths in French and Italian works.\nFinally, in 1993, a unified Department of Drawings and Prints was created for all works on paper, chaired by George Goldner, who sought to rectify collecting imbalances by adding works by Dutch, Flemish, Central European, Danish, and British artists. The department has been led by Nadine Orenstein, Drue Heinz Curator in Charge since 2015. A particularly important recent gift was that of the Leslie and Johanna Garfield Collection of British Modernism in 2019.\nThe broadened collecting horizons of the museum in the post-Black Lives Matter era have been displayed in the exhibition of contemporary political works on paper called \"Revolution, Resistance, and Activism\", held at the Met in 2021\u201322. It included such works as the Guerrilla Girls' famous poster \"Do women have to be naked to get into the Met. Museum?\", 1987, Julie Torres' \"Super Diva!\", 2020 (a posthumous image of Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg), and Ben Blount's \"Black Women's Wisdom\", 2019.\nCurrently, the Drawings and Prints collection contains about 21,000 drawings, 1.2 million prints, and 12,000 illustrated books made in Europe and the Americas. Many of the great masters of European painting, who produced many more sketches and drawings than actual paintings, are represented in the Drawing and Prints collection, sometimes in great concentrations. Prints are also represented in multiple states. Many artists and makers whose work is in the prints and drawings collection are otherwise not represented in the museum's holdings.\nRobert Lehman Collection.\nOn the death of banker Robert Lehman in 1969, his Foundation donated 2,600 works of art to the museum, which had been collected by Robert and his father. Housed in the \"Robert Lehman Wing\", on the ground floor and the basement level, the museum refers to the collection as \"one of the most extraordinary private art collections ever assembled in the United States\". To emphasize the personal nature of the Robert Lehman Collection, the Met housed the collection in a special set of galleries, some of which evoked the interior of Lehman's richly decorated townhouse at 7 West 54th Street. This intentional separation of the Collection as a \"museum within the museum\" met with mixed criticism and approval at the time, though the acquisition of the collection was seen as a coup for the Met. Some have argued that it would be educationally more beneficial to have works from given schools of painting in the same section of the museum.\nUnlike other departments at the Met, the Robert Lehman collection does not concentrate on a specific style or period of art; rather, it is a reflection of Lehman's personal collecting interests. The Lehmans concentrated heavily on paintings of the Italian Renaissance, particularly the Sienese school. Sienese highlights include multiple major paintings by Ugolino da Siena, Simone Martini, Sano di Pietro, and Giovanni di Paolo, as well as a remarkable work by the Osservanza Master. Other choice Italian paintings in the collection include masterpieces like Botticelli's \"Annunciation\", a pair of stunning portraits by Jacometto Veneziano, and a stellar Madonna and Child by Giovanni Bellini. The Northern school of painting is represented by Petrus Christus, Hans Memling, the Master of Moulins (Jean Hey), Hans Holbein, and Lucas Cranach and his studio. Dutch and Spanish Baroque highlights include the Spanish painters El Greco and Goya, and the Dutch masters Rembrandt, Ter Borch, and de Hooch.\nLehman's collection of 700 drawings by the Old Masters, featuring works by Rembrandt and D\u00fcrer, is particularly valuable for its breadth and quality. The collection also has French 18th and 19th century drawings, as well as nearly two-hundred 18th century Venetian drawings, mostly by the Tiepolos.\nThe collection of bronzes, furniture, Renaissance majolica, Venetian glass, enamels, jewelry, textiles, and frames is outstanding. The Lehman collection of Italian majolica is regarded as the best in the country.\nRobert Lehman also collected many nineteenth and twentieth century paintings. These include works by Ingres, Corot, the Barbizon School, Monet, Renoir, Cezanne, Gauguin, Van Gogh, Seurat, and a number of Fauve painters, including Matisse. Princeton University Press has documented the massive collection in a multi-volume book series published as \"The Robert Lehman Collection Catalogues\".\nMedieval art and the Cloisters.\nThe Met's collection of medieval art consists of a comprehensive range of Western art from the 4th through the early 16th centuries, as well as Byzantine and pre-medieval European antiquities not included in the Ancient Greek and Roman collection. Like the Islamic collection, the Medieval collection contains a broad range of two- and three-dimensional art, with religious objects heavily represented. In total, the Medieval Art department's permanent collection numbers over 10,000 separate objects, divided between the main museum building on Fifth Avenue and The Cloisters.\nMain building.\nThe medieval collection in the main Metropolitan building, centered on the first-floor medieval gallery, contains about 6,000 separate objects. While a great deal of European medieval art is on display in these galleries, most of the European pieces are concentrated at the Cloisters (see below). However, this allows the main galleries to display much of the Met's Byzantine art side by side with European pieces. The main gallery is host to a wide range of tapestries and church and funerary statuary, while side galleries display smaller works of precious metals and ivory, including reliquary pieces and secular items. The main gallery, with its high arched ceiling, also serves double duty as the annual site of the Met's elaborately decorated Christmas tree.\nThe Cloisters museum and gardens.\nThe Cloisters was a principal project of John D. Rockefeller Jr., a major benefactor of the Met. Located in Fort Tryon Park and completed in 1938, it is a separate building dedicated solely to medieval art. The Cloisters collection was originally that of a separate museum, assembled by George Grey Barnard and acquired \"in toto\" by Rockefeller in 1925 as a gift to the Met.\nThe Cloisters are so named on account of the five medieval French cloisters whose salvaged structures were incorporated into the modern building, and the five thousand objects at the Cloisters are strictly limited to medieval European works. The collection features items of outstanding beauty and historical importance; among these are the \"Belles Heures of Jean de France, Duc de Berry\" illustrated by the Limbourg Brothers in 1409, the Romanesque altar cross known as the \"Cloisters Cross\" or \"Bury Cross\", and the seven tapestries depicting the Hunt of the Unicorn.\nModern and contemporary art.\nWith some 13,000 artworks, primarily by European and American artists, the modern art collection occupies , of gallery space and contains many iconic modern works. Cornerstones of the collection include Picasso's portrait of Gertrude Stein, Jasper Johns's \"White Flag\", Jackson Pollock's \"Autumn Rhythm (Number 30)\", and Max Beckmann's triptych \"Beginning\". Certain artists are represented in remarkable depth, for a museum whose focus is not exclusively on modern art: for example, ninety works constitute the museum's Paul Klee collection, donated by Heinz Berggruen, spanning the entirety of the artist's life. Due to the Met's long history, \"contemporary\" paintings acquired in years past have often migrated to other collections at the museum, particularly to the American and European Paintings departments.\nIn April 2013, it was reported that the museum was to receive a collection worth $1\u00a0billion (~$ in 2024) from cosmetics tycoon Leonard Lauder. The collection of Cubist art includes work by Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque and Juan Gris and went on display in 2014. The Met has since added to the collection, for example spending $31.8\u00a0million (~$ in 2024) for Gris' \"The musician's table\" in 2018.\nMusical instruments.\nThe Met's collection of musical instruments, with about 5,000 examples of musical instruments from all over the world, is virtually unique among major museums. The collection began in 1889 with a donation of 270 instruments by Mary Elizabeth Adams Brown, who joined her collection to become the museum's first curator of musical instruments, named in honor of her husband, John Crosby Brown. By the time she died, the collection had 3,600 instruments that she had donated and the collection was housed in five galleries. Instruments were (and continue to be) included in the collection not only on aesthetic grounds, but also insofar as they embodied technical and social aspects of their cultures of origin. The modern Musical Instruments collection is encyclopedic in scope; every continent is represented at virtually every stage of its musical life. Highlights of the department's collection include several Stradivari violins, a collection of Asian instruments made from precious metals, and the oldest surviving piano, a 1720 model by Bartolomeo Cristofori. Many of the instruments in the collection are playable, and the department encourages their use by holding concerts and demonstrations by guest musicians.\nPhotographs.\nThe Met's collection of photographs, numbering more than 25,000 in total, is centered on five major collections plus additional acquisitions by the museum. Alfred Stieglitz, a photographer himself, donated the first major collection of photographs to the museum, which included a comprehensive survey of Photo-Secessionist works, a rich set of master prints by Edward Steichen, and an outstanding collection of Stieglitz's photographs from his own studio. The Met supplemented Stieglitz's gift with the 8,500-piece Gilman Paper Company Collection, the Rubel Collection, and the Ford Motor Company Collection, which respectively provided the collection with early French and American photography, early British photography, and post-WWI American and European photography. The museum also acquired Walker Evans's personal collection of photographs, a particular coup considering the high demand for his works.\nThe department of photography was founded in 1992. Though the department gained a permanent gallery in 1997, not all of the department's holdings are on display at any given time, due to the sensitive materials represented in the photography collection. However, the Photographs department has produced some of the best-received temporary exhibits in the Met's recent past, including a Diane Arbus retrospective and an extensive show devoted to spirit photography. In 2007, the museum designated a gallery exclusively for the exhibition of photographs made after 1960.\nFilm.\nThe Met has an extensive archive consisting of 1,500 films made and collected by the museum since the 1920s. As part of the museum's 150 anniversary commemoration, since January 2020, the museum uploads a film from its archive weekly onto YouTube.\nDigital representation of collections.\nBeginning in 2013, the Met organized the Digital Media Department for the purpose of increasing access of the museum's collections and resources using digital media and expanded website services. The first Chief Digital Officer Sree Sreenivasan from 2013 departed in 2016 and was replaced by Loic Tallon at the time that the department became known by its simplified designation as the Digital Department. At the start of 2017, the department began its Open Access initiative summarized on the Met's website titled \"Digital Underground\" stating: \"It's been six months since the Met launched its Open Access initiative, which made available all 375,000+ images of public-domain works in the Met collection under Creative Commons Zero (CC0). During what is just the dawn of this new initiative, the responses so far have been incredible.\" At that time, more than 375,000 photographic images from the museum's archival collection were released for public domain reproduction and use both by the general public and by large public access websites such as those available at Google BigQuery.\nIn May 2022, the Met and the World Monuments Fund announced a collaboration of digital work for the 2024 reopening of the African, ancient American, and Oceanic art galleries. The digital project \"aims to bolster the understanding of several historic sites in sub-Saharan Africa\", in particular sites that have been minimally explored by Western museums.\nOpen access images and data have been viewed over 1.2 billion times with over 7 million downloads.\nLibraries.\nEach curatorial department maintains a library, most of the material of which can be requested online through the libraries' catalog. Two of the libraries may be accessed without an appointment:\nThomas J. Watson Library.\nThe Thomas J. Watson Library is the central library of The Metropolitan Museum of Art, and supports the activities of staff and researchers. Watson Library's collection contains approximately 900,000 volumes, including monographs and exhibition catalogs; over 11,000 periodical titles; and more than 125,000 auction and sale catalogs. The library includes a reference collection, auction and sale catalogs, a rare book collection, manuscript items, and vertical file collections. The library is accessible to anyone 18 years of age or older simply by registering online and providing a valid photo ID.\nNolen Library.\nThe Nolen Library is open to the general public. The collection of some 8,000 items, arranged in open shelves, includes books, picture books, DVDs, and videos. The Nolen Library includes a children's reading room and materials for teachers.\nSpecial exhibitions.\nThe museum regularly hosts notable special exhibitions, often focusing on the works of one artist that have been loaned out from a variety of other museums and sources for the duration of the exhibition. These exhibitions are part of the attraction that draw people both within and outside Manhattan to explore the Met. Such exhibitions include displays especially designed for the Costume Institute, paintings from artists from across the world, works of art related to specific art movements, and collections of historical artifacts. Exhibitions are commonly located within their specific departments, ranging from American decorative arts, arms and armor, drawings and prints, Egyptian art, Medieval art, musical instruments, and photographs. Typical exhibitions run for months at a time and are open to the general public. Each exhibition provides insight into the world of art as a transformative, cultural experience and often includes a historical analysis to demonstrate the profound impact that art has on society and its dramatic transformation over the years.\nIn 1969, a special exhibition, titled \"Harlem on My Mind\" was criticized for failing to exhibit work by Harlem artists. The museum defended its decision to portray Harlem itself as a work of art. Norman Lewis, Benny Andrews, Romare Bearden, Clifford Joseph, Roy DeCarava, Reginald Gammon, Henri Ghent, Raymond Saunders, and Alice Neel were among the artists who picketed the show.\nPerformance arts.\nThe museum's Department of Live Arts commissions new works of performance using music, sound, movement, and other artistic practices. Under the banner of MetLiveArts, performances are presented in the galleries and spaces of the main museum building and The Cloisters, and made available through digital platforms such as YouTube and the museum's own website. Limor Tomer, general manager of MetLiveArts since 2011, has moved away from the programs of classical recitals and chamber concerts that were customary at that time.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nThe New York State Legislature granted the Metropolitan Museum of Art an Act of Incorporation on April 13, 1870, \"for the purpose of establishing and maintaining in said City a Museum and Library of Art, of encouraging and developing the Study of the Fine Arts, and the application of Art to manufacture and natural life, of advancing the general knowledge of kindred subjects, and to that end of furnishing popular instruction and recreations\". This legislation was supplemented later by the 1893 Act, Chapter 476, which required that its collections \"shall be kept open and accessible to the public free of all charge throughout the year\". The founders included businessmen and financiers, among them Theodore Roosevelt Sr., the father of Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th president of the US, as well as leading artists and thinkers of the day, who wanted to open a museum to bring art and art education to the American people. Also instrumental in the founding of the museum was Henry Gurdon Marquand, who donated an important part of his collection of Old Masters paintings to the fledgling institution. The Marquand family, founders of Marquand and Co., maintained a diverse interest in art based philanthropy, having donated large sums of money to Princeton University, as well as establishing Southport's Pequot Library, a special collections institution.\nThe museum first opened on February 20, 1872, housed in a building located at 681 Fifth Avenue. John Taylor Johnston, a railroad executive whose personal art collection seeded the museum, served as its first president, and the publisher George Palmer Putnam came on board as its founding superintendent. The artist Eastman Johnson acted as co-founder of the museum, as did landscape painter Frederic Edwin Church. Various other industrialists, artists, and scientists of the age served as co-founders, including Howard Potter, Salem Howe Wales, and Henry Gurdon Marquand. Marquand's donated works are known as the Marquand Collection. The former Civil War officer, Luigi Palma di Cesnola, was named as its first director. He served from 1879 to 1904. Under their guidance, the Met's holdings, initially consisting of a Roman stone sarcophagus and 174 mostly European paintings, quickly outgrew the available space. In 1873, occasioned by the Met's purchase of the Cesnola Collection of Cypriot antiquities, the museum decamped from Fifth Avenue and took up residence at the Mrs. Nicholas Cruger Mansion also known as the Douglas Mansion (James Renwick, 1853\u201354, demolished 1928) at 128 West 14th Street. However, these new accommodations proved temporary, as the growing collection required more space than the mansion could provide. It moved into the current building in 1880. Between 1879 and 1895, the museum created and operated a series of educational programs, known as the Metropolitan Museum of Art Schools, intended to provide vocational training and classes on fine arts.\n20th century.\nThe museum is said to have established the world's first museum shop in 1908. In 1954, to mark the opening of its Grace Rainey Rogers concert hall, the museum inaugurated a series of concerts, adding art lectures in 1956. This \"Concerts &amp; Lectures program\" grew over the years into 200 events each season. The program presented such performers as Marian Anderson, Cecilia Bartoli, Judy Collins, Marilyn Horne, Burl Ives, Juilliard String Quartet, Yo-Yo Ma, Itzhak Perlman, Artur Rubinstein, Andr\u00e1s Schiff, Nina Simone, Joan Sutherland and Andr\u00e9 Watts, as well as lectures on art history, music, dance, theater and social history. The program was directed, from its inception to 1968, by William Kolodney, and from 1969 to 2010, by Hilde Limondjian.\nIn the 1960s, the governance of the Met was expanded to include, for the first time, a chairman of the board of trustees in contemplation of a large bequest from the estate of Robert Lehman. For six decades Lehman built upon an art collection begun by his father in 1911 and devoted a great deal of time to the Met, before finally becoming the first chairman of the board at the Metropolitan in the 1960s. After his death in 1969, the Robert Lehman Foundation donated close to 3,000 works of art to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Housed in the Robert Lehman Wing, which opened to the public in 1975 and largely financed by the Lehman Foundation, the museum has called it \"one of the most extraordinary private art collections ever assembled in the United States\".\nThe Metropolitan Museum of Art Centennial was celebrated with exhibitions, symposia, concerts, lectures, the reopening of refurbished galleries, special tours, social events, and other programming for eighteen months from October 1969 through the spring of 1971. The centennial's events (including an open house, Centennial Ball, year-long art history course for the public, and various educational programming and traveling exhibitions) and publications drew on support from prominent New Yorkers, artists, writers, composers, interior designers, and art historians.\n21st century.\nIn 2009 Michael Gross published \"The Secret History of the Moguls and the Money That Made the Metropolitan Museum, an unauthorized social history\", and the museum bookstore declined to sell it.\nIn 2012, following the earlier appointment of Daniel Brodsky as chairman of the board at the Met, the by-laws of the museum were formally amended to recognize the office of the chairman as having authority over the assignment and review of both the offices of president and director of the museum. The office of chairman was first introduced relatively late in the museum's history in the 1960s in contemplation of the anticipated donation of the Lehman collection to the museum and has since that time, under Brodsky, become the most senior administrative position at the museum.\nFrom 2016 to 2020, the museum operated a modern and contemporary art gallery at 945 Madison Avenue, a Marcel Breuer-designed building at Madison Avenue and 75th Street in Manhattan's Upper East Side, the former Whitney Museum of American Art. It extends the museum's modern and contemporary art program. In September 2018, it was announced that the Met intended to vacate the Met Breuer three years early, in 2020; the Frick Collection began occupying the space while the main building underwent renovations.\nIn January 2018, museum president Daniel Weiss announced that the century-old policy of free admission would be replaced by a $25 charge to out-of-state and foreign visitors, effective March 2018. The museum temporarily closed in March 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City, and reopened in late August; this was the first time in over a century that the Met was closed for more than three consecutive days.\nIn September 2020, following debates surrounding provenance holes and mismanagement of Indigenous art, the museum appointed Patricia Marroquin Norby (Pur\u00e9pecha/Nde descent) as the museum's inaugural Associate Curator of Native American Art. In May 2021, the museum installed a plaque on its Fifth Avenue facade in recognition of indigenous communities and of the fact that the museum is situated in what was historically Lenapehoking. That November, the Met received a $125 million donation from Oscar L. Tang and Agnes Hsu-Tang, the largest gift in the museum's history. In exchange, the Met named its modern and contemporary art galleries after the Tangs. The following February, the Met hired Moody Nolan to renovate the Ancient Near Eastern and Cypriot galleries. Mexican architect Frida Escobedo was hired in March 2022 to renovate the Tang Wing, and the Met had raised $550 million for the Tang Wing by 2024. Designs for the Tang Wing were announced that December.\nIn 2024, several protests targeted the Met during the Israel-Gaza war, citing board members' investments in RTX and a lack of public comment around destruction of cultural heritage during the war. Met workers issued an open letter to the director calling for a public statement and to showcase Palestinian art held in storage. In a March 24 protest, advocates for the Palestinian cause and ceasefire laid a quilt on the front steps.\nThe Michael C. Rockefeller Wing closed temporarily in 2021 for a renovation designed by Beyer Blinder Belle and WHY Architecture. The renovation was finished in May 2025.\nArchitecture.\nAfter negotiations with the City of New York in 1871, the Met was granted the land between the East Park Drive, Fifth Avenue, and the 79th and 85th Street transverse roads in Central Park. The first part of the Met to be built was a red-brick and stone \"mausoleum\" designed by American architect Calvert Vaux and his collaborator Jacob Wrey Mould. The Fifth Avenue facade, Great Hall, and Grand Stairway were designed in the Beaux-Arts style by Richard Morris Hunt and his son, Richard Howland Hunt, in the late 1890s and early 1900s. The firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White completed the wings on the Fifth Avenue facade in 1910. The modernistic glass sides and rear of the museum are the work of Roche-Dinkeloo.\nThe Met Fifth Avenue measures almost long and with more than of floor space, more than 20 times the size of the original 1880 building. The museum building is an accretion of over 20 structures, most of which are not visible from the exterior. The City of New York owns the museum building and contributes utilities, heat, and some of the cost of guardianship. The Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Roof Garden is located on the roof near the southwestern corner of the museum. The museum's main building was designated a city landmark by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1967, and its interior was separately recognized by the Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1977. The Met's main building was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1986, recognizing both its monumental architecture, and its importance as a cultural institution.\nManagement.\nGovernance.\nDaniel Weiss was the President and CEO of the Met, replacing Emily K. Rafferty, who served as president for a decade, and Thomas P. Campbell, CEO and director of the museum until resigning in 2017. In April 2018, Max Hollein was named director. The Met announced in August 2022 that Hollein became CEO in July 2023.\nBoard.\nAlthough the City of New York owns the museum building and contributes utilities, heat, and some of the cost of guardianship, the collections are owned by a private corporation of fellows and benefactors which totals about 950 people. The museum is governed by a board of trustees of 41 elected members, several officials of the City of New York, and persons honored as trustees by the museum. The current co-chairs of the board, Candace Beinecke and Hamilton E. James, were elected in 2021. Other notable trustees include Anna Wintour, Richard Chilton, Candace Beinecke, Alejandro Santo Domingo. The New York City Mayor, City Council speaker, and New York City Comptroller serve as ex officio trustees, who appoint representatives to serve on the board without pay.\nThe activities of board of trustees are organized and based upon the activities of the individual trustees and their various committees as of 2016. The several committees of the board of trustees include the committees listed as Nominating, Executive, Acquisitions, Finance, Investment, Legal, Education, Audit, Employee Benefits, External Affairs, Merchandising, Membership, Building, Technology, and The Fund for the Met.\nFinances.\nAs of 2021, the museum's endowment as administered by the museum's investment officer Lauren Meserve is US$3.3\u00a0billion which provides much of the income for operations while admissions account for only 13 percent of revenue as of fiscal 2016. The 2009\u201310 operating budget was $221\u00a0million (~$ in 2024). The museum admission price as of March 2018 is $25 (~$ in 2024) for out-of-state and foreign visitors, while New York state residents can pay what they wish to enter. Although subject to re-assessment, a 1970 agreement between the museum and the city of New York requires New York state visitors to pay at least a nominal amount; a penny is acceptable. The Met's finance committee is led by Hamilton E. James of The Blackstone Group, who is also one of the board members at the Met. The Met is reported to have an Aaa credit rating, the highest such rating possible. This was last affirmed by Moody's in 2015.\nIn 2019, museum president Daniel Weiss announced that the institution would review its policy for receiving financial donations, under pressure from activist group P.A.I.N. for the role that cultural institutions have played in whitewashing the Sackler family by receiving their donations. The museum announced it would remove the Sackler name from locations within the museum in December 2021.\n2015\u20132018 setbacks.\nIn September 2016, \"The Wall Street Journal\" first reported financial set-backs at the museum related to servicing its outstanding debts and associated cut-backs in staffing at the museum, with the goal of trying to balance its budget by fiscal year 2018. According to the Met's annual tax filing for fiscal year 2016, several top executives had received disproportionately high compensation, often exceeding $1\u00a0million per annum with over $100,000 bonuses per annum.\nIn April 2017, \"The New York Times\" reported that the Met's annual debt was approaching $40\u00a0million, in addition to an outstanding museum bond for $250\u00a0million. This resulted in the indefinite postponement of a planned $600\u00a0million architectural expansion of the exhibition space for the museum's modern art collection as well as started a general discussion over the Met's human resources management. The chairman of the board at the Met elected in 2011, Daniel Brodsky, stated in response to the \"Times\" reports that he \"looked forward to working with my administrative and board colleagues to support a climate of candor, transparency, accountability and mutual respect\". In January 2018, Daniel Weiss as president of the museum stated that a downsized version of the original $600\u00a0million architectural expansion might be reconsidered as early as 2020 at a reduction to the $450\u00a0million level.\nBrodsky, the chairman of the Met, stated that after the 2017 financial setbacks, the director position would be appointed separately from the position of CEO. Following a commissioned report from the Boston Consulting Group, the interim CEO, president, and COO of the Met, Daniel Weiss, said that the Met's 2015\u20132017 financial setbacks were caused by \"slowing revenue, rising costs, and too many projects at once\". Weiss was further reported as having hired Will Manzer, formerly an executive at Perry Ellis, to help re-invigorate recently declining revenues at the museum. On April 26, Weiss stated that the budget shortfall of $15\u00a0million might require a re-assessment and increase in the museum's current admission payment policy. Weiss added that there remained concerns for a sustainable fiscal model for the Met in which city officials \"have a right to a clear understanding of how we would be engaging the public, how we balance access with sustainability\". In May 2017, the Met filed formal proposal to attempt to charge admission fees to out-of-state visitors. Robin Pogrebin, writing for the \"Times\", reported that the request for out-of-state admissions would call for the re-legislation of the New York State 1893 Act which requires that the museum's collections \"shall be kept open and accessible to the public free of all charge throughout the year\", and any unlegislated changes would be subject to challenge by the New York State attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, or one of the tristate counselors, Christopher Porrino or George Jepsen.\nIn January 2018, Pogrebin writing for \"The New York Times\" reported that amid-continuing reverberations from \"a period of financial turbulence and leadership turmoil\" that the museum president Daniel Weiss had announced that the museum would rescind its century-old policy of free admission to the museum and begin charging $25 for out-of-state visitors starting in March 2018. Pogrebin stated that although the museum had made progress in decreasing its deficit from $40\u00a0million to $10\u00a0million, that an adverse decision from the City of New York to curtail funding for the Met's operating costs by as much as $8\u00a0million \"for security and building staff\" caused Weiss to announce the change in admissions policy. Weiss indicated that the new policy would be estimated to increase revenue from the current $43\u00a0million it receives from admissions to an enhanced revenue stream as high as US$49\u00a0million.\nAttendance.\nFor the fiscal year 2017 which ended on June 30, the museum was reported as having 7\u00a0million visitors during the past year, where \"37 percent of these were international visitors, while 30 percent came from New York's five boroughs.\" Previously in 2016, the museum set a record for attendance, attracting 6.7\u00a0million visitors\u2014the highest number since the museum began tracking admissions. Forty percent of the Met's visitors in fiscal year 2016 came from New York City and the tristate area; 41 percent from 190 countries besides the United States. In 2017, the attendance figures indicated seven million annual visitors with 63% of the visitors arriving from outside of New York State.\nRoberta Smith writing for \"The New York Times\" in September 2017 voiced growing public concern that proposed increases in admissions costs would have an adverse effect upon attendance statistics at the museum. Smith referred to the public perception that such costs would appear \"greedy and inappropriate\" because \"The museum already gets around $39 million a year from its gate\u2014equal to the entire annual budget of the Brooklyn Museum.\" Smith's article continued to report the negative response of local communities in the tristate area surrounding the museum which was previously introduced in a series of articles by Robin Pogrebin written during the 2016\u20132017 fiscal year at the museum which criticized speculative suggestions among current administrators at the museum that an added revenue stream could be pursued by the museum by rescinding existing museum policy since 1893 allowing for free public access to the museum. In January 2018, museum president Daniel Weiss announced that the century-old policy of free museum admission would be replaced. Effective March 2018, most visitors who do not live in New York state or are not a student from New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut have to pay $25 (~$ in 2024) to enter the museum. The City of New York has reduced funding at the Metropolitan as part of Mayor De Blasio's political effort to increase artistic diversity. They made an agreement to allow the fees in exchange for less funding which the city pledged to use at alternate facilities and promote diversity.\nHolland Carter and Roberta Smith of \"The New York Times\" argued in response to Weiss's decision to rescind the previous free admission policy as lacking in responsible fiscal planning. They stated that a recent $65\u00a0million expenditure for renovating fountains seemed to be a poor allocation of the limited available funding. Smith added, \"Those new awful Darth Vaderish fountains take huge hunks out of the plaza and disrupt movement\" as an indication of the misuse of funds. Further criticism of Weiss's proposal was voiced internationally when \"The Guardian\" summarized the backlash from the Weiss proposal for raising the admissions fees. It stated, \"Some critics are outraged. The past week has seen a \"New York Times\" piece titled \"The New Pay Policy Is a Mistake\", while Jezebel's Aim\u00e9e Lutkin claimed \"The Met Should Be Fucking Free\". \"The New York Post\" writes that the museum has never had the right to charge admission and Alexandra Schwartz in the \"New Yorker\" says the new policy diminishes New York City\".\nImpact of the COVID-19 pandemic (2020\u20132021).\nIn early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic greatly impacted the Met's operations and led to the museum's first long-term shutdown on March 13. The Met gradually partially reopened in stages. By 2021, the public could visit the Met five days a week, with reduced hours of operation, and visitors were required to wear masks and practice social distancing. Several special exhibits were opened to the public during the reduced hours. There were 6,479,548 visitors in 2019, compared to 1,124,759 in 2020. However, in 2021, the museum attracted 1,958,000 visitors, ranking fourth on the list of most-visited art museums in the world.\nOther services such as the research libraries were almost completely closed except for off-site digital access. As a result, 20 percent of staff positions were eliminated, and Met director Max Hollein indicated that the Met might deaccession and sell off some of its collection to make up financial shortfalls. At least some of the museum's large art holding was placed in storage in order to make-up for losses in revenue causes by responses to the pandemic.\nDeaccessioning works of art.\nThe Met has always deaccessioned works to improve the collection by using the proceeds to purchase better or more appropriate works. As noted above, it has deaccessioned nearly two-thirds of the founding purchase of Old Master paintings made in 1871. As early as 1887, it sold 5,000 Cypriot objects in order to purchase Egyptian antiquities, and over the years it sold many thousands more works from Cyprus. 15,000 Egyptian objects were sold in the museum's shop in 1955, and nearly 10,000 works from other departments were earmarked that year for sale at auction.\nThe Metropolitan Museum of Art spent $39\u00a0million to acquire art for the fiscal year ending in June 2012. In 2020, it spent $29,824,000 (with $6,747,000 coming from insurance and the sale of art). In 2021, it spent $36,402,000 (with $4,007,000 coming from insurance and the sale of art). In 2022, it spent $74,432,000 (with $9,488,000 coming from insurance and the sale of art); in 2023 it spent $52,401,000 (with $7,444,000 coming from insurance and the sale of art).\nIn the early 1970s, under the directorship of Thomas Hoving, the Met revised its deaccessioning policy. It sought to acquire \"world-class\" pieces, including through the sale of mid- to high-value items from its collection. Though the Met had always sold duplicate or minor items from its collection to fund the acquisition of new pieces, the Met's new policy allowed the sale of important items with high values, objects regarded as part of the museum's core collection. Hoving's deaccessioning practices, including secretive non-public sales that violated donor wishes, was exposed by John L. Hess in a series of articles in the \"New York Times\". These expos\u00e9s provoked widespread criticism when they came to light, and they were compounded by deceitful and misleading statements made by Hoving, who was censured by the College Art Association and the Art Dealers Association of America. This resulted in an investigation of the museum by the New York State Attorney General Louis J. Lefkowitz, who held public hearings in 1972. As a result of these hearings, the museum agreed to list in its annual report the total cash proceeds from art sales each year, and to itemize any deaccessioned objects valued at more than $50,000 each. It also agreed to sell those pieces at public auction and provide advance public notice of a work being sold if it had been on view in the last ten years. Known as the \"Hoving Affair\", the deaccessioning scandal has been written about by Calvin Tomkins, in \"Merchants and Masterpieces\" (1970; rev. ed. 1989), Michael Gross in \"Rogues' Gallery\" (2009), and Martin Gammon, \"Deaccessioning and its Discontents: A Critical History\" (2018), though the most comprehensive account remains Hess's 1974 book, \"The Grand Acquisitors\".\nTwo of the objects purchased with funds generated by Hoving's deaccessions were highlights of the Met's collection. Diego Vel\u00e1zquez's 1650 \"Portrait of Juan de Pareja\" (bought in part through deaccessioned works) and a classical Greek vase, the Euphronios Krater, which depicted the death of Sarpedon (funded by the sale of the museum's classical coin collection). The latter, which proved to be looted, was repatriated to Italy in 2006. The Met has sold such valuable pieces as Edward Steichen's 1904 photograph \"The Pond-Moonlight\" (which it regarded as a duplicate, since another copy was already in the Met's collection) for a record price of $2.9\u00a0million.\nHoving was criticized for selling important works from the museum to fund his acquisitions, including a Henri Rousseau and a Van Gogh, and he planned to sell many more, including 14 Monet paintings he characterized as \"routine\". During the tenure of director Philippe de Montebello, the sale of a single Monet (together with the construction of purpose-built galleries) eventually led to the acquisition of two collections totaling 220 paintings, which established the museum's remarkable plein-air paintings collection.\nAnother deaccessioning controversy broke out in 2021, when the Association of Art Museum Directors temporarily relaxed its guidelines due to hardships suffered by museums during the COVID pandemic. Previously, funds from deaccessioned works were only to be used to purchase other works for the permanent collection. The temporary guidelines, however, permitted these monies to be used for the \"care\" of the collection. The Met decided to use funds from deaccessions for collection care (to pay salaries). It was roundly criticized for this decision by the Met's former director Thomas P. Campbell (Montebello's successor), by cultural critic Lee Rosenbaum, and by Pulitzer Prize winning journalist Christopher Knight, among others. They argued that the practice set a bad example for other museums and that the Met did not truly need these monies.\nLooted art.\nOne of the most serious and daunting challenges to the Metropolitan Museum's respectable reputation has been a series of allegations and lawsuits about its known status as an institutional buyer of looted and stolen antiquities. Since the 1990s the Met has been the subject of countless investigative reports and books critical of the Met's \"laissez-faire\" attitude to acquisition. The Met has lost several major lawsuits, notably against the governments of Italy and Turkey, which successfully sought the repatriation of hundreds of ancient Mediterranean and Middle Eastern antiquities, with a total value in the hundreds of millions of dollars. In August 2022, it was reported that the Cambodian government was pressuring the museum to return Khmer artifacts that were allegedly looted during the civil war and the tumultuous period following. In September 2022, New York law enforcement, across three separate search warrants, seized 27 artifacts highlighting ancient Rome, Greece, and Egypt, with the intention of returning them to Italy and Egypt. These 27 objects were worth an aggregate total of $13 million. The items were seized due to their discovered link to known antiquities traffickers. This comes along with an international recalculation of what belongs in the museums of the world. Similar cases of repatriation conversations include the Elgin Marbles, the Benin Bronzes, and El Penacho. Along with the conversation about returning art, the art community is calling upon museological institutions to hold themselves to a higher standard of Social Justice, equity, and ethics. On March 22, 2023, Manhattan prosecutors seized 15 allegedly stolen antiquities tied to Subhash Kapoor. In December 2023, the museum announced it will return 14 Khmer sculptures to Cambodia and 2 to Thailand after determining they were stolen and linked to art dealer Douglas Latchford.\nLooted Indigenous American art and NAGPRA violations.\nSince 1993, Charles and Valerie Diker have donated 139 Indigenous objects to the museum, many of which are funerary. Most of these objects have ownership histories with 200\u20132,000 year gaps in known owners. The display of Native American funerary objects is problematic, not just because of its unethical spotlighting of private ceremonial objects, but also due to its violation of NAGPRA. NAGPRA, the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, established in 1990, states that institutions that receive federal funding must work to repatriate Native American human remains, funerary objects, and other ceremonially important objects. This was done to ensure that the respect and dignity deserved by all humans was given to Native Americans. Part of the goal of enacting NAGPRA was to begin a dialogue between American museum institutions and Indigenous groups. Written into NAGPRA is an acknowledgement of museums as the preservers of history. The Met has been able to avoid the repatriation of valuable objects that fall under the grasp of NAGPRA because they have not formally owned them. Objects that are on permanent or semi-permanent loan to a museum do not legally necessitate the initiation of the repatriation process. As the Diker collection is slowly incorporated into the Met's permanent collection, the objects will become illegal possessions, as the Met is a publicly funded institution.\nIn April 2023, ProPublica published a report detailing the Indigenous American collections of the Met Museum. The report exposed the loophole of loan vs. own that the Met was using to cling onto objects that they had an ethical and legal responsibility to repatriate. The report came to the conclusion that the Native American art held by the Met could only have come into the possession of the Diker's through violence, looting, and dispossession. Additionally, the report exposed that only 15% of the 193 objects donated to the Met by the Diker collection have known provenance. The Report was the cause of international outcry due to its bold pinpointing of just some of the Met's shoddy acquisitioning history. This callout of the unequivocally respected institution that is the Met Museum caused a reckoning amongst museums displaying Indigenous American art. In response to this scandal, the Met claimed that they were in contact with tribal governments about creating appropriate displays of Native American art and funerary objects, but did not specify which tribes.\nHead of a Griffin.\nIn February 2025, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York announced the return of a 2,700-year-old bronze griffin head to Greece. The artifact, dating to the 7th century B.C., had been in the museum\u2019s collection since 1950. An internal investigation, prompted by new information from Greek authorities and independent researchers, confirmed that the piece had been looted from an archaeological site before reaching the museum through a private collector.\nCollecting practices.\nIn response to many controversies, the museum issued a statement on collecting practices. The statement encompasses all 1.5 million works of art held by the Met. Referencing research, transparency, and collaboration, this statement is a clear redefining of the Met's outlook on looted art and artwork with unknown histories. \"As a pre-eminent voice in the global art community, it is incumbent upon the Met to engage more intensively and proactively in examining certain areas of our collection,\" stated Max Hollein, the director of the museum. The Met hired a manager of provenance research with a team of three staff to assist the already-employed curators and historians.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37536", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37536", "title": "Central Park", "text": "Public park in Manhattan, New York\nCentral Park is an urban park between the Upper West Side and Upper East Side neighborhoods of Manhattan in New York City, and the first landscaped park in the United States. It is the sixth-largest park in the city, containing , and the most visited urban park in the United States, with an estimated 42\u00a0million visitors annually as of 2016[ [update]]. Central Park is owned by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation but has been managed by the Central Park Conservancy since 1998 under a contract with the government of New York City in a public\u2013private partnership. The conservancy, a non-profit organization, sets Central Park's annual operating budget and is responsible for care of the park.\nThe creation of a large park in Manhattan was first proposed in the 1840s, and a park approved in 1853. In 1858, landscape architects Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux won a design competition for the park with their \"Greensward Plan\". Construction began in 1857; existing structures, including a majority-Black settlement named Seneca Village, were seized through eminent domain and razed. The park's first areas were opened to the public in late 1858. Additional land at the northern end of Central Park was purchased in 1859, and the park was completed in 1876. After a period of decline in the early 20th\u00a0century, New York City parks commissioner Robert Moses started a program to clean up Central Park in the 1930s. The Central Park Conservancy, created in 1980 to combat further deterioration in the late 20th\u00a0century, refurbished many parts of the park starting in the 1980s.\nThe park's main attractions include the Ramble and Lake, Hallett Nature Sanctuary, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir, Sheep Meadow, Wollman Rink, Central Park Carousel, Central Park Zoo, Central Park Mall, Bethesda Terrace, and the Delacorte Theater. The biologically diverse ecosystem has several hundred species of flora and fauna. Recreational activities include carriage-horse and bicycle tours, bicycling, sports facilities, and concerts and events such as Shakespeare in the Park. Central Park is traversed by a system of roads and walkways and is served by public transportation. Central Park is one of the most filmed locations in the world, and its design has inspired that of other parks. It was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1963 and a New York City scenic landmark in 1974.\nDescription.\nCentral Park is bordered by Central Park North at 110th Street, Central Park South at 59th Street, Central Park West at Eighth Avenue, and Fifth Avenue on the east. The park is adjacent to the neighborhoods of Harlem to the north, Midtown Manhattan to the south, the Upper West Side to the west, and the Upper East Side to the east. It measures \u00a0from north to south and \u00a0from west to east.\nDesign and layout.\nCentral Park is split into three sections: the North End extending above the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir, Mid-Park, between the reservoir to the north and the Lake and Conservatory Water to the south, and South End below the Lake and Conservatory Water. The park has five visitor centers: Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, Belvedere Castle, Chess &amp; Checkers House, the Dairy, and Columbus Circle.\nThe park has been described as the first landscaped park in the United States. It has natural-looking plantings and landforms, having been almost entirely landscaped when built in the 1850s and 1860s. It has eight lakes and ponds that were created artificially by damming natural seeps and flows. There are several wooded sections, lawns, meadows, and minor grassy areas. There are 21\u00a0children's playgrounds, and of drives.\nCentral Park is the sixth-largest park in New York City, behind Pelham Bay Park, the Staten Island Greenbelt, Freshkills Park, Van Cortlandt Park, and Flushing Meadows\u2013Corona Park, with an area of . Central Park constitutes its own United States census tract, numbered 143. According to American Community Survey five-year estimates, the park was home to four females with a median age of 19.8. Though the 2010 United States census recorded 25 residents within the census tract, park officials have rejected the claim of anyone permanently living there.\nVisitors.\nCentral Park is the most visited urban park in the United States and one of the most visited tourist attractions worldwide, with 42\u00a0million visitors in 2016. The number of unique visitors is much lower; a Central Park Conservancy report conducted in 2011 found that between eight and nine million people visited Central Park, with 37 to 38\u00a0million visits between them. By comparison, there were 25\u00a0million visitors in 2009, and 12.3\u00a0million in 1973.\nThe number of tourists as a proportion of total visitors is much lower: in 2009, one-fifth of the 25\u00a0million park visitors recorded that year were estimated to be tourists. The 2011 Conservancy report gave a similar ratio of park usage: only 14%\u00a0of visits are by people visiting Central Park for the first time. According to the report, nearly two-thirds of visitors are regular park users who enter the park at least once weekly, and about 70%\u00a0of visitors live in New York City. Moreover, peak visitation occurred during summer weekends, and most visitors used the park for passive recreational activities such as walking or sightseeing, rather than for active sport.\nGovernance.\nThe park is managed and maintained by the Central Park Conservancy, a private, not-for-profit organization, under contract with the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC Parks). The president of the Conservancy is the \"ex officio\" administrator of Central Park who effectively oversees the work of both the park's private and public employees under the authority of the publicly appointed Central Park Administrator, who reports to both the parks commissioner and the Conservancy's president. The Central Park Conservancy was founded in 1980 as a nonprofit organization with a citizen board to assist with the city's initiatives to clean up and rehabilitate the park. The Conservancy took over the park's management duties from NYC Parks in 1998, though NYC Parks retained ownership of Central Park. The conservancy provides maintenance support and staff training programs for other public parks in New York City, and has assisted with the development of new parks such as the High Line and Brooklyn Bridge Park.\nCentral Park is patrolled by its own New York City Police Department precinct, the 22nd\u00a0(Central Park) Precinct, at the 86th\u00a0Street transverse. The precinct employs both regular police and auxiliary officers. The 22nd\u00a0Precinct has a lower crime rate than in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 81.2% between 1990 and 2023. The precinct saw no murders, three\u00a0rapes, 23\u00a0robberies, nine\u00a0felony assaults, five\u00a0burglaries, 48\u00a0grand larcenies, and no grand larcenies auto in 2023. The citywide New York City Parks Enforcement Patrol patrols Central Park, and the Central Park Conservancy sometimes hires seasonal Parks Enforcement Patrol officers to protect certain features such as the Conservatory Garden. In 2025, the Conservancy created the Central Park Conservancy Ranger Corps to handle quality-of-life issues and help homeless individuals.\nA free volunteer medical emergency service, the Central Park Medical Unit, operates within Central Park. The unit operates a rapid-response patrol with bicycles, ambulances, and an all-terrain vehicle. Before the unit was established in 1975, municipal EMS often took over 30\u00a0minutes to respond to incidents in the park.\nHistory.\nPlanning.\nBetween 1821 and 1855, New York City's population nearly quadrupled. As the city expanded northward up Manhattan, people were drawn to the few existing open spaces, mainly cemeteries, for passive recreation. These were seen as escapes from the noise and chaotic life in the city, which at the time was almost entirely centered on Lower Manhattan. The Commissioners' Plan of 1811, the outline for Manhattan's modern street grid, included several smaller open spaces but not Central Park. As such, John Randel Jr. had surveyed the grounds for the construction of intersections within the modern-day park site. The only remaining surveying bolt from his survey is embedded in a rock north of the present Dairy and the 66th\u00a0Street transverse, marking the location where West 65th\u00a0Street would have intersected Sixth Avenue.\nSite.\nBy the 1840s, members of the city's elite were publicly calling for the construction of a new large park in Manhattan. At the time, Manhattan's seventeen squares comprised a combined of land, the largest of which was the Battery Park at Manhattan island's southern tip. These plans were endorsed in 1844 by \"New York Evening Post\" editor William Cullen Bryant, and in 1851 by Andrew Jackson Downing, one of the first American landscape designers.\nMayor Ambrose Kingsland, in a message to the New York City Common Council on May 5, 1851, set forth the necessity and benefits of a large new park and proposed the council move to create such a park. Kingsland's proposal was referred to the council's Committee of Lands, which endorsed the proposal. The committee chose Jones's Wood, a tract of land between 66th\u00a0and 75th\u00a0streets on the Upper East Side, as the park's site, as Bryant had advocated for Jones Wood. The acquisition was controversial because of its location, small size relative to other potential uptown tracts, and cost. A bill to acquire Jones's Wood was invalidated as unconstitutional, so attention turned to a second site: a area known as \"Central Park\", bounded by 59th\u00a0and 106th\u00a0streets between Fifth and Eighth avenues. Croton Aqueduct Board president Nicholas Dean, who proposed the Central Park site, chose it because the Croton Aqueduct's , collecting reservoir would be in the geographical center. In July 1853, the New York State Legislature passed the Central Park Act, authorizing the purchase of the present-day site of Central Park.\nThe board of land commissioners conducted property assessments on more than 34,000 lots in the area, completing them by July 1855. While the assessments were ongoing, proposals to downsize the plans were vetoed by mayor Fernando Wood. At the time, the site was occupied by free black people and Irish immigrants who had developed a property-owning community there since 1825. Most of the Central Park site's residents lived in small villages, such as Pigtown; Seneca Village; or in the school and convent at Mount St. Vincent's Academy. Clearing began shortly after the land commission's report was released in October 1855, and approximately 1,600 residents were evicted under eminent domain. Though supporters claimed that the park would cost just $1.7\u00a0million, the total cost of the land ended up being $7.39\u00a0million (equivalent to $ in 2024), more than the price that the United States would pay for Alaska a few years later.\nDesign contest.\nIn June 1856, Fernando Wood appointed a \"consulting board\" of seven people, headed by author Washington Irving, to inspire public confidence in the proposed development. Wood hired military engineer Egbert Ludovicus Viele as the park's chief engineer, tasking him with a topographical survey of the site. The following April, the state legislature passed a bill to authorize the appointment of four Democratic and seven Republican commissioners, who had exclusive control over the planning and construction process. Though Viele had already devised a plan for the park, the commissioners disregarded it and retained him to complete only the topographical surveys. The Central Park Commission began hosting a landscape design contest shortly after its creation. The commission specified that each entry contain extremely detailed specifications, as mandated by the consulting board. Thirty-three firms or organizations submitted plans.\nIn April 1858, the park commissioners selected Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux's \"Greensward Plan\" as the winning design. Three other plans were designated as runners-up and featured in a city exhibit. Unlike many of the other designs, which effectively integrated Central Park with the surrounding city, Olmsted and Vaux's proposal introduced clear separations with sunken transverse roadways. The plan eschewed symmetry, instead opting for a more picturesque design. It was influenced by the pastoral ideals of landscaped cemeteries such as Mount Auburn in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Green-Wood in Brooklyn. The design was also inspired by Olmsted's 1850 visit to Birkenhead Park in Birkenhead, England, which is generally acknowledged as the first publicly funded civil park in the world. According to Olmsted, the park was \"of great importance as the first real Park made in this country\u2014a democratic development of the highest significance\".\nConstruction.\nConstruction of Central Park's design was executed by a gamut of professionals. Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux were the primary designers, assisted by board member Andrew Haswell Green, architect Jacob Wrey Mould, master gardener Ignaz Anton Pilat, and engineer George E. Waring Jr. Olmsted was responsible for the overall plan, while Vaux designed some of the finer details. Mould, who worked frequently with Vaux, designed the Central Park Esplanade and the Tavern on the Green building. Pilat was the park's chief landscape architect, whose primary responsibility was the importation and placement of plants within the park. A \"corps\" of construction engineers and foremen, managed by superintending engineer William H. Grant, were tasked with the measuring and constructing architectural features such as paths, roads, and buildings. Waring was one of the engineers working under Grant's leadership and was in charge of land drainage.\nCentral Park was difficult to construct because of the generally rocky and swampy landscape. Around of soil and rocks had to be transported out of the park, and more gunpowder was used to clear the area than was used at the Battle of Gettysburg during the American Civil War. More than of topsoil were transported from Long Island and New Jersey, because the original soil was neither fertile nor sufficiently substantial to sustain the flora specified in the Greensward Plan. Modern steam-powered equipment and custom tree-moving machines augmented the work of unskilled laborers. In total, over 20,000 individuals helped construct Central Park. Because of extreme precautions taken to minimize collateral damage, five laborers died during the project, at a time when fatality rates were generally much higher.\nDuring the development of Central Park, Superintendent Olmsted hired several dozen mounted police officers, who were classified into two types of \"keepers\": park keepers and gate keepers. The mounted police were viewed favorably by park patrons and were later incorporated into a permanent patrol. The regulations were sometimes strict. For instance, prohibited actions included games of chance, speech-making, large congregations such as picnics, or picking flowers or other parts of plants. These ordinances were effective: by 1866, there had been nearly eight million visits and only 110 arrests in the park's history.\nLate 1850s.\nIn late August 1857, workers began building fences, clearing vegetation, draining the land, and leveling uneven terrain. By the following month, chief engineer Viele reported that the project employed nearly 700 workers. Olmsted employed workers using day labor, hiring men directly without any contracts and paying them by the day. Many of the laborers were Irish immigrants or first-or-second generation Irish Americans, and some Germans and Italians; there were no black or female laborers. The workers were often underpaid, and workers would often take jobs at other construction projects to supplement their income. A pattern of seasonal hiring was established, wherein more workers would be hired and paid at higher rates during the summers.\nFor several months, the park commissioners faced funding issues, and a dedicated workforce and funding stream was not secured until June 1858. The landscaped Upper Reservoir was the only part of the park that the commissioners were not responsible for constructing; instead, the Reservoir would be built by the Croton Aqueduct board. Work on the Reservoir started in April 1858. The first major work in Central Park involved grading the driveways and draining the land in the park's southern section. The Lake in Central Park's southwestern section was the first feature to open to the public, in December 1858, followed by the Ramble in June 1859. The same year, the New York State Legislature authorized the purchase of an additional at the northern end of Central Park, from 106th\u00a0to 110th\u00a0Streets. The section of Central Park south of 79th\u00a0Street was mostly completed by 1860.\nThe park commissioners reported in June 1860 that $4\u00a0million had been spent on the construction to date. As a result of the sharply rising construction costs, the commissioners eliminated or downsized several features in the Greensward Plan. Based on claims of cost mismanagement, the New York State Senate commissioned the Swiss engineer Julius Kellersberger to write a report on the park. Kellersberger's report, submitted in 1861, stated that the commission's management of the park was a \"triumphant success\".\n1860s.\nOlmsted often clashed with the park commissioners, notably with Chief Commissioner Green. Olmsted resigned in June 1862, and Green was appointed to Olmsted's position. Vaux resigned in 1863 because of what he saw as pressure from Green. As superintendent of the park, Green accelerated construction, though having little experience in architecture. He implemented a style of micromanagement, keeping records of the smallest transactions in an effort to reduce costs. Green finalized the negotiations to purchase the northernmost of the park which was later converted into a \"rugged\" woodland and the Harlem Meer waterway.\nWhen the American Civil War began in 1861, the park commissioners decided to continue building Central Park, since significant parts of the park had already been completed. Only three major structures were completed during the Civil War: the Music Stand and the Casino restaurant, both later demolished, and the Bethesda Terrace and Fountain. By late 1861, the park south of 72nd\u00a0Street had been completed, except for various fences. Work had begun on the northern section of the park but was complicated by a need to preserve the historic McGowan's Pass. The Upper Reservoir was completed the following year.\nDuring this period Central Park began to gain popularity. One of the main attractions was the \"Carriage Parade\", a daily display of horse-drawn carriages that traversed the park. Park patronage grew steadily: by 1867, Central Park accommodated nearly three million pedestrians, 85,000 horses, and 1.38\u00a0million vehicles annually. The park had activities for New Yorkers of all social classes. While the wealthy could ride horses on bridle paths or travel in horse-drawn carriages, almost everyone was able to participate in sports such as ice-skating or rowing, or listen to concerts at the Mall's bandstand.\nOlmsted and Vaux were re-hired in mid-1865. Several structures were erected, including the Children's District, the Ballplayers House, and the Dairy in the southern part of Central Park. Construction commenced on Belvedere Castle, Harlem Meer, and structures on Conservatory Water and the Lake.\n1870\u20131876: completion.\nThe Tammany Hall political machine, which was the largest political force in New York at the time, was in control of Central Park for a brief period beginning in April 1870. A new charter created by Tammany boss William M. Tweed abolished the old 11-member commission and replaced it with one with five men composed of Green and four other Tammany-connected figures. Subsequently, Olmsted and Vaux resigned again from the project in November 1870. After Tweed's embezzlement was publicly revealed in 1871, leading to his imprisonment, Olmsted and Vaux were re-hired, and the Central Park Commission appointed new members who were mostly in favor of Olmsted.\nOne of the areas that remained relatively untouched was the underdeveloped western side of Central Park, though some large structures would be erected in the park's remaining empty plots. By 1872, Manhattan Square had been reserved for the American Museum of Natural History, founded three years before at the Arsenal. A corresponding area on the East Side, originally intended as a playground, would later become the Metropolitan Museum of Art. In the final years of Central Park's construction, Vaux and Mould designed several structures for Central Park. The park's sheepfold (now Tavern on the Green) and Ladies' Meadow were designed by Mould in 1870\u20131871, followed by the administrative offices on the 86th\u00a0Street transverse in 1872. Even though Olmsted and Vaux's partnership was dissolved by the end of 1872, the park was not officially completed until 1876.\nLate 19th and early 20th centuries: first decline.\nBy the 1870s, the park's patrons increasingly came to include the middle and working class, and strict regulations were gradually eased, such as those against public gatherings. Because of the heightened visitor count, neglect by the Tammany administration, and budget cuts demanded by taxpayers, the maintenance expenses for Central Park had reached a nadir by 1879. Olmsted blamed politicians, real estate owners, and park workers for Central Park's decline, though high maintenance costs were also a factor. By the 1890s, the park faced several challenges: cars were becoming commonplace, and with the proliferation of amusements and refreshment stands, people were beginning to see the park as a recreational attraction. The 1904 opening of the New York City Subway displaced Central Park as the city's predominant leisure destination, as New Yorkers could travel to farther destinations such as Coney Island beaches or Broadway theaters for a five-cent fare.\nIn the late 19th\u00a0century the landscape architect Samuel Parsons took the position of New York City parks superintendent. A onetime apprentice of Calvert Vaux, Parsons helped restore the nurseries of Central Park in 1886. Parsons closely followed Olmsted's original vision for the park, restoring Central Park's trees while blocking the placement of several large statues in the park. Under Parsons' leadership, two circles (now Duke Ellington and Frederick Douglass Circles) were constructed at the northern corners of the park. He was removed in May 1911 following a lengthy dispute over whether an expense to replace the soil in the park was unnecessary. A succession of Tammany-affiliated Democratic mayors were indifferent toward Central Park.\nSeveral park advocacy groups were formed in the early 20th\u00a0century. To preserve the park's character, the citywide Parks and Playground Association, and a consortium of multiple Central Park civic groups operating under the Parks Conservation Association, were formed in the 1900s and 1910s. These associations advocated against such changes to the park as the construction of a library, sports stadium, a cultural center, and an underground parking lot. A third group, the Central Park Association, was created in 1926. The Central Park Association and the Parks and Playgrounds Association were merged into the Park Association of New York City two years later.\nThe Heckscher Playground\u2014named after philanthropist August Heckscher, who donated the play equipment\u2014opened near its southern end in 1926, and quickly became popular with poor immigrant families. The following year, Mayor Jimmy Walker commissioned landscape designer Hermann W. Merkel to create a plan to improve Central Park. Merkel's plans would combat vandalism and plant destruction, rehabilitate paths, and add eight new playgrounds, at a cost of $1\u00a0million. One of the suggested modifications, underground irrigation pipes, were installed soon after Merkel's report was submitted. The other improvements outlined in the report, such as fences to mitigate plant destruction, were postponed due to the Great Depression.\n1930s to 1950s: Moses rehabilitation.\nIn 1934, Republican Fiorello La Guardia was elected mayor of New York City. He unified the five park-related departments then in existence. Newly appointed city parks commissioner Robert Moses was given the task of cleaning up the park, and he summarily fired many of the Tammany-era staff. At the time, the lawns were filled with weeds and dust patches, while many trees were dying or already dead. Monuments had been vandalized, equipment and walkways were broken, and ironwork was rusted. Moses's biographer Robert Caro later said, \"The once beautiful Mall looked like a scene of a wild party the morning after. Benches lay on their backs, their legs jabbing at the sky...\"\nDuring the following year, the city's parks department replanted lawns and flowers, replaced dead trees and bushes, sandblasted walls, repaired roads and bridges, and restored statues. The park menagerie was transformed into the modern Central Park Zoo, and a rat extermination program was instituted within the zoo. Another dramatic change was Moses' removal of the \"Hoover valley\" shantytown at the north end of Turtle Pond, which became the Great Lawn. The western part of the Pond at the park's southeast corner became an ice skating rink called Wollman Rink, roads were improved or widened, and twenty-one playgrounds were added. These projects used funds from the New Deal program, and donations from the public. Moses removed Sheep Meadow's sheep to make way for the Tavern on the Green restaurant.\nRenovations in the 1940s and 1950s include a restoration of the Harlem Meer completed in 1943, and a new boathouse completed in 1954. Moses began construction on several other recreational features in Central Park, such as playgrounds and ball fields. One of the more controversial projects proposed during this time was a 1956 dispute over a parking lot for Tavern in the Green. The controversy placed Moses, an urban planner known for displacing families for other large projects around the city, against a group of mothers who frequented a wooded hollow at the site of a parking lot. Though opposed by the parents, Moses approved the destruction of part of the hollow. Demolition work commenced after Central Park was closed for the night and was only halted after the threat of a lawsuit.\n1960s and 1970s: \"Events Era\" and second decline.\nMoses left his position in May 1960. No park commissioner since then has been able to exercise the same degree of power, nor did NYC Parks remain in as stable a position in the aftermath of his departure. Eight commissioners held the office in the twenty years following his departure. The city experienced economic and social changes, with some residents moving to the suburbs. Interest in Central Park's landscape had long since declined, and it was now mostly being used for recreation. Several unrealized additions were proposed for Central Park in that decade, such as a public housing development, a golf course, and a \"revolving world's fair\".\nThe 1960s marked the beginning of an \"Events Era\" in Central Park that reflected the widespread cultural and political trends of the period. The Public Theater's annual Shakespeare in the Park festival was settled in the Delacorte Theater, and summer performances were instituted on the Sheep Meadow and the Great Lawn by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra and the Metropolitan Opera. During the late 1960s, the park became the venue for rallies and cultural events such as the \"love-ins\" and \"be-ins\" of the period. The same year, Lasker Rink opened in the northern part of the park; the facility served as an ice rink in winter and Central Park's only swimming pool in summer.\nBy the mid-1970s, managerial neglect resulted in a decline in park conditions. A 1973 report noted that the park suffered from severe erosion and tree decay, and that individual structures were being vandalized or neglected. The Central Park Community Fund was subsequently created based on the recommendation of a report from a Columbia University professor. The Fund then commissioned a study of the park's management and suggested the appointment of both a NYC Parks administrator and a board of citizens. In 1979, Parks Commissioner Gordon Davis established the Office of Central Park Administrator and appointed Elizabeth Barlow, the executive director of the Central Park Task Force, to the position. The Central Park Conservancy, a nonprofit organization with a citizen board, was founded the following year.\n1970s to 2000s: restoration.\nUnder the leadership of the Central Park Conservancy, the park's reclamation began by addressing needs that could not be met within NYC Parks' existing resources. The Conservancy hired interns and a small restoration staff to reconstruct and repair unique rustic features, undertaking horticultural projects, and removing graffiti under the broken windows theory which advocated removing visible signs of decay. The first structure to be renovated was the Dairy, which reopened as the park's first visitor center in 1979. The Sheep Meadow, which reopened the following year, was the first landscape to be restored. Bethesda Terrace and Fountain, the USS \"Maine\" National Monument, and the Bow Bridge were also rehabilitated. By then, the Conservancy was engaged in design efforts and long-term restoration planning, and in 1981, Davis and Barlow announced a 10-year, $100\u00a0million \"Central Park Management and Restoration Plan\". The long-closed Belvedere Castle was renovated and reopened in 1983, while the Central Park Zoo closed for a full reconstruction that year. To reduce the maintenance effort, large gatherings such as free concerts were canceled.\nOn completion of the planning stage in 1985, the Conservancy launched its first campaign and mapped out a 15-year restoration plan. Over the next several years, the campaign restored landmarks in the southern part of the park, such as Grand Army Plaza and the police station at the 86th\u00a0Street transverse; while Conservatory Garden in the northeastern corner of the park was restored to a design by Lynden B. Miller. Real estate developer Donald Trump renovated the Wollman Rink in 1987 after plans to renovate it were delayed repeatedly. The following year, the Zoo reopened after a $35\u00a0million, four-year renovation.\nWork on the northern end of the park began in 1989. A$51\u00a0million campaign, announced in 1993, resulted in the restoration of bridle trails, the Mall, the Harlem Meer, and the North Woods, and the construction of the Dana Discovery Center on the Harlem Meer. This was followed by the Conservancy's overhaul of the near the Great Lawn and Turtle Pond, which was completed in 1997. The Upper Reservoir was decommissioned as a part of the city's water supply system in 1993, and was renamed after former U.S. first lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis the next year. During the mid-1990s, the Conservancy hired additional volunteers and implemented a zone-based system of management throughout the park. The Conservancy assumed much of the park's operations in early 1998.\nRenovations continued through the first decade of the 21st\u00a0century, and a project to restore the pond was commenced in 2000. Four years later, the Conservancy replaced a chain-link fence with a replica of the original cast-iron fence that surrounded the Upper Reservoir. It started refurbishing the ceiling tiles of the Bethesda Arcade, which was completed in 2007. Soon after, the Central Park Conservancy began restoring the Ramble and Lake, in a project that was completed in 2012. Bank Rock Bridge was restored, and the Gill, which empties into the lake, was reconstructed to approximate its dramatic original form. The final feature to be restored was the East Meadow, which was rehabilitated in 2011.\n2010s to present.\nIn 2014, the New York City Council proposed a study on the viability of banning vehicular traffic from the park's drives. The next year, mayor Bill de Blasio announced that West and East drives north of 72nd\u00a0Street would be closed to vehicular traffic, because the city's data showed that closing the roads did not adversely impact traffic flows. Subsequently, in June 2018, the remaining drives south of 72nd\u00a0Street were closed to vehicular traffic. Several structures were also renovated in the 2010s. Belvedere Castle was closed in 2018 for an extensive renovation, reopening in June 2019. Later in 2018, it was announced that the Delacorte Theater would be closed from 2020 to 2022 for a $110\u00a0million rebuild. The Central Park Conservancy further announced that Lasker Rink would be closed for a $150\u00a0million renovation; demolition of the existing rink began in 2021.\nIn March 2020, in response to the coronavirus pandemic, temporary field hospitals were set up within the park to treat overflow patients from area hospitals. By mid-2023, the New York City government was considering erecting tents in Central Park to temporarily house asylum seekers. This move came after the federal government repealed an order authorizing Title 42 expulsions of migrants, which had been implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic. A renovation of the Chess and Checkers House was completed in June 2023, and a renovation of the Delacorte Theater began later that year. In addition, pickleball courts were added to Wollman Rink in 2023 and became permanent the next year. The Central Park Conservancy allocated $64\u00a0million in early 2024 to fix sidewalks on 108 blocks immediately surrounding the park. Later that year, the conservancy announced plans to redesign the park's drives to provide bike lanes and pedestrian paths of consistent width. A report by the conservancy also recommended constructing bike lanes on the 86th Street transverse, as well as removing traffic lights from the park, which served little purpose due to the lack of vehicular traffic.\nDavis Center, which replaced the old Lasker Rink, was completed in April 2025. The renovated Delacorte Theater reopened that July.\nLandscape features.\nGeology.\nThere are four different types of bedrock in Manhattan. In Central Park, Manhattan schist and Hartland schist, which are both metamorphosed sedimentary rock, are exposed in various outcroppings. The other two types, Fordham gneiss (an older deeper layer) and Inwood marble (metamorphosed limestone which overlays the gneiss), do not surface in the park. Fordham gneiss, which consists of metamorphosed igneous rocks, was formed a billion years ago, during the Grenville orogeny that occurred during the creation of an ancient super-continent. Manhattan schist and Hartland schist were formed in the Iapetus Ocean during the Taconic orogeny in the Paleozoic era, about 450\u00a0million years ago, when the tectonic plates began to merge to form the supercontinent Pangaea. Cameron's Line, a fault zone that traverses Central Park on an east\u2013west axis, divides the outcroppings of Hartland schist to the south and Manhattan schist to the north.\nVarious glaciers have covered the area of Central Park in the past, with the most recent being the Wisconsin glacier which receded about 12,000\u00a0years ago. Evidence of past glaciers can be seen throughout the park in the form of glacial erratics (large boulders dropped by the receding glacier) and north\u2013south glacial striations visible on stone outcroppings. Alignments of glacial erratics, called \"boulder trains\", are present throughout Central Park. The most notable of these outcroppings is Rat Rock (also known as Umpire Rock), a circular outcropping at the southwestern corner of the park. It measures wide and tall with different east, west, and north faces. Boulderers sometimes congregate there. A single glacial pothole with yellow clay is near the southwest corner of the park.\nThe underground geology of Central Park was altered by the construction of several subway lines underneath it, and by the New York City Water Tunnel No.\u00a03 approximately underground. Excavations for the project have uncovered pegmatite, feldspar, quartz, biotite, and several metals.\nWooded areas and lawns.\nThere are three wooded areas in Central Park: North Woods, the Ramble, and Hallett Nature Sanctuary. These areas function as small forest patches with canopy layers, understory trees and shrubs that create cooler, shaded microclimates compared to its surrounding area of the city. North Woods, the largest of the woodlands, is at the northwestern corner of Central Park. It covers about adjacent to North Meadow. The name sometimes applies to other attractions in the park's northern end; these adjacent features plus the area of North Woods can be . North Woods contains the Ravine, a forest with deciduous trees on its northwestern slope, and the Loch, a small stream that winds diagonally through North Woods.\nThe Ramble is in the southern third of the park next to the Lake. Covering , it contains a series of winding paths. The area contains a diverse selection of vegetation and other flora, which attracts a plethora of birds. At least 250\u00a0species of birds have been spotted in the Ramble over the years. Historically, the Ramble was known as a place for private homosexual encounters due to its seclusion. The Ramble has been through extensive ecological restoration, which included removing invasive plants, replacing soils in heavily eroded areas, and planting native trees and shrubs.\nThe Hallett Nature Sanctuary is at the southeastern corner of Central Park. It is the smallest wooded area at . Originally known as the Promontory, it was renamed after civic activist and birder George Hervey Hallett Jr. in 1986. The Hallett Sanctuary was closed to the public in the 1930s, and it was renovated and restored starting in 2001. The sanctuary opened for periodic guided tours in 2013 and for public open hours in 2016.\nRecent restoration work in both the Hallett Nature Sanctuary has been focused on removing invasive plants, rebuilding soils, stabilizing slope, replanting oaks, hickories and other historical native tree species to help support healthier woodland conditions. After restoration, the Conservancy introduced limited public access to reduce trampling and to protect the recovering habitat.\nThe Central Park Conservancy classifies its remaining green space into four types of lawns, labeled alphabetically based on usage and the amount of maintenance needed. There are seven high-priority \"A Lawns\", collectively covering , that are heavily used: Sheep Meadow, Great Lawn, North Meadow, East Meadow, Conservatory Garden, Heckscher Ballfields, and the Lawn Bowling and Croquet Greens near Sheep Meadow. These are permanently surrounded by fences, are constantly maintained, and are closed during the off-season. Another 16 lawns, covering , are classed as \"B Lawns\" and are fenced off only during off-seasons, while an additional are \"C Lawns\" and are only occasionally fenced off. The lowest-prioritized type of turf, \"D Lawns\", cover and are open year-round with few barriers or access restrictions.\nWatercourses.\nCentral Park is home to numerous bodies of water. The northernmost lake, Harlem Meer, is near the northeastern corner of the park and covers nearly . Located in a wooded area of oak, cypress, and beech trees, it was named after Harlem, one of Manhattan's first suburban communities, and was built after the completion of the southern portion of the park. Harlem Meer allows catch and release fishing. It is fed by two interconnected water features: the Pool, a pond within the North Woods fed by drinking water, and the Loch, a small stream with three cascades that winds through the North Woods. These are all adapted from a single watercourse called Montayne's Rivulet, originally fed from a natural spring but later replenished by the city's water system. Lasker Rink is above the mouth of the Loch where it drains into the Harlem Meer.\nSouth of Harlem Meer and the Pool is Central Park's largest lake, the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir, known as the Central Park Reservoir before 1994. It was constructed between 1858 and 1862. Covering an area of between 86th\u00a0and 96th\u00a0streets, the reservoir reaches a depth of more than in places and contains about of water. The Onassis Reservoir was created as a new, landscaped storage reservoir to the north of the Croton Aqueduct's rectangular receiving reservoir. Because of the Onassis Reservoir's shape, East Drive was built as a straight path, with little clearance between the reservoir to the west and Fifth Avenue to the east. It was decommissioned in 1993 and renamed after Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis the following year, after her death.\nThe Turtle Pond is at the southern edge of the Great Lawn. The pond was originally part of the Croton receiving reservoir. The receiving reservoir was drained starting in 1930, and the dry reservoir bed was temporarily used as a homeless encampment when filling stopped during the Great Depression. The Great Lawn was completed in 1937 on the site of the reservoir. Until 1987, it was known as Belvedere Lake, after the castle at its southwestern corner.\nThe Lake, south of the 79th Street transverse, covers nearly . Originally, it was part of the Sawkill Creek, which flowed near the American Museum of Natural History. The Lake was among the first features to be completed, opening to skaters in December 1858. It was intended to accommodate boats in the summer and ice skaters in winter. The Loeb Boathouse, on the eastern shore of the Lake, rents out rowboats, kayaks, and gondolas, and houses a restaurant. The Lake is spanned by Bow Bridge at its center, and its northern inlet, Bank Rock Bay, is spanned by the Bank Rock or Oak Bridge. Ladies' Pond, spanned by two bridges on the western end of the Lake, was infilled in the 1930s.\nDirectly east of the Lake is Conservatory Water, on the site of an unbuilt formal garden. The shore of Conservatory Water contains the Kerbs Memorial Boathouse, where patrons can rent and navigate model boats.\nIn the park's southeast corner is the Pond, with an area of . The Pond was adapted from part of the former DeVoor's Mill Stream, which used to flow into the East River at the modern-day neighborhood of Turtle Bay. The western section of the Pond was converted into Wollman Rink in 1950.\nWildlife.\nCentral Park is biologically diverse. A 2013 survey of park species by William E. Macaulay Honors College found 571 total species, including 173\u00a0species that were not previously known to live there. Another survey from 2007 found 583 species of plants.\nCentral Park contains various migratory birds during their spring and fall migration on the Atlantic Flyway. The first official list of birds observed in Central Park, which numbered 235\u00a0species, was published in \"Forest and Stream\" in 1886 by Augustus G. Paine Jr. and Lewis B. Woodruff. Overall, 303\u00a0bird species have been seen in the park since the first official list of records was published, and an estimated 200\u00a0species are spotted every season. No single group is responsible for tracking Central Park's bird species. Some of the more famous birds include a male red-tailed hawk called Pale Male, who made his perch on an apartment building overlooking Central Park in 1991. A mandarin duck nicknamed Mandarin Patinkin received international media attention in late 2018 and early 2019 due to its colorful appearance and the species' presence outside its native range in East Asia. Another bird, an Eurasian eagle-owl named Flaco, gained attention in 2023 when he escaped from the Central Park Zoo after his enclosure was vandalized. More infamously, Eugene Schieffelin released 100\u00a0imported European starlings in Central Park in 1890\u20131891, which led to them becoming an invasive species across North America.\nCentral Park has approximately ten species of mammals as of 2013[ [update]]. Bats, a nocturnal order, have been found in dark crevices. Because of the prevalence of raccoons, the Parks Department posts rabies advisories. Eastern gray squirrels, eastern chipmunks, and Virginia opossums inhabit the park. A 2019 squirrel census found there were 2,373 Eastern gray squirrels in Central Park. Central Park has also been home to coyotes.\nThere are 223\u00a0invertebrate species in Central Park. \"Nannarrup hoffmani\", a centipede species discovered in Central Park in 2002, is one of the smallest centipedes in the world at about long. The more prevalent Asian long-horned beetle is an invasive species that has infected trees in Long Island and Manhattan, including in Central Park. A variety of butterflies and moths are found in Central Park, often found inhabiting the local flora. The pink-shaded fern moth (\"Callopistria mollissima\"), a native moth to New York, is found among New York ferns. \nTurtles, fish, and frogs live in Central Park. There are five turtle species: red-eared sliders, snapping turtles, painted turtles, musk turtles, and box turtles. Most of the turtles live in Turtle Pond, and many of these are former pets that were released into the park. The fish are scattered more widely, but they include several freshwater species, such as the snakehead, an invasive species. Catch and release fishing is allowed in the Lake, Pond, and Harlem Meer. Central Park is a habitat for two amphibian species: the American bullfrog and the green frog. The park contained snakes in the late 19th century, though Marie Winn, who wrote about wildlife in Central Park, said in a 2008\u00a0interview that the snakes had died off.\nTrees and plants.\nAccording to a 2011 survey, Central Park had more than 20,000 trees, representing a decrease from the 26,000 trees that were recorded in the park in 1993. More than 170 tree species grow throughout the park, including a mixture of long established native species and ornamental species. \nCentral Park contains ten \"great tree\" clusters that are specially recognized by NYC Parks. These include four individual American elms and one American elm grove; the 600\u00a0pine trees in the Arthur Ross Pinetum; a black tupelo in the Ramble; 35\u00a0Yoshino cherries on the east side of the Onassis Reservoir; one of the park's oldest London planes at 96th\u00a0Street; and a \"Tetradium\" (formerly \"Euodia\") at Heckscher Playground. The American elms in Central Park are the largest remaining stands in the Northeastern United States, protected by their isolation from the Dutch elm disease that devastated the tree throughout its native range.\nIn Central Park's earliest years, two plant nurseries were maintained within the park boundaries: a demolished nursery near the Arsenal, and the still-extant Conservatory Garden. Central Park Conservancy later took over regular maintenance of the park's flora, allocating gardeners to one of 49\u00a0\"zones\" for maintenance purposes.\nTree diversity and ecological importance.\nCentral Park contains a diversity of trees. Each autumn, many of the park's native and ornamental trees create distinct leaf colors that reflect their physiology. Sugar maples (\"Acer saccharum\") and red maples (\"Acer rubrum\") develop saturated oranges and reds, while sweetgums, larches, and tupelos have deep purple colors, attracting migratory birds and urban wildlife. Central Park is home to oak species, including red oak (\"Quercus rubra\"), willow oak (\"Q. phellos\"), swamp white oak (\"Q. bicolor\"), chestnut oak (\"Q. montana\"), and non-native species Turkey oak (\"Q. cerris\"). The park's catalogued trees also include rare species such as the Tetradium (\"Tetradium daniellii\") at Heckscher Playground and a black tupelo (\"Nyssa sylvatica\") in the Ramble.\nCentral Park's tree canopy shades paved surfaces, releases moisture into the air, and reduces localized temperature spikes during the summer heat events. The park's trees also capture matter and absorb pollutants that accumulate in dense urban environments. Their organic debris such as branches, leaves, and wood chips, is recycles through a composting program that enriches soils throughout the park, helping sustain plant life and reduce the need for external fertilizers. These ecological services are supported by a team of arborists who monitor the park's tree health year-round, responding to storm damage, pets, and long-term environmental stressors.\nHistorical plant lists dating from the 19th century highlight that Central Park once supported a broader range of naturally occurring native tree species. Trees native to central New York include red maple (\"Acer rubrum\"), white spruce (\"Picea glauca\"), and tamarack (\"Laric laricina\"). Over time, soil disturbance, landscape alterations and the spread of invasive plants have contributed to the decline of native species within the park's tree community. Many of the park's tree species experience soil-related stresses that affect the long-term survival. Compacted soils, shallow root zones, and reduced leaf-litter accumulation are favorable to species with strong tolerance to urban soil limitations, influencing which species survived through the years. Several tree species once found in Central Park, including white oak (\"Quercus alba\") and black cherry (\"Prunus serotina\"), are no longer present. These losses are linked to large scale habitat alteration, such as the elimination of wet meadow and woodland habitats, soil disturbance, pavement expansion, and the introduction of invasive understory plants that outcompete young native trees.\nLandmarks and structures.\nPlazas and entrances.\nCentral Park is surrounded by a , stone wall. It initially contained 18 unnamed gates. In April 1862, the Central Park commissioners adopted a proposal to name each gate with \"the vocations to which this city owes its metropolitan character\", such as miners, scholars, artists, or hunters. The park grew to contain 20 named gates by the late 20th century, four of which are accessed from plazas at each corner of the park. No named gates were added between 1862 and 2022, when the Gate of the Exonerated at Lenox Avenue and Central Park North was dedicated in honor of the Central Park Five.\nColumbus Circle is a circular plaza at the southwestern corner, at the junction of Central Park West/Eighth Avenue, Broadway, and 59th\u00a0Street (Central Park South). Built in the 1860s, it contains the Merchant's Gate entrance to the park, and its largest feature is the 1892 Columbus Monument and was the subject of controversies in the 2010s. The 1913 USS \"Maine\" National Monument is just outside the park entrance.\nThe square Grand Army Plaza is on the southeastern corner, at the junction with Fifth Avenue and 59th\u00a0Street. Its largest feature is the \"Pulitzer Fountain\", which was completed in 1916 along with the plaza itself. The plaza contains the \"William Tecumseh Sherman\" statue, dedicated in 1903.\nDuke Ellington Circle, at the northeastern corner, forms the junction between Fifth Avenue and Central Park North/110th\u00a0Street. It contains the Duke Ellington Memorial, dedicated in 1997. Duke Ellington Circle is adjacent to the Pioneers' Gate.\nFrederick Douglass Circle is on the northwestern corner, at the junction with Central Park West/Eighth Avenue and Central Park North/110th\u00a0Street. It was named for Douglass in 1950. The center of the circle contains a memorial to Frederick Douglass, dedicated in 2011.\nStructures.\nThe Dana Discovery Center was built in 1993 at the northeast section of the park, on the north shore of the Harlem Meer. Blockhouse No. 1, the oldest extant structure within Central Park, and built before the park's creation, sits in the northwest section of the park. It was erected as part of Fort Clinton during the War of 1812. The Blockhouse is near McGowan's Pass, rocky outcroppings that also once contained Fort Fish and Nutter's Battery. The Lasker Rink, a skating rink and swimming pool facility, formerly occupied the southwest corner of the Harlem Meer. The Conservatory Garden, the park's only formal garden, is entered through the Vanderbilt Gate at Fifth Avenue and 105th Street. The Tarr Family Playground, North Meadow Recreation Center, tennis courts, and East Meadow sit between the Loch to the north and the reservoir to the south. The North Woods takes up the rest of the northern third of the park. The areas in the northern section of the park were developed later than the southern section and are not as heavily used, so there are several unnamed features. The park's northern portion was intended as the \"natural section\" in contrast to the landscaped \"pastoral section\" to the south.\nThe area between the 86th\u00a0and 96th\u00a0Street transverses is mostly occupied by the Onassis Reservoir. Directly south of the Reservoir is the Great Lawn and Turtle Pond. The Lawn is bordered by the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Fifth Avenue building to the east, Turtle Pond to the south, and Summit Rock to the west. Summit Rock, the highest point in Central Park at , abuts Diana Ross Playground to the south and the Seneca Village site, occupied by the Toll Family playground, to the north. Turtle Pond's western shore contains Belvedere Castle, Delacorte Theater, the Shakespeare Garden, and Marionette Theatre. The section between the 79th\u00a0Street transverse and Terrace Drive at 72nd\u00a0Street contains three main natural features: the forested Ramble, the L-shaped Lake, and Conservatory Water. Cherry Hill is to the south of the Lake, while Cedar Hill is to the east.\nThe southernmost part of Central Park, below Terrace Drive, contains several children's attractions and other flagship features. It contains many of the structures built in Central Park's initial stage of construction, designed in the Victorian Gothic style. Directly facing the southeastern shore of the Lake is a bi-level hall called Bethesda Terrace, which contains an elaborate fountain on its lower level. Bethesda Terrace connects to Central Park Mall, a landscaped walkway and the only formal feature in the Greensward Plan. Near the southwestern shore of the Lake is Strawberry Fields, a memorial to John Lennon who was murdered nearby; Sheep Meadow, a lawn originally intended for use as a parade ground; and Tavern on the Green, a restaurant. The southern border of Central Park contains the \"Children's District\", an area that includes Heckscher Playground, the Central Park Carousel, the Ballplayers House, and the Chess and Checkers House. Wollman Rink/Victorian Gardens, the Central Park Zoo and Children's Zoo, the Arsenal, and the Pond and Hallett Nature Sanctuary are nearby. The Arsenal, a red-brick building designed by Martin E. Thompson in 1851, has been NYC Parks' headquarters since 1934.\nThere are 21\u00a0children's playgrounds in Central Park. The largest, at , is Heckscher Playground. Central Park includes 36\u00a0ornamental bridges, each of a different design. The bridges are generally designed in the Gothic Revival or Romanesque Revival styles and are made of wood, stone, or cast iron. \"Rustic\" shelters and other structures were originally spread out through the park. Most have been demolished over the years, and several have been restored. The park contains around 9,500 benches in three styles, of which nearly half have small engraved tablets of some kind, installed as part of Central Park's \"Adopt-a-Bench\" program. These engravings typically contain short personalized messages and can be installed for at least $10,000 apiece. \"Handmade rustic benches\" can cost more than half a million dollars and are only granted when the honoree underwrites a major park project.\nArt and monuments.\nSculptures.\nTwenty-nine sculptures have been erected within Central Park's boundaries. Most of the sculptures were not part of the Greensward Plan, but were nevertheless included to placate wealthy donors when appreciation of art increased in the late 19th\u00a0century. Though Vaux and Mould proposed 26\u00a0statues in the Terrace in 1862, these were eliminated because they were too expensive. More sculptures were added through the late 19th\u00a0century, and by 1890s, there were 24\u00a0in the park.\nSeveral busts of authors and poets are on Literary Walk adjacent to the Central Park Mall. Another cluster of sculptures, around the Zoo and Conservancy Water, are statues of characters from children's stories. A third sculpture grouping primarily depicts \"subjects in nature\" such as animals and hunters.\nSeveral sculptures stand out because of their geography and topography. \"Alice in Wonderland Margaret Delacorte Memorial\" (1959), a sculpture of Alice, is at Conservatory Water. \"Angel of the Waters\" (1873), by Emma Stebbins, is the centerpiece of Bethesda Fountain; it was the first large public sculpture commission for an American woman and the only statue included in the original park design. \"Balto\" (1925), a statue of Balto, the sled dog who became famous during the 1925 serum run to Nome, is near East Drive and East 66th\u00a0Street. \"King Jagiello Monument\" (1939), a bronze monument installed in 1945, is at the east end of Turtle Pond. \"Women's Rights Pioneers Monument\" (2020), a monument of Sojourner Truth, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, was the city's first statue to depict a female historical figure.\nStructures and exhibitions.\nCleopatra's Needle, a red granite obelisk west of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is the oldest human-made structure in Central Park. The needle in Central Park is one of three Cleopatra's Needles that were originally erected at the Temple of Ra in Heliopolis in Ancient Egypt around 1450\u00a0BC by the Pharaoh Thutmose\u00a0III. The hieroglyphs were inscribed about 200 years later by Pharaoh Rameses\u00a0II to glorify his military victories. The needles are so named because they were later moved to in front of the Caesarium in Alexandria, a temple originally built by Cleopatra\u00a0VII of Egypt in honor of Mark Antony. The needle in Central Park arrived in late 1880 and was dedicated early the following year.\nThe Strawberry Fields memorial, near Central Park West and 72nd\u00a0Street, is a memorial commemorating John Lennon, who was murdered outside the nearby Dakota apartment building. The city dedicated Strawberry Fields in Lennon's honor in April 1981, and the memorial was completely rebuilt and rededicated on what would have been Lennon's 45th\u00a0birthday, October\u00a09, 1985. Countries from all around the world contributed trees, and Italy donated the \"Imagine\" mosaic in the center of the memorial. It has since become the site of impromptu memorial gatherings for other notables.\nFor 16 days in 2005, Central Park was the setting for Christo and Jeanne-Claude's installation \"The Gates\", an exhibition that had been planned since 1979. Although the project was the subject of mixed reactions, it was a major attraction for the park while it was open, drawing over a million people.\nRestaurants.\nCentral Park contains two indoor restaurants. Tavern on the Green, at Central Park West and West 67th\u00a0Street, was built in 1870 as a sheepfold and was converted into a restaurant in 1934. The Tavern on the Green was expanded between 1974 and 1976; it was closed in 2009 and reopened five years later after a renovation. The Loeb Boathouse restaurant is at the Loeb Boathouse, on the Lake, near Fifth Avenue between 74th\u00a0and 75th\u00a0streets. Though the boathouse was constructed in 1954, its restaurant opened in 1983.\nActivities.\nTours.\nIn the late 19th\u00a0century, West and East Drives was a popular place for carriage rides, though only five percent of the city was able to afford a carriage. One of the main attractions in the park's early years was the introduction of the \"Carriage Parade\", a daily display of horse-drawn carriages that traversed the park. The introduction of the automobile caused the carriage industry to die out by World War\u00a0I, though the carriage-horse tradition was revived in 1935. The carriages have become a symbolic institution of the city; for instance, in a much-publicized event after the September 11 attacks, Mayor Rudy Giuliani went to the stables to ask the drivers to go back to work to help return a sense of normality.\nSome activists, celebrities, and politicians have questioned the ethics of the carriage-horse industry and called for its end. The history of accidents involving spooked horses came under scrutiny in the 2000s and 2010s after reports of horses collapsing and even dying. Supporters of the trade say it needs to be reformed rather than shut down. Some replacements have been proposed, including electric vintage cars. Bill de Blasio, in his successful 2013 mayoral campaign, pledged to eliminate horse carriage tours if he was elected; as of August 2018[ [update]], had only succeeded in relocating the carriage pick-up areas.\nPedicabs operate mostly in the southern part of the park, as horse carriages do. The pedicabs have been criticized: there have been reports of pedicab drivers charging exorbitant fares of several hundred dollars.\nRecreation.\nThe park's drives, which are long, are used heavily by runners, joggers, pedestrians, bicyclists, and inline skaters. The park drives contain protected bike lanes and are used as the home course for the racing series of the Century Road Club Association, a USA Cycling-sanctioned amateur cycling club. In 2021, e-scooters were legalized in New York, including in Central Park. The park is used for professional running, and the New York Road Runners designated a running loop within Central Park. The New York City Marathon course uses several miles of drives within Central Park and finishes outside Tavern on the Green; from 1970 through 1975, the race was held entirely in Central Park.\nThere are 26\u00a0baseball fields in Central Park: eight on the Great Lawn, six at Heckscher Ballfields near Columbus Circle, and twelve in the North Meadow. 12\u00a0tennis courts, six non-regulation soccer fields (which overlap with the North Meadow ball fields), four basketball courts, and a recreation center are in the North Meadow. An additional soccer field and four basketball courts are at Great Lawn. Four volleyball courts are in the southern part of the park.\nCentral Park has two ice skating rinks: Wollman Rink in its southern portion and Lasker Rink in its northern portion. During summer, the former is the site of Victorian Gardens seasonal amusement park, and the latter converts to an outdoor swimming pool.\nCentral Park's glaciated rock outcroppings attract climbers, especially boulderers, but the quality of the stone is poor, and the climbs present so little challenge that it has been called \"one of America's most pathetic boulders\". The two most renowned spots for boulderers are Rat Rock and Cat Rock. Other rocks frequented by climbers, mostly at the south end of the park, include Dog Rock, Duck Rock, Rock N' Roll Rock, and Beaver Rock.\nConcerts and performances.\nCentral Park has been the site of concerts almost since its inception. Originally, they were hosted in the Ramble, but these were moved to the Concert Ground next to the Mall in the 1870s. The weekend concerts hosted in the Mall drew tens of thousands of visitors from all social classes. Since 1923, concerts have been held in Naumburg Bandshell, a bandshell of Indiana limestone on the Mall. Named for banker Elkan Naumburg, who funded its construction, the bandshell has deteriorated over the years but has never been fully restored. The oldest free classical music concert series in the United States\u2014the Naumburg Orchestral Concerts, founded in 1905\u2014is hosted in the bandshell. Other large concerts include \"The Concert in Central Park\", a benefit performance by Simon &amp; Garfunkel in 1981, and , a free concert by Garth Brooks in 1997.\nSeveral arts groups are dedicated to performing in Central Park. These include Central Park Brass, which performs concert series, and the New York Classical Theatre, which produces an annual series of plays.\nThere are several regular summer events. The Public Theater presents free open-air theater productions, such as Shakespeare in the Park, in the Delacorte Theater. The City Parks Foundation offers Central Park Summerstage, a series of free performances including music, dance, spoken word, and film presentations, often featuring famous performers. Additionally, the New York Philharmonic gives an open-air concert on the Great Lawn yearly during the summer, and from 1967 until 2007, the Metropolitan Opera presented two operas in concert each year. Every August since 2003, the Central Park Conservancy has hosted the Central Park Film Festival, a series of free film screenings.\nTransportation.\nCentral Park incorporates a system of pedestrian walkways, scenic drives, bridle paths, and transverse roads to aid traffic circulation, and it is easily accessible via several subway stations and bus routes.\nPublic transport.\nThe New York City Subway's IND\u00a0Eighth Avenue Line ( A , \u200b B , \u200b C , and \u200b D trains) runs along the western edge of the park. Most of the Eighth Avenue Line stations on Central Park West serve only the local B and \u200b C trains, while the 59th\u00a0Street\u2013Columbus Circle station is additionally served by the express A and \u200b D trains and the IRT\u00a0Broadway\u2013Seventh Avenue Line ( 1 trains). The IRT\u00a0Lenox Avenue Line ( 2 and \u200b 3 trains) has a station at . From there the line curves southwest under the park and heads west under 104th\u00a0Street. On the southeastern corner of the park, the BMT\u00a0Broadway Line (trains) has a station at Fifth Avenue and 59th\u00a0Street. The 63rd\u00a0Street lines (trains) pass underneath without stopping, and the line contains a single ventilation shaft within the park, west of Fifth Avenue and 63rd\u00a0Street.\nVarious bus routes pass through Central Park or stop along its boundaries. The M10\u00a0bus stops along Central Park West, while the M5\u00a0and part of the M7\u00a0runs along Central Park South, and the run along Central Park North. The M1, M2, M3, and M4\u00a0run southbound along Fifth Avenue with corresponding northbound bus service on Madison Avenue. The (Select Bus Service), buses use the transverse roads across Central Park. The only serve Columbus Circle on the south end of the park, and the run on 57th\u00a0Street two blocks from the park's south end but do not stop on the boundaries of the park.\nSome of the buses running on the edge of Central Park replaced former streetcar routes that formerly traveled across Manhattan. These streetcar routes included the Sixth Avenue line, which became the M5 bus, and the Eighth Avenue line, which became the M10. Only one streetcar line traversed Central Park: the 86th\u00a0Street Crosstown Line, the predecessor to the M86\u00a0bus.\nTransverse roads.\nCentral Park contains four transverse roadways that carry crosstown traffic across the park. From south to north, they are at 66th\u00a0Street, 79th\u00a0Street, 86th\u00a0Street, and 97th\u00a0Street; the transverse roads were originally numbered sequentially in that order. The 66th\u00a0Street transverse connects the discontinuous sections of 65th\u00a0and 66th\u00a0streets on either side of the park. The 79th\u00a0Street transverse links West\u00a081st and East\u00a079th streets, while the 86th\u00a0Street transverse links West 86th\u00a0Street with East 84th\u00a0and 85th\u00a0streets. The 97th\u00a0Street transverse likewise joins the disconnected segments of 96th\u00a0and 97th\u00a0streets. Each roadway carries two lanes, one in each direction, and is sunken below the level of the rest of the park to minimize the transverses' visual impact on it. The transverse roadways are open even when the park is closed.\nThe 66th\u00a0Street transverse was the first to be finished, having opened in December 1859. The 79th\u00a0Street transverse\u2014which passed under Vista Rock, Central Park's second-highest point\u2014was completed by a railroad contractor because of their experience in drilling through hard rock; it opened in December 1860. The 86th\u00a0and 97th\u00a0Street transverses opened in late 1862. By the 1890s, maintenance had decreased to the point where the 86th\u00a0Street transverse handled most crosstown traffic because the other transverse roads had been so poorly maintained. Both ends of the 79th\u00a0Street transverse were widened in 1964 to accommodate increased traffic. Generally, the transverses were not maintained as frequently as the rest of the park, though being used more frequently than the park proper.\nScenic drives.\nThe park has three scenic drives that travel through it vertically. They have multiple traffic lights at the intersections with pedestrian paths, although there are some arches and bridges where pedestrian and drive traffic can cross without intersection. To discourage park patrons from speeding, the designers incorporated extensive curves in the park drives. The drives range from wide, and there are more than 50 traffic signals along these drives.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;West Drive is the westernmost of the park's three vertical \"drives\". The road, which carries southbound bicycle and horse-carriage traffic, winds through the western part of Central Park, connecting Lenox Avenue/Central Park North with Seventh Avenue/Central Park South and Central Drive.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Center Drive (also known as the \"Central Park Lower Loop\") connects northbound bicycle and carriage traffic from Midtown at Central Park South/Sixth Avenue to East Drive near the 66th\u00a0Street transverse. The street generally goes east and then north, forming the bottom part of the Central Park loop. The attractions along Center Drive include Victorian Gardens, the Central Park Carousel, and the Central Park Mall.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;East Drive, the easternmost of the three drives, connects northbound bicycle and carriage traffic from Midtown to the Upper West Side at Lenox Avenue. The street is renowned for its country scenery and free concerts. It generally straddles the east side of the park along Fifth Avenue. The drive passes by the Central Park Zoo around 63rd\u00a0Street and the Metropolitan Museum of Art from 80th\u00a0to 84th\u00a0Streets. Unlike the rest of the drive system, which is generally serpentine, East Drive is straight between the 86th\u00a0and 96th\u00a0Street transverses, because it is between Fifth Avenue and the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir. East Drive is known as the \"Elite Carriage Parade\", because it was where the carriage procession occurred at the time of the park's opening, and because only five percent of the city was able to afford the carriage. In the late 19th\u00a0century, West and East Drives were popular places for carriage rides.\nTwo other scenic drives cross the park horizontally. Terrace Drive is at 72nd\u00a0Street and connects West and East Drives, passing over Bethesda Terrace and Fountain. The 102nd\u00a0Street Crossing, further north near the street of the same name, is a former carriage drive connecting West and East Drives.\nModifications and closures.\nIn Central Park's earliest years, the speed limits were set at for carriages and for horses, which were later raised to respectively. Commercial vehicles and buses were banned from the park. Automobiles became more common in Central Park during the 1900s and 1910s, and they often broke the speed limits, resulting in crashes. To increase safety, the gravel roads were paved in 1912, and the carriage speed limit was raised to two years later. With the proliferation of cars among the middle class in the 1920s, traffic increased on the drives, to as many as eight thousand cars per hour in 1929. The roads were still dangerous; in the first ten months of 1929, eight people were killed and 249 were injured in 338 separate collisions.\nIn November 1929, the scenic drives were converted from two-way traffic to unidirectional traffic. Further improvements were made in 1932 when forty-two traffic lights were installed along the scenic drives, and the speed limit was lowered to . The signals were coordinated so that drivers could go through all of the green lights if they maintained a steady speed of . The drives were experimentally closed to automotive traffic on weekends beginning in 1967, for exclusive use by pedestrians and bicyclists. In subsequent years, the scenic drives were closed to automotive traffic for most of the day during the summer. By 1979, the drives were only open during rush hours and late evenings during the summer.\nLegislation was proposed in October 2014 to conduct a study to make the park car-free in summer 2015. In 2015, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the permanent closure of West and East Drives north of 72nd\u00a0Street to vehicular traffic as it was proven that closing the roads did not adversely impact traffic. After most of the Central Park loop drives were closed to vehicular traffic, the city performed a follow-up study. The city found that West Drive was open for two hours during the morning rush period and was used by an average of 1,050 vehicles a day, while East Drive was open 12\u00a0hours a day and was used by an average of 3,400 vehicles daily. Subsequently, all cars were banned from East Drive in January 2018. In April 2018, de Blasio announced that the entirety of the three loop drives would be closed permanently to traffic. The closure became effective in June 2018.\nDuring the early 21st\u00a0century, there were numerous collisions in Central Park involving cyclists. The 2014 death of Jill Tarlov, after she was hit by a cyclist on West 63rd\u00a0Street, called attention to the issue. In 2011, residents of nearby communities unsuccessfully petitioned the NYPD to increase enforcement of cycling rules within the park. The scenic drives' pedestrian and bike paths were repaved in 2025 following repeated collisions between pedestrians and cyclists. The city government also replaced existing traffic signals with bicycle signals, since many cyclists ran through red traffic lights. As of 2025[ [update]], the left lane of each scenic drive is a beige pedestrian path, while the center lane is for slower cyclists and the right lane is for faster cyclists; each lane is wide.\nIssues.\nCrime and neglect.\nIn the mid-20th century, Central Park had a reputation for being very dangerous, especially after dark. Such a viewpoint was reinforced following a 1941 incident when 12-year-old Jerome Dore fatally stabbed 15-year-old James O'Connell in the northern section of the park. Local tabloids cited this incident and several other crimes as evidence of a highly exaggerated \"crime wave\". Though recorded crime had indeed increased since Central Park opened in the late 1850s, this was in line with crime trends seen in the rest of the city. Central Park's reputation for crime was reinforced by its worldwide name recognition, and the fact that crimes in the park were covered disproportionately compared to crimes in the rest of the city. For instance, in 1973 \"The New York Times\" wrote stories about 20%\u00a0of murders that occurred citywide but wrote about three of the four murders that took place in Central Park that year. By the 1970s and 1980s, the number of murders in the police precincts north of Central Park was 18 times higher than the number of murders within the park itself, and even in the precincts south of the park, the number of murders was three times as high.\nThe park was the site of numerous high-profile crimes during the late 20th\u00a0century. Of these, two particularly notable cases shaped public perception against the park. In 1986, Robert Chambers murdered Jennifer Levin in what was later called the \"preppy murder.\" Three years later, an investment banker was raped and brutally beaten in what came to be known as the Central Park jogger case. Conversely, other crimes such as the 1984 gang-rape of two homeless women were barely reported. After World War\u00a0II, it was feared that gay men perpetrated sex crimes and attracted violence. Other problems in the 1970s and 1980s included a drug epidemic, a large homeless presence, vandalism, and neglect.\nAs crime has declined in New York City, many of these negative perceptions have waned. Safety measures keep the number of crimes in the park to fewer than 100 per year as of 2019[ [update]], down from approximately 1,000 in the early 1980s. Some well-publicized crimes have occurred since then: for instance, on June\u00a011, 2000, following the Puerto Rican Day Parade, gangs of drunken men sexually assaulted women in the park.\nOther issues.\nPermission to hold issue-centered rallies in Central Park, similar to the be-ins of the 1960s, has been met with increasingly stiff resistance from the city. During some 2004 protests, the organization United for Peace and Justice wanted to hold a rally on the Great Lawn during the Republican National Convention. The city denied an application for a permit, stating that such a mass gathering would be harmful to the grass and the damage would make it harder to collect private donations to maintain the park. A judge of the New York Supreme Court's New York County branch upheld the refusal.\nDuring the 2000s and 2010s, new supertall skyscrapers were constructed along the southern end of Central Park, in a corridor commonly known as Billionaires' Row. According to a Municipal Art Society report, such buildings cast long shadows over the southern end of the park. A 2016 analysis by \"The New York Times\" found that some of the tallest and skinniest skyscrapers, such as One57, Central Park Tower, and 220 Central Park South, would cast shadows that can be as much as long during the winter, covering up to a third of the park's length. In 2018, the New York City Council proposed a task force to study the effects of skyscrapers near city parks.\nImpact.\nCultural significance.\nCentral Park's size and cultural position has served as a model for many urban parks. Olmsted believed landscape design was a way to improve the feeling of community and had intended the park as the antithesis of the stresses of the city's daily life. The Greensward Plan, radical at the time of its construction, led to widespread changes in park designs and urban planning; in particular, parks were designed to incorporate landscapes whose elements were related to each other.\nAs a New York City icon, Central Park is one of the most filmed locations in the world. A December 2017 report found that 231\u00a0movies had used it for on-location shoots, more than the 160\u00a0movies that had filmed in Greenwich Village or the 99\u00a0movies that had filmed in Times Square. Some of the movies filmed at Central Park, such as the 1993 film \"The Age of Innocence\", reflect ideals of the past. Other films, including \"The Fisher King\" (1991), \"Marathon Man\" (1976), \"The Out of Towners\" (1970), and \"\" (1992), use the park for dramatic conflict scenes. Central Park has been used in romance films such as \"Maid in Manhattan\" (2002), \"13\u00a0Going on\u00a030\" (2004) or \"Hitch\" (2005), and fantasy live-action/animated films such as \"Enchanted\" (2007). In 2009, an estimated 4,000 days of film shoots were hosted, or an average of more than ten film shoots per day, accounting for $135.5\u00a0million in city revenue.\nBecause of its cultural and historical significance, Central Park has been a National Historic Landmark since 1962, and a New York City scenic landmark since 1974. It was placed on UNESCO's list of tentative World Heritage Sites in 2017.\nReal estate and economy.\nThe value of the surrounding land started rising significantly in the mid-1860s during the park's construction. The completion of Central Park immediately increased the surrounding area's real estate prices, in some cases by up to 700\u00a0percent between 1858 and 1870. It also resulted in the creation of the zoning plan in Upper Manhattan. Upscale districts grew on both sides of Central Park following its completion. On the Upper East Side, a portion of Fifth Avenue abutting lower Central Park became known as \"Millionaires' Row\" by the 1890s, due to the concentration of wealthy families in the area. The Upper West Side took longer to develop, but row houses and luxury apartment buildings came to predominate in the neighborhood; some of these buildings are included in the Central Park West Historic District. Though most of the city's rich formerly lived in mansions, they moved into apartments close to Central Park during the late 19th\u00a0and early 20th\u00a0centuries.\nDuring the late 20th\u00a0century, until Central Park's restoration in the 1990s, proximity to the park did not have a significant positive effect on real estate values. Following Central Park's restoration, some of the city's most expensive properties have been sold or rented near the park. The value of the land in Central Park was estimated to be about $528.8\u00a0billion in December 2005, though this was based on the park's impact on the average value of nearby land.\nIn the modern day, it is estimated that Central Park has resulted in billions of dollars in economic impact. A 2009 study found that the city received annual tax revenue of more than $656\u00a0million, visitors spent more than $395\u00a0million due to the park, in-park businesses such as concessions generated $135.5 million, and the 4,000 hours of annual film shoots and other photography generated $135.6 million of economic output. In 2013, about 550,000 people lived within a ten-minute walk (about ) of the park's boundaries, and 1.15\u00a0million more people could get to the park within a half-hour subway ride.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37537", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37537", "title": "NEAR Shoemaker", "text": "American space probe to asteroid (1996\u20132001)\nNear Earth Asteroid Rendezvous \u2013 Shoemaker (NEAR Shoemaker), renamed after its 1996 launch in honor of planetary scientist Eugene Shoemaker, was a robotic space probe designed by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory for NASA to study the near-Earth asteroid Eros from close orbit over a period of a year. It was the first spacecraft to orbit an asteroid and land on it successfully. In February 2000, the mission closed in on the asteroid and orbited it. On February 12, 2001, Shoemaker touched down on the asteroid and was terminated just over two weeks later.\nThe primary scientific objective of \"NEAR\" was to return data on the bulk properties, composition, mineralogy, morphology, internal mass distribution, and magnetic field of Eros. Secondary objectives include studies of regolith properties, interactions with the solar wind, possible current activity as indicated by dust or gas, and the asteroid spin state. This data was used to help understand the characteristics of asteroids in general, their relationship to meteoroids and comets, and the conditions in the early Solar System. To accomplish these goals, the spacecraft was equipped with an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a near-infrared imaging spectrograph, a multi-spectral camera fitted with a CCD imaging detector, a laser rangefinder, and a magnetometer. A radio science experiment was also performed using the \"NEAR\" tracking system to estimate the gravity field of the asteroid. The total mass of the instruments was , requiring 80 watts of power.\nDevelopment.\nNEAR was the first robotic space probe built by Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL). A previous plan for the mission was for it to go to 4660 Nereus and do a flyby of 2019 van Albada en route. In January 2000, it would rendezvous with Nereus, but instead of staying, it would visit multiple asteroids and comets. Some of the choices that were discussed were 2P/Encke, 433 Eros (which became the mission's primary target), 1036 Ganymed, 4 Vesta, and 4015 Wilson\u2013Harrington.\nThe Small-Body Grand Tour was a plan to visit two asteroids and two comets over a decade with the spacecraft.\nMission profile.\nSummary.\nThe mission's primary goal was to study the near-Earth asteroid 433 Eros from orbit for approximately one year. Eros is an S-type asteroid approximately 13 \u00d7 13 \u00d7 33\u00a0km in size, the second largest near-Earth asteroid. Initially, the orbit was circular with a radius of 200\u00a0km. The orbit radius was brought down in stages to a 50 \u00d7 50\u00a0km orbit on April 30, 2000, and decreased to 35 \u00d7 35\u00a0km on July 14, 2000. The orbit was raised over succeeding months to a 200 \u00d7 200\u00a0km orbit and then slowly decreased and altered to a 35 \u00d7 35\u00a0km retrograde orbit on December 13, 2000. The mission ended with a touchdown in Eros's \"saddle\" region on February 12, 2001.\nSome scientists claim that the mission's ultimate goal was to link Eros, an asteroidal body, to meteorites recovered on Earth. With sufficient data on chemical composition, a causal link could be established between Eros and other S-type asteroids, and those meteorites believed to be pieces of S-type asteroids (perhaps Eros itself). Once this connection is established, meteorite material can be studied with large, complex, and evolving equipment, and the results can be extrapolated to bodies in space. \"NEAR\" did not prove or disprove this link to the satisfaction of scientists.\nBetween December 1999 and February 2001, \"NEAR\" used its gamma-ray spectrometer to detect gamma-ray bursts as part of the InterPlanetary Network.\nThe journey to Mathilde.\nAfter launching on a Delta 7925-8 (a Delta II launch vehicle with nine strap-on solid-rocket boosters and a Star 48 (PAM-D) third stage) on February 17, 1996, and exited from Earth orbit, \"NEAR\" entered the first part of its cruise phase. \"NEAR\" spent most of the cruise phase in a minimal activity \"hibernation\" state, which ended a few days before the flyby of the 61\u00a0km diameter asteroid 253 Mathilde.\nOn June 27, 1997, \"NEAR\" flew by Mathilde within 1200\u00a0km at 12:56 UT at 9.93\u00a0km/s, returning imaging and other instrument data. The flyby produced over 500 images, covering 60% of Mathilde's surface, as well as gravitational data allowing calculations of Mathilde's dimensions and mass.\nThe journey to Eros.\nOn July 3, 1997, \"NEAR\" executed the first major deep space maneuver, a two-part burn of the main 450\u00a0N thruster. This decreased the velocity by 279\u00a0m/s and lowered perihelion from 0.99\u00a0AU to 0.95\u00a0AU. The Earth gravity assist swingby occurred on January 23, 1998, at 7:23 UT. The closest approach was 540\u00a0km, altering the orbital inclination from 0.5 to 10.2\u00a0degrees and the aphelion distance from 2.17 to 1.77\u00a0AU, nearly matching those of Eros. Instrumentation was active at this time.\nFailure of first attempt at orbital insertion.\nThe first of four scheduled rendezvous burns was attempted on December 20, 1998, at 22:00 UT. The burn sequence was initiated but immediately aborted. The spacecraft subsequently entered safe mode and began tumbling. The spacecraft's thrusters fired thousands of times during the anomaly, which expended 29\u00a0kg of propellant, reducing the program's propellant margin to zero. This anomaly almost resulted in the loss of the spacecraft due to a lack of solar orientation and subsequent battery drain. Contact between the spacecraft and mission control could not be established for over 24 hours. The root cause of this incident has not been determined, but software and operational errors contributed to the severity of the anomaly.\nThe original mission plan called for the four burns to be followed by an orbit insertion burn on January 10, 1999, but the abort of the first burn and loss of communication made this impossible. A new plan was put into effect in which \"NEAR\" flew by Eros on December 23, 1998, at 18:41:23 UT at a speed of 965\u00a0m/s and a distance of 3827\u00a0km from the center of mass of Eros. The camera took images of Eros, data were collected by the near IR spectrograph, and radio tracking was performed during the flyby. A rendezvous maneuver was performed on January 3, 1999, involving a thruster burn to match \"NEAR\"'s orbital speed to that of Eros. A hydrazine thruster burn took place on January 20 to fine-tune the trajectory. On August 12, a two-minute thruster burn slowed the spacecraft velocity relative to Eros to 300\u00a0km/h.\nOrbital insertion.\nOrbital insertion around Eros occurred on February 14, 2000, at 15:33 UT (10:33 EST) after \"NEAR\" completed a 13-month heliocentric orbit which closely matched the orbit of Eros. A rendezvous maneuver was completed on February 3 at 17:00 UT, slowing the spacecraft from 19.3 to 8.1\u00a0m/s relative to Eros. Another maneuver took place on February 8, increasing the relative velocity slightly to 9.9\u00a0m/s. Searches for satellites of Eros took place on January 28 and February 4, and 9; none were found. The scans were for scientific purposes and to mitigate any possible collision with a satellite. \"NEAR\" went into a 321\u00d7366\u00a0km elliptical orbit around Eros on February 14. The orbit was slowly decreased to a 35\u00a0km circular polar orbit by July 14. \"NEAR\" remained in this orbit for ten days and then was backed out in stages to a 100\u00a0km circular orbit by September 5, 2000. Maneuvers in mid-October led to a flyby of Eros within 5.3\u00a0km of the surface at 07:00 UT on October 26.\nOrbits and landing.\nFollowing the flyby, \"NEAR\" moved to a 200\u00a0km circular orbit and shifted the orbit from prograde near-polar to a retrograde near-equatorial orbit. By December 13, 2000, the orbit was shifted back to a circular 35\u00a0km low orbit. Starting on January 24, 2001, the spacecraft began a series of close passes (5 to 6\u00a0km) to the surface and, on January 28, passed 2 to 3\u00a0km from the asteroid. The spacecraft then made a slow controlled descent to the surface of Eros, ending with a touchdown just to the south of the saddle-shaped feature Himeros on February 12, 2001, at approximately 20:01 UT (3:01\u00a0p.m. EST). To the surprise of the controllers, the spacecraft was undamaged and operational after the landing at an estimated speed of 1.5 to 1.8\u00a0meters per second (thus becoming the first spacecraft to soft-land on an asteroid). After receiving an extension of antenna time on the Deep Space Network, the spacecraft's gamma-ray spectrometer was reprogrammed to collect data on Eros's composition from a vantage point about from the surface where it was ten times more sensitive than when it was used in orbit. This increase in sensitivity was in part due to the increased ratio of the signal from Eros compared to the noise generated by the probe itself. The impact of cosmic rays on the sensor was also reduced by about 50%.\nAt 7 p.m. EST on February 28, 2001, the last data signals were received from \"NEAR\" Shoemaker before it was shut down. A final attempt to communicate with the spacecraft on December 10, 2002, was unsuccessful. This was likely due to the extreme \u2212279\u00a0\u00b0F (\u2212173\u00a0\u00b0C, 100 K) conditions the probe experienced while on Eros.\nSpacecraft and subsystems.\nSpacecraft.\nThe spacecraft has the shape of an octagonal prism, approximately 1.7 m on a side, with four fixed gallium arsenide solar panels in a windmill arrangement, a fixed 1.5 m X-band high-gain radio antenna with a magnetometer mounted on the antenna feed, and an X-ray solar monitor on one end (the forward deck), with the other instruments fixed on the opposite end (the aft deck). Most electronics were mounted on the inside of the decks. The propulsion module was contained in the interior. The decision to mount instruments on the body of the spacecraft rather than using booms resulted in the gamma-ray spectrometer needing to be shielded from noise generated by the craft. A bismuth germanate shield was used, although this proved only moderately effective.\nThe craft was three-axis stabilized and used a single bipropellant (hydrazine / nitrogen tetroxide) 450 newton (N) main thruster, and four 21\u00a0N and seven 3.5\u00a0N hydrazine thrusters for propulsion, for a total delta-V potential of 1450\u00a0m/s. Attitude control was achieved using the hydrazine thrusters and four reaction wheels. The propulsion system carried 209\u00a0kg of hydrazine and 109\u00a0kg of NTO oxidizer in two oxidizer and three fuel tanks.\nPower was provided by four 1.8 by 1.2\u00a0meter gallium arsenide solar panels, which could produce 400\u00a0watts at 2.2\u00a0AU (329,000,000\u00a0km), \"NEAR\"'s maximum distance from the Sun and 1800 watts at one AU (150,000,000\u00a0km). Power was stored in a nine-ampere-hour, 22-cell rechargeable super nickel-cadmium battery.\nSpacecraft guidance was achieved through the use of a sensor suite of five digital solar attitude detectors, an inertial measurement unit (IMU), and a star tracker camera pointed opposite the instrument pointing direction. The IMU contained hemispherical resonators gyroscopes and accelerometers. Four reaction wheels (arranged so that any three can provide complete three-axis control) were used for normal attitude control. The thrusters were used to dump angular momentum from the reaction wheels, as well as for rapid slew and propulsive maneuvers. Attitude control was to 0.1 degree, line-of-sight pointing stability is within 50 microradians over one second, and post-processing attitude knowledge is to 50 microradians.\nThe command and data handling subsystem was composed of two redundant command and telemetry processors and solid state recorders, a power switching unit, and an interface to two redundant 1553 standard data buses for communications with other subsystems.\n\"NEAR\" was the first APL spacecraft to use significant numbers of plastic encapsulated microcircuits (PEMs), and the first to use solid-state data recorders for mass storage\u2014previous APL spacecraft used magnetic tape recorders or magnetic cores.\nThe solid-state recorders are constructed from 16 Mbit IBM Luna-C DRAMs. One recorder has 1.1 gigabits of storage, and the other has 0.67 gigabits.\nThe \"NEAR\" mission was the first launch of NASA's Discovery Program, a series of small-scale spacecraft designed to proceed from development to flight in under three years for a cost of less than $150 million. The construction, launch, and 30-day cost for this mission is estimated at $122 million. The final total mission cost was $224 million, which consisted of $124.9 million for spacecraft development, $44.6 million for launch support and tracking, and $54.6 million for mission operations and data analysis.\nScientific payload and experiments.\nThe science payload includes:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37538", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37538", "title": "Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous", "text": ""}
{"id": "37539", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37539", "title": "Benfords law", "text": ""}
{"id": "37541", "revid": "0", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37541", "title": "First digit law", "text": ""}
{"id": "37543", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37543", "title": "IHO", "text": ""}
{"id": "37544", "revid": "1309717390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37544", "title": "PalmPilot", "text": "Handheld personal information manager\nThe PalmPilot Personal and PalmPilot Professional are the second generation of Palm PDA devices produced by Palm Inc (then a subsidiary of U.S. Robotics, later 3Com). These devices were launched on March 10, 1997.\nAccessories and pricing.\nPalm also sold the 10201U modem at 14.4\u00a0kbit/s, introduced at a price of $129 (this modem is also compatible with the Palm III and Palm IIIx devices). An upgrade kit was also available, which allowed users of the earlier Pilot 1000/5000 devices to upgrade the OS, ROM, and RAM to match the PalmPilot Professional. Initially suggested retail prices upon launch were $399 for the PalmPilot Professional (1\u00a0MB), $299 for the PalmPilot Personal (512\u00a0KB), and $199 for the Upgrade Kit. Upgrade kits were also available to existing registered Pilot users for $99 for a limited time after the launch. These kits included IR capability, a new plastic memory door to accommodate the IR diodes, a memory card with 1\u00a0MB, the new ROM for Palm OS 2.0, and a CD-ROM with updated desktop software.\nReception.\nThe PalmPilot became a large success and helped Palm further establish itself as the leader in the growing PDA/handheld PC market. PalmPilot had reportedly sold over 1 million units by 1998.\nIt was succeeded by Palm III in 1998.\nNotable uses.\nIMAX used a simulator that mimics the look and feel of a PalmPilot for its Quick Turn Reel Units (to keep it simple and familiar for Imax film projectionists), which are used to screen feature films in 70mm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37545", "revid": "1320340952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37545", "title": "Palm OS", "text": "Mobile operating system\nPalm OS (later versions of which were also known as Garnet OS) is a discontinued mobile operating system initially developed by Palm, Inc., for personal digital assistants (PDAs) in 1996. Palm OS was designed for ease of use with a touchscreen-based graphical user interface. It was provided with a suite of basic applications for personal information management. Later versions of the OS were extended to support smartphones. The software appeared on the company's line of Palm devices while several other licensees have manufactured devices powered by Palm OS.\nFollowing Palm's purchase of the Palm trademark, the operating system was renamed \"Garnet OS\". In 2007, ACCESS introduced the successor to Garnet OS, called Access Linux Platform; additionally, in 2009, the main licensee of Palm OS, Palm, Inc., switched from Palm OS to webOS for their forthcoming devices.\nCreator and ownership.\nPalm OS was originally developed under the direction of Jeff Hawkins at Palm Computing, Inc. Palm was later acquired by U.S. Robotics Corp., which in turn was later bought by 3Com, which made the Palm subsidiary an independent publicly traded company on March 2, 2000.\nIn January 2002, Palm set up a wholly owned subsidiary to develop and license Palm OS, which was named PalmSource. PalmSource was then spun off from Palm as an independent company on October 28, 2003. Palm (then called palmOne) became a regular licensee of Palm OS, no longer in control of the operating system.\nIn September 2005, PalmSource announced that it was being acquired by ACCESS.\nIn December 2006, Palm gained perpetual rights to the Palm OS source code from ACCESS. With this Palm can modify the licensed operating system as needed without paying further royalties to ACCESS. Together with the May 2005 acquisition of full rights to the \"Palm\" brand name, only Palm can publish releases of the operating system under the name 'Palm OS'.\nAs a consequence, on January 25, 2007, ACCESS announced a name change to their current Palm OS operating system, now titled \"Garnet OS\".\nOS overview.\nPalm OS was a proprietary mobile operating system. Designed in 1996 for Palm Computing, Inc.'s new Pilot PDA, it has been implemented on a wide array of mobile devices, including smartphones, wrist watches, handheld gaming consoles, barcode readers and GPS devices.\nPalm OS versions earlier than 5.0 run on Motorola/Freescale DragonBall processors. From version 5.0 onwards, Palm OS runs on ARM architecture-based processors.\nThe key features of the current Palm OS Garnet are:\nIncluded with the OS is also a set of standard applications, with the most relevant ones for the four mentioned PIM operations.\nVersion history and technical background.\nManufacturers are free to implement different features of the OS in their devices or even add new features. This version history describes the officially licensed version from Palm/PalmSource/ACCESS.\nAll versions prior to Palm OS 5 are based on top of the AMX 68000 kernel licensed from KADAK Products Ltd. While this kernel is technically capable of multitasking, the \"terms and conditions of that license specifically state that Palm may not expose the API for creating/manipulating tasks within the OS.\"\nPalm OS 1.0.\nPalm OS 1.0 is the original version present on the Pilot 1000 and 5000. It was introduced in March 1996.\nVersion 1.0 features the classic PIM applications \"Address\", \"Date Book\", \"Memo Pad\", and \"To Do List\". Also included is a calculator and the Security tool to hide records for private use.\nPalm OS 1.0 does not differentiate between RAM and file system storage. Applications are installed directly into RAM and executed in place. As no dedicated file system is supported, the operating system depends on constant RAM refresh cycles to keep its memory. The OS supports 160x160 monochrome output displays. User input is generated through the Graffiti handwriting recognition system or optionally through a virtual keyboard. The system supports data synchronization to another PC via its HotSync technology over a serial interface. The latest bugfix release is version 1.0.7.\nPalm OS 2.0.\nPalm OS 2.0 was introduced on March 10, 1997 with the PalmPilot Personal and Professional. This version adds TCP/IP network, network HotSync, and display backlight support. The last bugfix release is version 2.0.5.\nTwo new applications, \"Mail\" and \"Expense\" are added, and the standard PIM applications have been enhanced.\nPalm OS 3.0.\nPalm OS 3.0 was introduced on March 9, 1998 with the launch of the Palm III series. This version adds IrDA infrared and enhanced font support. This version also features updated PIM applications and an update to the application launcher.\nPalm OS 3.1 adds only minor new features, like network HotSync support. It was introduced with the Palm IIIx and Palm V. The last bugfix release is version 3.1.1.\nPalm OS 3.2 adds Web Clipping support, which is an early Palm-specific solution to bring web-content to a small PDA screen. It was introduced with the Palm VII organizer.\nPalm OS 3.3 adds faster HotSync speeds and the ability to do infrared hotsyncing. It was introduced with the Palm Vx organizer.\nPalm OS 3.5 is the first version to include native 8-bit color support. It also adds major convenience features that simplify operation, like a context-sensitive icon-bar or simpler menu activation. The datebook application is extended with an additional agenda view. This version was first introduced with the Palm IIIc device. The latest bugfix release is version 3.5.3.\nAs a companion, Palm later offered a \"Mobile Internet Kit\" software upgrade for Palm OS 3.5. This included Palm's Web Clipping software, MultiMail (which was later renamed to VersaMail) Version 2.26 e-mail software, handPHONE Version 1.3 SMS software, and Neomar Version 1.5 WAP browser.\nPalm OS 4.0.\nPalm OS 4.0 was released with the new Palm m500 series on March 19, 2001. This version adds a standard interface for external file system access (such as SD cards). External file systems are a radical change to the operating system's previous in-place execution. Now, application code and data need to be loaded into the device's RAM, similar to desktop operating system behavior. A new Universal Connector with USB support is introduced. The previous optional Mobile Internet Kit is now part of the operating system. Version 4.0 adds an attention manager to coordinate information from different applications, with several possibilities to get the user's attention, including sound, LED blinking or vibration. 16-bit color screens and different time zones are supported. This version also has security and UI enhancements.\nPalm OS 4.1 is a bugfix release. It was introduced with the launch of the Palm i705. The later minor OS update to version 4.1.2 includes a backport of Graffiti 2 from Palm OS 5.2.\nPalm OS 4.2 Simplified Chinese Edition is targeted especially for the Chinese market with fully Simplified Chinese support, co-released with Palm OS 5.3. No device has been manufactured with this version up to now.\nAround this time, at least two emulators of the Palm OS surfaced for its competing platform, Windows CE (later Pocket PC). The first was Palm OS Emulator, known prior as CoPilot, created by Conduits and a community of professional developers. The second, PocketPalm, created by an independent developer named George Andre and presented by Elad Yakobowicz, former Senior News Editor of Pocketnow.\nPalm OS 5.0.\nPalm OS 5.0 was unveiled by the Palm subsidiary PalmSource in June 2002 and first implemented on the Palm Tungsten T. It is the first version to support ARM devices and replaced the Kadak AMX68000 kernel with the custom MCK kernel, named for its developer, that was written in-house by Palm. Applications written for the prior OS versions use the older DragonBall 68K instruction set and are supported via the \"Palm Application Compatibility Environment\" (PACE) emulator in Garnet. Even with the additional overhead of PACE, Palm applications usually run faster on ARM devices than on previous generation hardware. New software can take advantage of the ARM processors with small units of ARM code, referred to as \"ARMlets\".\nWith a more powerful hardware basis, Palm OS 5 adds substantial enhancements for multimedia capabilities. High density 320x320 screens are supported together with a full digital sound playback and record API. Palm's separate Bluetooth stack is added together with an IEEE 802.11b Wi-Fi stack. Secure network connections over SSL are supported. The OS can be customized with different color schemes.\nFor Palm OS 5, PalmSource developed and licensed a web browser called \"PalmSource Web Browser\" based on ACCESS' NetFront 3.0 browser.\nPalm OS 5.2 is mainly a bugfix release, first implemented in the Samsung SGH-i500 in March 2003. It added support for 480x320 resolutions and introduced the new handwriting input system called Graffiti 2; the new input system was prompted by Xerox' lawsuit win against Palm. Graffiti 2 is based on \"Jot\" from CIC. The last bugfix release is version 5.2.8.\nPalm OS 5.3 Simplified Chinese Edition released in September 2003, added full Simplified Chinese support, further support for QVGA resolutions, and a standard API for virtual Graffiti called \"Dynamic Input Area\". This version first shipped on Lenovo's P100 and P300 handhelds.\nPalm OS Garnet (5.4) added updated Bluetooth libraries and support for multiple screen resolutions ranging from 160x160 up to 480x320. It first shipped on the Treo 650 in November 2004. This version also introduced the \"Garnet\" moniker to distinguish it from Palm OS Cobalt 6.0. The last bugfix release is version 5.4.9.\nGarnet OS 5.5 dropped the \"Palm\" moniker and, as of 2007[ [update]], is the current version developed by ACCESS. This version is dedicated for use inside the \"Garnet VM\" virtual machine.\nGarnet VM was announced and released by ACCESS in November 2007 as a core part of the Access Linux Platform and as an emulator allowing Nokia Internet Tablets to run applications written for the Garnet OS. In June 2010, ACCESS release Garnet VM version 6 (a.k.a. Garnet VM Beta 6 1.05b).\nPalm OS Cobalt.\nPalm OS Cobalt (6.0) was the designated successor for Palm OS 5. It was introduced on February 10, 2004, but is no longer offered by ACCESS (see next section). Palm OS 6.0 was renamed to Palm OS Cobalt to make clear that this version was initially not designated to replace Palm OS 5, which adopted the name Palm OS Garnet at the same time.\nPalm OS Cobalt introduced modern operating system features to an embedded operating system based on a new kernel with multitasking and memory protection, a modern multimedia and graphic framework (derived from Palm's acquired BeOS), new security features, and adjustments of the PIM file formats to better cooperate with Microsoft Outlook.\nPalm OS Cobalt 6.1 presented standard communication libraries for telecommunication, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth connectivity. Despite other additions, it failed to interest potential licensees to Palm OS Cobalt.\nThird-party OS enhancements.\nSeveral licensees have made custom modifications to the operating system. These are not part of the official licensed version.\nModernization.\nFor several years, PalmSource had been attempting to create a modern successor for Palm OS 5 and have licensees implement it. Although PalmSource shipped Palm OS Cobalt 6.0 to licensees in January 2004, none adopted it for release devices. PalmSource made major improvements to Palm OS Cobalt with the release of Palm OS Cobalt 6.1 in September 2004 to please licensees, but even the new version did not lead to production devices.\nIn December 2004, PalmSource announced a new OS strategy. With the acquisition of the mobile phone software company China Mobilesoft, PalmSource planned to port Palm OS on top of a Linux kernel, while still offering both Palm OS Garnet and Palm OS Cobalt. This strategy was revised in June 2005, when still no device with Palm OS Cobalt was announced. PalmSource announced it was halting all development efforts on any product not directly related to its future Linux based platform.\nWith the acquisition of PalmSource by ACCESS, Palm OS for Linux was changed to become the Access Linux Platform which was first announced in February 2006. The initial versions of the platform and software development kits for the Access Linux Platform were officially released in February 2007. As of January 2011, the Access Linux Platform had then yet to ship on any devices, however development kits then existed and public demonstrations had been showcased.\nPalm, Inc., the main licensee of Palm OS Garnet, did not license Access Linux Platform for their own devices. Instead, Palm developed another Linux-based operating system called Palm webOS. On February 11, 2009, Palm CEO Ed Colligan said there would be no additional Palm OS devices (excepting the Centro being released to other carriers). Palm was focusing on Palm webOS and Windows Mobile devices. On April 1, 2009, Palm announced the availability of a Palm OS emulator for its webOS.\nBuilt-in applications.\nPalm OS licensees decide which applications are included on their Palm OS devices. Licensees can also customize the applications.\nStandard Palm OS applications.\nNote: On the newer models, the standard PIM apps \"Address\", \"Date Book\", \"Memo Pad\" and \"ToDos\" were replaced by their improved counterparts \"Contacts\", \"Calendar\", \"Memos\" and \"Tasks\".\nThe Palm's Address program stores contact information, keyed by any of several user-definable categories. Entries are displayed and sorted in last name, first name order (this can be changed only to Company, Last Name order). There are five slots for phone or e-mail, each of which may be designated Work, Home, Fax, Other, E-mail, Main, Pager or Mobile (the slot designations cannot be changed) The newer Contacts app adds the following features: several addresses, 9 new fields: Website, Birthday, More phone numbers, Instant Messaging with quick connect.\nCalc turns the Palm into a standard 4-function pocket calculator with three shades of purple and blue buttons contrasting with the two red clear buttons. It supports square root and percent keys and has one memory.\nIt also has an option to display a running history of the calculations, much like the paper-tape calculators that were once common.\nDate Book shows a daily or weekly schedule, or a simple monthly view. The daily schedule has one line per hour, between user-selected begin and end times. Clicking on an empty line creates a new event. Empty lines are crowded out by actual events, whose start and stop times are shown by default bracketed in the left margin. The newer Calendar app adds the following features: New Day view, use of categories for events, event location, event can span midnight, event details, birthdays as timeless events. It supports time zone designation for events, a feature lacking in some more recent competitors.\nAn event, or appointment, can be heralded by an alarm, any number of minutes, hours or days before it begins. These alarms sound even when the unit is switched off.\nAppointments can recur in a specified number of days, weeks, months or years and can contain notes.\nExpense tracks common business expenses. No totals are calculated on the Palm. The user must sync with a host computer and view the expense data in a worksheet (templates for Microsoft Excel are supplied).\nHotSync integrates with the user's PC. Usually activated by a press of the physical HotSync button on the Palm's cradle (a dock station), this application communicates with various conduits on the desktop PC to install software, backup databases, or merge changes made on the PC or the handheld to both devices. It can communicate with the PC through a physical connection (USB on newer models), Bluetooth or IrDA wireless connections, and direct network connections on devices with networking capability.\nIn addition to the conduits provided by the licensee, developers can create their own conduits for integration with other Palm OS applications and desktop products. For example, a time tracking package could provide a conduit to communicate information between Palm OS and Windows executables.\nA Backup conduit included with the HotSync software backs up (and restores, if necessary) most of the data on a Palm OS device. This allows users to hard reset their Palm\u2014thus clearing all of the data\u2014with few noticeable consequences. This also allows users to migrate to new Palm devices of the same Palm OS version, a feature that is helpful to those who lose or damage their device.\nSome models of Palm keep their data storage in volatile memory and require constant power to maintain their memory. Although these handhelds attempt to save the contents of memory in low battery situations by not \"turning on,\" leaving a \"dead\" handheld for an extended period of time can cause this reserve power to be used up and the contents of storage memory to be lost. Some later Palms use NVRAM or microdrive for storage.\nMemo Pad can hold notes of up to 4,000 characters each; the newer Memos app increases field size from 3 to 30 kB. Memos are ordered in two ways: alphabetically, and manually (which allows the user to choose the order of the memos), and memos can be grouped in user-configurable categories. Memo Pad is for text only, not for drawings, and text can be entered using the Graffiti alphabet, using hardware or software keyboards, or using the 'paste' function. When Palm devices first became available, some Palm users started to create and exchange Memo Pad documents containing generally useful information, which came to be known as Memoware.\nTo do list creates personal reminders and prioritizes the things the user has to do.\nEach To Do List item may also have: a priority, categories (to organize and view items in logical groups), attached Note (to add more description and clarification of the task). &lt;br&gt;To Do List item can be sorted by: due date, priority or category The newer Tasks app features the following improvements: new interface, repeating tasks, alarms, etc.\nPreferences (also referred to as Prefs) shows program files with a special preference panel type which are not shown by the normal launcher. Programs can be changed by switching the 'appl' type to 'panl' and vice versa. Palm OS contains approximately 15 preference panels by default and new preference panels can be added just like any other application.\nPreference panels allow users to manage a number of settings, including Graffiti settings, sound settings, text shortcuts, network settings and the system time.\nSecurity (which is a panel on newer Palm OS devices) is used to configure Palm OS's security settings. These include the password needed to display hidden records and unlock the device when locked, as well as set up an automatic lockdown time or inactivity threshold. On the PC, only Palm Desktop honors this password but other PC programs can view everything\u2014in other words, all the data protected by this password can be seen by anyone opening the .dat files using a text editor or word processor.\nCommon third-party core OS applications.\nStarting with Palm OS version 5.2, Palm created customized versions of the common PIM application. Some new features have been added, e.g. support for Address categories, Ringtone associations to users, longer memo texts, etc.. They were also renamed to reflect designations from Microsoft Outlook, thus Address became \"Contacts\", Datebook became \"Calendar\", Memo Pad became \"Memos\" and To do list became \"Tasks\".\nBlazer is a web browser for Palm handhelds. The versions 1.0 and 2.0 run on Palm OS 3.1 or higher handhelds, but they needed a proxy server which has been shut down, so they can no longer be used. Version 3.0 is used on the Treo 600 smartphone. The current version of Blazer is Blazer 4.5, which is compliant with most major standards. It is generally bundled with newer smartphones and newer Palm devices capable of accessing the Internet.\nPalm's Note Pad can be used for quick drawings. With neat handwriting, 20\u201330 words will fit on one page; for more text, Memo Pad is the better choice. There are three sizes of pen width, plus an eraser and a background color change feature in some models. It is possible to draw a very simple map. The more \"advanced\" desktop version saves the Memo pad drawings to the desktop.\nAs of 2006, most new Palm handhelds include Photos, which creates a digital photo album used to view pictures on a Palm OS device. As with all the other photo programs, photos can be beamed to other mobile devices. Each photo can be labeled and organized into separate photo albums. A slideshow can also be shown for a specific album, and each photo in the album will be shown full screen.\nPhotos can be edited with the Palm Photos PC software (Windows only), and when the photos are transferred to the handheld they will contain all changes made to the photo.\nThe Palm Photos software is available in the Zire 71, Tungsten C, Tungsten E, Tungsten T2, Tungsten T3 and several others.\nWith the support for Video, Palm Photos was later renamed to \"Media\" and even later to \"Pics&amp; Videos\".\nSome models feature the ability to make voice recordings which are synced using the Voice conduit and can be viewed on a desktop with the Voice Memo application which is part of the Palm Desktop Suite.\nThird-party applications.\nThere are many successful applications that can be installed on a Palm OS device. As of 2008, there were more than 50,000 third-party applications available for the Palm OS platform, which have various licensing types, including open-source, and various closed licensing schemes such as freeware, shareware, and traditional pay-up-front purchase.\nHackMaster is an extension manager for Palm OS that includes several patches improving OS features. Other third party OS extensions also require HackMaster to work.\nIn November 2022, the Internet Archive launched 565 Palm OS applications in its archives that can be accessed through a browser. The applications also launch CloudpilotEmu, an emulator for the PalmPilot Palm OS, when accessed.\nApplication development.\nPalm OS Garnet applications are primarily coded in C/C++. Two officially supported compilers exist: a commercial product, CodeWarrior Development Studio for Palm OS, and an open source tool chain called prc-tools, based on an old version of gcc. CodeWarrior is criticized for being expensive and is no longer being developed, whereas PRC-Tools lacks several of CodeWarrior's features. A version of PRC-Tools is included in a free Palm OS Developer Suite (PODS).\nOnBoardC is a C compiler, assembler, linker and programming editor that runs on the Palm itself.\nPalm OS Cobalt applications are also coded in a variation of gcc, but the Cobalt compilers have fewer limitations.\nThere are development tools available for Palm programming that do not require low-level programming in C/C++, such as PocketC/PocketC Architect, CASL, AppForge Crossfire (which uses Visual Basic, Visual Basic .NET, or C#), Handheld Basic, Pendragon Forms, Satellite Forms and NSBasic/Palm (Visual Basic like languages). A Java Virtual Machine was previously available for the Palm OS platform, however on 12 January 2008, Palm, Inc. announced that it would no longer be available. Palm, Inc. further said \"There is no alternate Java Virtual Machine that we are aware of for Palm OS.\" Waba and a derivative of it, SuperWaba, provide a Java-like virtual machine and programming language. A version of the Lua language, called Plua, is also available for Palm; however, due to the fact that it requires an additional runtime to be installed along with the application, it is only used for mainstream applications by a minority of software companies. Quartus Forth is an ISO/ANSI Standard Forth compiler that runs on the Palm itself. It also has an interactive console for dynamic development and debugging.\nThree environments allow programming in Pascal for Palm OS. The free PP Compiler runs directly on the handheld computer, while PocketStudio is a Delphi-like IDE for Windows Computers that has a visual form designer and generates PRC files for being transferred to handhelds via HotSync. The third option was HSPascal, developed by Danish developer Christen Fihl, based on his experience with the High Speed Pascal compiler for various 16-bit computer systems, including the Commodore Amiga.\nAs Palm has no connection drivers that enable the transfer of data with a server DBMS (Oracle, mySQL, MS SQL Server), the programmer can use Middleware software that enables this connectivity.\nA roughly R4RS-compatible implementation of Scheme, LispMe, provides the Palm platform with a GPL-licensed onboard Lisp REPL with some Palm OS-specific adaptations, but although it is functionally a compiler it does not produce code that operates outside the development environment, so its use is restricted to prototyping.\nLegal issues.\nPalm OS has been involved in various lawsuits over the years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37546", "revid": "48932058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37546", "title": "Palm", "text": "Palm most commonly refers to:\nPalm or Palms may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37547", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37547", "title": "WToO", "text": ""}
{"id": "37548", "revid": "50611761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37548", "title": "Mycenae", "text": "Archaeological site in Greece\nMycenae ( ; or , \"Myk\u0113\u0302nai\" or \"Myk\u1e17n\u0113\") is an archaeological site near Mykines in Argolis, north-eastern Peloponnese, Greece. It is located about south-west of Athens; north of Argos; and south of Corinth. The site is inland from the Saronic Gulf and built upon a hill rising above sea level.\nIn the second millennium BC, Mycenae was one of the major centres of Greek civilization\u2014a military stronghold which dominated much of southern Greece, Crete, the Cyclades and parts of southwest Anatolia. The period of Greek history from about 1600 BC to about 1100 BC is called Mycenaean in reference to Mycenae. At its peak in 1350 BC, the citadel and lower town had a population of 30,000 and an area of .\nThe first correct identification of Mycenae in modern literature was in 1700, during a survey conducted by the Venetian engineer Francesco Vandeyk on behalf of Francesco Grimani, the Provveditore Generale of the Kingdom of the Morea. Vandeyk used Pausanias's description of the Lion Gate to identify the ruins of Mycenae.\nIn 1999 the archeological site of Mycenae was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List, along with the nearby site of Tiryns, because of its historical importance as the center of the Mycenaean civilization, its outstanding architecture and its testimony to the development of Ancient Greek civilization.\nThe Lion Gate, the Treasury of Atreus and the walls of Mycenae and Tiryns are examples of the noteworthy architecture found in Mycenae and Tiryns. The structures and layouts of these discoveries exemplify the creative talent of the time. Greek architecture and urban planning have been significantly influenced by the Mycenaean civilization. Mycenae and Tiryns, which stand as the pinnacle of the early phases of Greek civilisation, provided unique witness to political, social and economic growth during the Mycenaean civilization. The accomplishments of the Mycenaean civilisation in art, architecture and technology, which inspired European cultures, are also on display at both locations.\nThese sites are strongly connected to the Homeric epics. The earliest examples of the Greek language are also visible at Mycenae and Tiryn, preserved on Linear B tablets.\nA stringent legal framework was established to safeguard the integrity of the Mycenae and Tiryns sites against vandalism and other forms of damage and disturbance to the remains. The Hellenic Ministry of Culture and Sports monitors the two archaeological sites. To maintain the quality and conditions of the Mycenaean and Tiryn sites, archaeological study is conducted methodically and systematically.\nThe Greek Antiquities Law No 3028/2002, on the 'Conservation of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage in General', governs the preservation and protection of the sites. Ministerial Decree No 2160 of 1964 created and safeguarded the limits of Mycenae in addition to the sites themselves. The acropolis and the wider surroundings are also covered by the extension of protection conferred by this ministerial decree. Ministerial Decrees No 102098/4753 of 1956 and 12613/696 of 1991 both provide protection for the Tiryns archaeological site.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mukanai\" is thought not to be Greek but rather one of the many pre-Greek place names inherited by later Greek speakers. Legend has it that the name was connected to the Greek word \"myk\u0113s\" (\u03bc\u03cd\u03ba\u03b7\u03c2, \"mushroom\"). Thus Pausanias ascribes the name to the legendary founder, Perseus, who was said to have named it either after the cap (\"myk\u0113s\") of the sheath of his sword or after a mushroom he had plucked on the site. Homer connected the name to the nymph Mycene, the daughter of the river god Inachos of Argos (Odyssey 2.120).\nIn the \"Iliad\" the name of the city is spelled \"\" (\u039c\u03c5\u03ba\u03ae\u03bd\u03b7).\nHistory.\nMycenae, an acropolis site, was built on a hill above sea level, some inland from the Gulf of Argolis. Situated in the north-east corner of the Argive plain, it easily overlooked the whole area and was ideally positioned to be a centre of power, especially as it commanded all easy routes to the Isthmus of Corinth. Besides its strong defensive and strategic position, it had good farmland and an adequate water supply. \nNeolithic Age.\nThere are only faint traces of Neolithic settlement on the site although it was continuously occupied from the Early Neolithic (EN, c. 5000\u2013c. 4000 BC). EN Rainbow Ware constitutes the earliest ceramic evidence discovered so far.\nEarly Bronze Age.\nThe Early Bronze Age (EBA) is known as the Early Helladic (EH) on mainland Greece, dated from around 3200-2050/2000 BC. The EH can be subdivided into EH I (3200-2650 BC), EH II (2650-2200 BC) and EH III (2200-2000 BC). Mycenae was occupied throughout this period.\nPottery material spanning the entire Early Helladic was discovered 1877 by Panagiotis Stamatakis at a low depth in the sixth shaft grave in Circle A. Further EH and MH material was found beneath the walls and floors of the palace, on the summit of the acropolis and outside the Lion Gate in the area of the ancient cemetery. An EH\u2013MH settlement was discovered near a fresh-water well on top of the Kalkani hill south-west of the acropolis.\nMiddle Bronze Age.\nThe Middle Bronze Age (MBA) is known as the Middle Helladic (MH) on mainland Greece, dated from around 2050/2000-1550 BC. At Mycenae the population grew considerably during the MH. The region came under the dominant Cretan influence (Minoan) prevailed from c. 1600 BC, the first evidence of this coming from the shaft graves discovered in 1876 by Heinrich Schliemann. Schliemann's shaft graves came to be known as Circle A to distinguish them from the Circle B graves, which were found at a later date, although Circle B are the earlier graves, dated c. 1650 BC to c. 1550 BC and entirely within MHIII. Circle A is dated to the sixteenth century BC, including the transition from Middle to Late Helladic IA (LHIA; c. 1550 \u2013 c. 1500 BC). The contents of Circle B are less wealthy than those of Circle A.\nIn MH II (c. 1800 BC), the first burials in pits or cist graves are found on the west slope of the acropolis, which was at least partially enclosed by the earliest circuit wall.\nLate Bronze Age.\nThe Late Bronze Age (LBA) is known as the Late Helladic (LH) on mainland Greece, dated from around 1550-1200/1150 BC.\nIn the absence of documents and objects that can be precisely dated, events at Mycenae can be dated only relatively within the constraints of Helladic chronology, which relies on categorisation of stratified material objects, mainly pottery, within an agreed historical framework. Mycenae developed into a major power during LHI (c. 1550 \u2013 c. 1450 BC) and is believed to have become the main centre of Aegean civilisation through the fifteenth century to the extent that the two hundred years from c. 1400 BC to c. 1200 BC (encompassing LHIIIA and LHIIIB) are known as the Mycenaean Age. The Minoan hegemony ended c. 1450 and there is evidence that Knossos was occupied by Mycenaeans until it too was destroyed c. 1370 BC. From then on, Mycenaean expansion throughout the Aegean was unhindered until the massive disruption of society in the first half of the twelfth century (LHIIIC), which ended Mycenaean civilisation and culminated in the destruction of Mycenae itself c. 1150 BC.\nLate Helladic I (LHI; c. 1550\u2013c. 1450 BC).\nOutside the partial circuit wall, Grave Circle B, named for its enclosing wall, contained ten cist graves in Middle Helladic style and several shaft graves, sunk more deeply, with interments resting in cists. Richer grave goods mark the burials as possibly regal. Mounds over the top contained broken drinking vessels and bones from a repast, testifying to a more than ordinary farewell. Stelae surmounted the mounds.\nA walled enclosure, Grave Circle A, included six more shaft graves, with nine female, eight male, and two juvenile interments. Grave goods were more costly than in Circle B. The presence of engraved and inlaid swords and daggers, with spear points and arrowheads, leaves little doubt that warrior chieftains and their families were buried here. Some art objects obtained from the graves are the Silver Siege Rhyton, the Mask of Agamemnon, the Cup of Nestor and weapons both votive and practical. The chemical compositions of the silver objects indicate that the silver was sourced from several locations.\nLate Helladic II (LHII; c. 1450\u2013c. 1400 BC).\nAlan Wace divided the nine tholos tombs of Mycenae into three groups of three, each based on architecture. His earliest \u2013 the Cyclopean Tomb, Epano Phournos, and the Tomb of Aegisthus \u2013 are dated to LHIIA.\nBurial in tholoi is seen as replacing burial in shaft graves. The care taken to preserve the shaft graves testifies that they were by then part of the royal heritage, the tombs of the ancestral heroes. Being more visible, all the tholoi had been plundered either in antiquity or in later historic times.\nLate Helladic III (LHIII; c. 1400\u2013c. 1050 BC).\nAt a conventional date of 1350 BC, the fortifications on the acropolis and other surrounding hills were rebuilt in a style known as Cyclopean because the blocks of stone used were so massive that they were thought in later ages to be the work of the one-eyed giants known as the Cyclopes. Within these walls, much of which can still be seen, successive monumental palaces were built. The final palace, remains of which are currently visible on the acropolis of Mycenae, dates to the start of LHIIIA:2. Earlier palaces must have existed but they had been cleared away or built over.\nThe construction of palaces at that time with a similar architecture was general throughout southern Greece. They all featured a megaron, or throne room, with a raised central hearth under an opening in the roof, which was supported by four columns in a square around the hearth. A throne was placed against the center of a wall to the side of the hearth, allowing an unobstructed view of the ruler from the entrance. Frescos adorned the plaster walls and floor.\nThe room was accessed from a courtyard with a columned portico. A grand staircase led from a terrace below to the courtyard on the acropolis.\nIn the temple built within the citadel, a scarab of Queen Tiye of Egypt, who was married to Amenhotep III, was placed in the Room of the Idols alongside at least one statue of either LHIIIA:2 or B:1 type. Amenhotep III's relations with \"m-w-k-i-n-u\", *Mukana, have corroboration from the inscription at Kom al-Hetan - but Amenhotep's reign is thought to align with late LHIIIA:1. It is likely that Amenhotep's herald presented the scarab to an earlier generation, which then found the resources to rebuild the citadel as Cyclopean and then, to move the scarab here.\nWace's second group of tholoi are dated between LHIIA and LHIIIB: Kato Phournos, Panagia Tholos, and the Lion Tomb. The final group, Group III: the Treasury of Atreus, the Tomb of Clytemnestra and the Tomb of the Genii, are dated to LHIIIB by a sherd under the threshold of the Treasury of Atreus, the largest of the nine tombs. Like the Treasury of Minyas at Orchomenus the tomb had been looted of its contents and its nature as funerary monument had been forgotten. The structure bore the traditional name of \"Treasury\".\nThe pottery phases on which the relative dating scheme is based (EH, MH, LH, etc.) do not allow very precise dating, even augmented by the few existing C-14 dates due to the tolerance inherent in these. The sequence of further construction at Mycenae is approximately as follows. In the middle of LHIIIB, around 1250 BC or so, the Cyclopean wall was extended on the west slope to include Grave Circle A. The main entrance through the circuit wall was made grand by the best known feature of Mycenae, the Lion Gate, through which passed a stepped ramp leading past circle A and up to the palace. The Lion Gate was constructed in the form of a \"Relieving Triangle\" in order to support the weight of the stones. An undecorated postern gate also was constructed through the north wall.\nOne of the few groups of excavated houses in the city outside the walls lies beyond Grave Circle B and belongs to the same period. The House of Shields, the House of the Oil Merchant, the House of the Sphinxes, and the West House. These may have been both residences and workshops.\nThe largest stones including the lintels and gate jambs weighed well over 20 tonnes; some may have been close to 100 tonnes.\nSomewhat later, toward the end of LHIIIB around 1200 BC, another, final extension to the citadel was undertaken. The wall was extended again on the northeast, with a sally port and also a secret passage through and under the wall, of corbelled construction, leading downwards by some 99 steps to a cistern carved out of rock 15 m below the surface. It was fed by a tunnel from a spring on more distant higher ground.\nAlready in LHIIIA:1, Egypt knew *Mukana by name as a capital city on the level of Thebes and Knossos. During LHIIIB, Mycenae's political, military and economic influence likely extended as far as Crete, Pylos in the western Peloponnese, and to Athens and Thebes.\nDecline.\nMycenae was among the numerous Aegean sites destroyed as part of the Bronze Age Collapse around 1200 BC. The causes of these destructions are unknown, but proposed explanations include enemy attack, internal strife, and natural disasters such as earthquakes. Unlike many other sites, Mycenae was partly rebuilt after this destruction, though it was no longer the centre of a centralised literate bureacuracy. Pottery finds suggest that Postpalatial Mycenae eventually regained some of its wealth, before burning once again. After this period, the site remained sparsely populated until the Hellenistic era.\nArchaic and classical periods.\nA temple dedicated to Hera was built on the summit of the Mycenaean citadel during the Archaic Period. A Mycenaean contingent fought at Thermopylae and Plataea during the Persian Wars. In 468 BC, however, troops from Argos captured Mycenae, expelled the inhabitants and razed the fortifications.\nRevival and abandonment.\nMycenae was briefly reoccupied in the Hellenistic period, when it boasted a theatre (located over the Tomb of Clytemnestra). The site was subsequently abandoned, and by the Roman period in Greece its ruins had become a tourist attraction. The ancient travel writer Pausanias, for example, visited the site and briefly described the prominent fortifications and the Lion Gate, still visible in his time, the second century AD. Pausanias also describes being led to the site by shepherds, indicating that the surrounding area was never completely deserted.\nThe Ministry of Culture, Education, and Religious Affairs is currently in charge of the site. In 1999, a scientific committee for Mycenae was created, and has since completed numerous projects for the preservation, improvement, and stabilization of both archaeological sites. The committee has also sought to improve visitor access to the monuments at the locations by laying out walkways and establishing information stations.\nPolitical organization.\nIt appears that the Mycenaean state was ruled by kings identified by the title , \"wa-na-ka\" (\"wanax\") in the Linear B inscriptions at Knossos and Pylos. The wanax had the supreme authority and was represented by a number of officials. In the Homeric poems, the word form is \"anax\" (), often translated in English as \"lord\". Some inscriptions with a list of offerings indicate that the king was probably divine, but the term \"for the king\" is usually accompanied by another name. It is possible that a priest-king system was adopted from the East and the title probably indicates that his right to rule was given by the god. The term , \"qa-si-re-u\" (cf. , \"basile\u00fas\"), which was later used in Greece for \"king\", was apparently used for the \"chief\" of any group of people, or for a provincial official. (Homer mentions many \"basilees\" in Ithaca).\nThe land possessed by the king is usually called , \"te-me-no\" (, \"t\u00e9menos\"), a word that survived in classical Greece (the \"temenos\" placed by Hephaestus on the shield of Achilles is called \"royal\"). In classical times the word has a religious connotation. Other important landowners were the , \"ra-wa-ke-ta\" (\"l\u0101w\u0101getas\"), literally translated as \"the leader of the people\", and sometimes interpreted as a given kingdom's military leader, though this is not confirmed by the inscriptions. Alternatively, he may have been the crown prince or, if one follows the argument of a single Mycenaean state, a local king who was a vassal to the overarching wanax / Great King. Below these two elevated persons, Linear B texts situate the , \"te-re-ta\" (\"telestai\"), the officials. Leonard Robert Palmer suggests that the \"telestai were the men of telos- the fief holders\". The , \"e-qe-ta\" (\"ekwetai\", \"companions\" or \"followers\") were a group of nobles (aristocrats), who followed the king in peace and war. It seems that they were representatives of the king among military groups and religious personnel. There is also at least one instance of a person, Enkhelyawon at Pylos, who appears titleless in the written record but whom modern scholars regard as being probably a king.\nFrom the existing evidence, it seems that the kingdom was further subdivided into sixteen districts. The , \"ko-re-se\" was the \"governor of the district\" and the , \"po-ro-ko-re-se\" was the \"deputy\". It is possible that these represent \"koreter\" and \"prokoreter\". The , \"da-mo-ko-ro\" (\"damokoros\") was an official appointment but his duties are not very clear. The communal land was held at the hands of , \"da-mo\" (literally, \"people\", cf. Attic , ), or \"plot holders\". It seems that the \"da-mo\" was a collective body of men, representing the local district and that it had certain power in public affairs. It is suggested that \"qa-si-re-u\" had a council of elders, a , \"ke-ro-si-ja\", (later ), but Palmer believes that it was an organization of \"bronze smiths\". The land was held by the wanax, by the damos, and by individual land owners. It seems that people lived in small family groups or clans around the main citadel. Occupying a lower rung of the social ladder were the slaves, \"do-e-ro\", (cf. , ). These are recorded in the texts as working either for the palace or for specific deities.\nArchaeological evidence supports the idea that the social hierarchy of Mycenae was a monarchy. The difference in the grave goods shows how the society was clearly separated by class. The king or the wanax was at the top of the hierarchy, who lived in the palaces and made laws for the people. It is believed that the kings came into power not because of great leadership duties, but because of hereditary succession. Below the king was the Lawagetas, believed to be the leader of the army, based on Homer's works. The Lawagetas are thought to have gotten their power by owning the most land. Other opinions think Lawagetas were a sort of prince, having no military power. Under the Lawagetas are numerous craftsmen employed by the Lawagetas. Other groups commonly mentioned in landholding texts are the Telestas. Some think the Telestas are religious officials while others believe they were given land in return for services. Under the Telestas is believed to be the Hequetia, who are believed to be either military workers or warriors or companions of the king. Under the Hequetia are the general laborers which includes artisans, farmers, fisherman, and more. At the bottom of the social hierarchy slaves, which are commonly believed to be women. Even when women were not slaves it is believed they were never able to hold substantial roles of power in the civilizations. The particular positions held and responsibilities performed within Mycenae's social structure are not well understood.\nAccording to the traditional view, Mycenae or any other palatial center of mainland Greece was not an empire, and the mainland consisted of independent city-states. This view has in recent years, however, been challenged by various specialists, such as Jorrit Kelder and, most recently, Birgitta Eder and Reinhard Jung. Kelder pointed out that a number of palaces and fortifications appear to be part of a wider kingdom. For instance, Gla, located in the region of Boeotia, belonged to the state of nearby Orchomenos. The palace of Mycenae probably ruled over a territory two to three times the size of the other palatial states in Bronze Age Greece. Its territory would have also included adjacent centers, including Tiryns and Nauplion, which could plausibly be ruled by a member of Mycenae's ruling dynasty. Certain archaeological features in the palatial centers like the architectural uniformity, the uniformity of the administrative system, the uniformity in pottery, the imperial language and some large scale projects (drainage systems, harbours, roads etc.) indicate that large parts of Greece may have fallen under the sway of a single king, with various degrees of control over local vassals: a situation not dissimilar from the contemporary Hittite world, although the archaeological evidence remains ambiguous. A loose confederacy of city-states under the king of Mycenae, Agamemnon, is mentioned by Homer in \"Iliad\".\nReligion.\nMuch of the Mycenaean religion survived into classical Greece in their pantheon of Greek deities, but it is not known to what extent Greek religious belief is Mycenaean, nor how much is a product of the Greek Dark Ages or later. Moses I. Finley detected only few authentic Mycenaean beliefs in the 8th-century Homeric world, but Nilsson suggested that the Mycenaean religion was the mother of the Greek religion.\nFrom the history traced by Nilsson and Guthrie, the Mycenaean pantheon consisted of Minoan deities, but also of gods and goddesses who appear under different names with similar functions in East and West. Many of these names appearing in the Linear B inscriptions can be found later in classical Greece, like Zeus, Hera, Poseidon, Athena, Hermes, Eileithyia and Dionysos, but the etymology is the only evidence of the cults.\nThere are several reasonable guesses that can be made, however. It seems that originally the Mycenaeans, like many Indo-Europeans, considered divine any object that inherited an internal power (anima). Certain religious beliefs were mixed with the beliefs of the local populations as it appears in the old cults of isolated Arcadia, which survived up to classical Greece. In these cults, Poseidon appears usually as a horse, representing the river spirit of the underworld, as usually happens in northern European folklore. The precursor goddesses of Demeter and Persephone are closely related with springs and animals, and especially with Poseidon and Artemis, who was the first nymph. Mycenaean religion was almost certainly polytheistic, and the Mycenaeans were actively syncretistic, adding foreign deities to their pantheon of deities with ease. The Mycenaeans probably entered Greece with a pantheon of deities headed by some ruling sky-deity, which linguists speculate might have been called \"*Dyeus\" in early Indo-European. In Greek, this deity would become Zeus (pronounced \"Zeus\" or \"Dias\" in ancient Greek). Among the Hindus, this sky-deity becomes \"Dyaus Pita\". In Latin he becomes \"Deus Pater\" or Jupiter; we still encounter this word in the etymologies of the words \"deity\" and \"divine\".\nLater in some cults, Zeus is united with the Aegean Great Goddess, who is represented by Hera, in a \"holy wedding\" (\"hieros gamos\"). At some point in their cultural history, the Mycenaeans adopted some Minoan goddesses like Aphaea, Britomartis, Diktynna and associated them with their sky-god. Many of them were absorbed by more powerful divinities, and some like the vegetation goddesses Ariadne and Helen survived in Greek folklore together with the cult of the \"divine child\", who was probably the precursor of Dionysos. Athena and Hera survived and were tutelary goddesses, the guardians of the palaces and the cities. In general, later Greek religion distinguishes between two types of deities: the Olympian, or sky, deities (including Zeus), who are now commonly known in some form or another; and the chthonic deities, or deities of the earth. Walter Burkert warns: \"To what extent one can and must differentiate between Minoan and Mycenaean religion is a question which has not yet found a conclusive answer.\" He suggests that useful parallels will be found in the relations between Hellenistic and Archaic Greek culture and religion, or between Roman and Etruscan culture.\nThe pantheon also included deities representing the powers of nature and wildlife, who appear with similar functions in the Mediterranean region. The \"Mistress of the Animals\" (\"Potnia Theron\"), later called Artemis, may be identified as the Minoan goddess Britomartis/Dictynna. Poseidon is the lord of the sea, and therefore of storms and earthquakes, (the \"Earth shaker\" in Linear B tablets). He may have functioned as a pre-Hellenic chthonic Zeus, the lord or spouse of the Earth goddess. Athena whose task was to protect the olive-trees is a civic Artemis. The powers of animal nature fostered a belief in nymphs whose existence was bound to the trees and the waters, and in gods with human forms and the heads or tails of animals who stood for primitive bodily instincts. In Arcadia were depicted animal-headed gods, indicating that in the remote past the gods were conceived as animals and birds, in a surrounding of animal-headed daemons. Later the gods were revealed in human forms with an animal as a companion or symbol. Some of the old gods survived in the cult of Dionysos (Satyrs) and Pan (the goat-god).\nThe Mycenaeans adopted probably from the east a priest-king system and the belief of a ruling deity in the hands of a theocratic society. At the end of the second millennium BC, when the Mycenaean palaces collapsed, it seems that Greek thought was gradually released from the idea that each man was a servant to the gods, and sought a \"moral purpose\". It is possible that this procedure started before the end of the Mycenaean age, but the idea is almost absent or vague in the Homeric poems, where the interference of the gods is not related to the rightness or wrongness of men's actions. Later, Hesiod uses a lot of eastern material in his cosmology and in the genealogical trees of the gods, and he introduces the idea of the existence of something else behind the gods, which was more powerful than they.\nThe Olympian Pantheon is an ordered system. The Greek divinities live with Zeus at the helm and each is concerned with a recognizable sphere. However, certain elements in some Greek cults indicate the survival of some older cults from a less rationalized world: old cults of the dead, agrarian magic, exorcism of evil spirits, peculiar sacrifices, and animal-headed gods. In the Homeric poems, the avenging Fate was probably originally a daemon acting in parallel with the gods. Later, the cult of Dionysos Zagreus indicates that life-blood of animals was needed to renew that of men. A similar belief may be guessed from the Mycenaean Hagia Triada sarcophagus (1400 BC), which combines features of Minoan civilization and Mycenaean style. It seems that the blood of a bull was used for the regeneration of the reappearing dead. Probably most of these cults existed in the Mycenaean period and survived by immemorial practice.\nA secondary level of importance was the cult of the heroes, which seems to have started in the Mycenaean era. These were great men of the past who were exalted to honor after death, because of what they had done. According to an old Minoan belief, beyond the sea there was an island called Elysion, where the departed could have a different but happier existence. Later, the Greeks believed that there could live in human form only heroes and the beloved of the gods. The souls of the rest would drift unconsciously in the gloomy space of Hades. Gods and men had common origins, but there was an enormous gap between the immortal gods and mortal men. However, certain elements indicate that the Mycenaeans probably believed in a future existence. Two well-preserved bodies were found in Shaft Grave VI, and Wolfgang Helbig believed that an embalming preceded the burial. In the shaft graves discovered by Heinrich Schliemann, the corpses were lightly exposed to fire in order to preserve them.\nMycenaean religion certainly involved offerings and sacrifices to the deities, and some have speculated that their ceremonies involved human sacrifice based on textual evidence and bones found outside tombs. In the Homeric poems, there seems to be a lingering cultural memory of human sacrifice in King Agamemnon's sacrifice of his daughter, Iphigenia; several of the stories of Trojan heroes involve tragic human sacrifice. In the far past, even human beings might be offered to placate inscrutable gods, especially in times of guilty fear. Later sacrifice became a feast at which oxen were slaughtered. Men kept the meat, and gave the gods the bones wrapped in fat.\nBeyond this speculation we can go no further. Somewhere in the shades of the centuries between the fall of the Mycenaean civilization and the end of the Greek Dark Ages, the original Mycenaean religion persisted and adapted until it finally emerged in the stories of human devotion, apostasy, and divine capriciousness that exists in the two great epic poems of Homer.\nMycenae in Greek mythology and legends.\nPerseid dynasty.\nClassical Greek myths assert that Mycenae was founded by Perseus, grandson of king Acrisius of Argos, son of Acrisius's daughter, Dana\u00eb and the god Zeus. Having killed his grandfather by accident, Perseus could not, or would not, inherit the throne of Argos. Instead he arranged an exchange of realms with his cousin, Megapenthes, and became king of Tiryns, Megapenthes taking Argos. After that, he founded Mycenae and ruled the kingdoms jointly from there.\nPerseus married Andromeda and had many sons. His son, Electryon, became the second of the dynasty, but the succession was disputed by the Taphians under Pterelaos, another Perseid, who assaulted Mycenae, lost, and retreated with the cattle. The cattle were recovered by Amphitryon, a grandson of Perseus, but he killed his uncle by accident with a club in an unruly cattle incident and had to go into exile.\nThe throne went to Sthenelus, third in the dynasty, a son of Perseus. He set the stage for future greatness by marrying Nicippe, a daughter of King Pelops of Elis, the most powerful state of the region and the times. With her he had a son, Eurystheus, the fourth and last of the Perseid dynasty. When a son of Heracles, Hyllus, killed Sthenelus, Eurystheus became noted for his enmity to Heracles and for his ruthless persecution of the Heracleidae, the descendants of Heracles.\nThis is the first we hear in legend of those noted sons, who became a symbol of the Dorians. Heracles had been a Perseid. After his death, Eurystheus determined to annihilate these rivals for the throne of Mycenae, but they took refuge in Athens, and in the course of war, Eurystheus and all his sons were killed. The Perseid dynasty came to an end and the people of Mycenae placed Eurystheus's maternal uncle, Atreus, a Pelopid, on the throne.\nAtreid dynasty.\nThe people of Mycenae had received advice from an oracle that they should choose a new king from among the Pelopids. The two contenders were Atreus and his brother, Thyestes. The latter was chosen at first. At this moment nature intervened and the sun appeared to reverse direction by setting in the east. Atreus argued that because the sun had reversed its path, the election of Thyestes should be reversed. The argument was heeded, and Atreus became king. His first move was to pursue Thyestes and all his family \u2013 that is, his own kin \u2013 but Thyestes managed to escape from Mycenae.\nIn legend, Atreus had two sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus, the Atreids. Aegisthus, the son of Thyestes, killed Atreus and restored Thyestes to the throne. With the help of King Tyndareus of Sparta, the Atreids drove Thyestes again into exile. Tyndareus had two ill-starred daughters, Helen and Clytemnestra, whom Menelaus and Agamemnon married, respectively. Agamemnon inherited Mycenae and Menelaus became king of Sparta.\nHomeric poems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSoon, Helen eloped with Paris of Troy. Agamemnon conducted a 10-year war against Troy to get her back for his brother. Because of lack of wind, the warships could not sail to Troy. In order to please the gods so that they might make the winds start to blow, Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia. According to some versions of the legend, the hunting goddess Artemis replaced her at the very last moment with a deer on the altar, and took Iphigenia to Tauris (see \"Iphigenia in Tauris\" by Euripides). The deities, having been satisfied by such a sacrifice, made the winds blow and the Greek fleet departed.\nLegend tells us that the long and arduous Trojan War, although nominally a Greek victory, brought anarchy, piracy, and ruin; already before the Greek fleet set sail for Troy, the conflict had divided the gods as well, and this contributed to curses and acts of vengeance following many of the Greek heroes. After the war Agamemnon returned to Mycenae and was greeted royally with a red carpet rolled out for him. Shortly thereafter, he was slain by Clytemnestra, who hated him bitterly for having ordered the sacrifice of their daughter Iphigenia in order to gain favorable winds to Troy. Clytemnestra was aided in her crime by Aegistheus, her lover, who reigned subsequently, but Orestes, her son by Agamemnon, was smuggled out to Phocis. He returned as an adult with his sister Electra to slay Clytemnestra and Aegistheus. He then fled to Athens to evade justice and a matricide, and became insane for a time. Meanwhile, the throne of Mycenae went to Aletes, son of Aegistheus, but not for long. Recovering, Orestes returned to Mycenae with Electra to kill Aletes and took the throne. This story is told in numerous plays, including the Oresteia, Sophocles' \"Electra\", and Euripides' \"Electra\".\nEnd of the Atreids.\nOrestes then built a larger state in the Peloponnese, but he died in Arcadia from a snake bite. His son, Tisamenus, the last of the Atreid dynasty, was killed by the Heracleidae on their return to the Peloponnesus. They claimed the right of the Perseids to inherit the various kingdoms of the Peloponnese and cast lots for the dominion of them, thus leaving the Atreids as the final rulers of Legendary Mycenae.\nModern history and excavation.\nThe site of Mycenae appears to have been abandoned after its short-lived Hellenistic resettlement. By the time of Pausanias' visit in the second century\u00a0CE, he described the site as a 'ruin', though noted that parts of the walls and the Lion Gate could still be seen. Grave Circle A, meanwhile, was already buried in prehistoric times, and is unlikely to have been visible to Pausanias. The site may still have been visible in the 5th century CE, when it was correctly located on the Roman map known as the \"Tabula Peutingeriana\", but the location seems to have been forgotten during the medieval period: it was generally misplaced on fifteenth-century maps, and Cyriac of Ancona, who believed he visited the site in 1447/1448, had actually seen the nearby fort of Katsingri. Similarly, modern scholarship has disproved the claims of two sixteenth-century travellers to have visited the site: Andr\u00e9 de Monceaux, who claimed to have visited the site in 1669, and the French military officer Nicola Mirabel, who believed that he had done so in 1691.\nEarly archaeological work (1700\u20131876).\nIn 1700, the Venetian engineer Francesco Vandeyk made the first known correct identification of Mycenae of modern times while surveying the Peloponnese (known to the Venetians as the 'Morea') under the orders of Francesco Grimani, \"Provveditore\" of the Venetian armies occupying the region. Vandeyk partially dismantled the debris that was then obscuring the Lion Gate, and identified the tomb now known as the 'Treasury of Atreus', even conjecturing that it was the tomb of a king of Mycenae. During the 18th century, Mycenae was visited only infrequently by tourists, such as the Frenchman Claude-Louis Fourmont, who visited Mycenae in 1729\u20131730 and drew parts of the walls and gates. From 1796, however, Napoleon's invasion of Italy encouraged members of the Society of Dilettanti, whose 'Grand Tour' normally took place in Italy, to find alternative destinations, and members of the society began to include Mycenae on their itineraries: seeing it, in the words of Cathy Gere, as 'the ultimate Romantic ruin.'\nIn the early 19th century, local tradition held that the Treasury of Atreus had been once explored by the \"agha\" of the nearby village of Karvati, who took from it a bronze lamp. By this period, more of Mycenae's monuments were visible and known to European visitors. In 1802, the British aristocrat Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin visited Mycenae looking for antiquities that might be taken back to Britain. While he had originally sought to remove the sculpted relief of the Lion Gate, it proved too large to lift or transport, and so Elgin asked the voivode of Nafplio to clear the Treasury of Atreus, from which he removed fragments of pottery vases, ornamental stonework and a marble vase, as well as parts of its sculptural decoration. In June 1810, Veli Pasha, the Ottoman \"Pasha\" of the Morea, excavated the tomb, clearing most of the entrance, and entered the chamber with ladders; according to Heinrich Schliemann's later publication of his own excavations at Mycenae, he discovered 'bones covered with gold', as well as gemstones and other gold and silver objects. Veli Pasha removed four large fragments of the semi-engaged columns beside the doorway, some of which he gave as a gift to Howe Browne, 2nd Marquess of Sligo, who visited him shortly after the excavations.\nIn 1834, the site was surveyed and mapped by French troops. In 1841, Kyriakos Pittakis, working on behalf of the Archaeological Society of Athens, cleared the approach to the Lion Gate and made a tentative exploration of the Tomb of Clytemnestra.\nSchliemann's excavations (1874\u20131876).\nThe archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann was particularly invested in the site of Mycenae. Schliemann was obsessed with the epic poetry of Homer and believed Homer's stories were based in historical truth. In the later part of his life, he dedicated himself to excavating historical sites relevant to the Homeric epics. Schliemann's first excavation was the site of Hisarlik, believed to be the site of ancient Troy. Following his work at Hisarlik, Schliemann began excavations at Mycenae in 1876. His goal was to find the grave of Agamemnon, the king of Mycenae and leader of the Greek army in the Trojan War as described in Homer's Iliad. Schliemann uncovered a royal cemetery containing six shaft graves, known as Grave Circle A. Among his findings at Grave Circle A was a gold death mask that he labeled as \"The Mask of Agamemnon\". Modern archeological evidence has proven his claims of discovering Agamemnon's remains were most likely false, as the mask is dated more than 300 years before the events of the Trojan War.\nSchliemann's discoveries at Mycenae have come under controversy. Schliemann's archaeological work in general is controversial, with some calling Schliemann \"the father of scientific archaeology\" and others criticizing Schliemann's destructive methods of excavation. The authenticity of Schliemann's excavation of Grave Circle A has come under question, with some critics claiming that Schliemann smuggled additional artifacts into Mycenae and then falsely claimed to have discovered them. Modern evidence suggests that Schliemann's findings at Grave Circle A were genuine, but significantly predate the Trojan War.\nExcavations since Schliemann (1876\u2013present).\nSince Schliemann's day, more scientific excavations have taken place at Mycenae, mainly by Greek archaeologists but also by the British School at Athens. Christos Tsountas, another member of the ASA, cleared a significant portion of the citadel during his excavations of the site beginning in 1884 and ending in 1902. The Athens Archaeological Society is currently excavating the Mycenae Lower Town (as of 2011[ [update]]), with support from Dickinson College and the Institute for Aegean Prehistory. Afterwards, Tsountas and the ASA gave permission to the British School of Archaeology (BSA) to excavate; the BSA conducted excavations from 1920 to 1955 under the supervision of Alan John Bayard Wace, assisted by Winifred Lamb. In 1951, workers discovered Grave Circle B. After Wace died in 1957, excavation work was finished by Lord William Taylour from 1958 to 1969, especially on the west slope of the citadel. The ASA continued excavation work on the site with efforts led by John Papadimitriou and Nicolas Verdelis in the late 1950s and early 1960s, as well as by George Mylonas from 1957 up until 1985. In 1985, excavation work was directed by Spyros Iakovidis who, as of 2009[ [update]], is still overseeing the ASA's research mission in both fieldwork and publication preparation.\nFootnotes.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37549", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37549", "title": "Albert Eienstein", "text": ""}
{"id": "37551", "revid": "1310518589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37551", "title": "Naval Submarine Base New London", "text": "US Navy installation in Connecticut\nNaval Submarine Base New London is the primary United States Navy East Coast submarine base, also known as the \"Home of the Submarine Force.\" It is located in Groton, Connecticut, directly across the Thames River from its namesake city of New London.\nHistory.\nIn 1868, the State of Connecticut gave the Navy exactly of land along the Thames River in Groton to build a Naval Station. Due to a lack of federal funding, it was not until 1872 that the two brick buildings and a T-shaped pier were constructed and officially declared a Navy Yard. In 1898, Congress approved a coaling station to be built at the Yard for refueling small naval ships traveling through the waters of New England. The Navy Yard was first used for laying up inactive ships. The Congressional appropriations were small and the Navy had little need for the yard, which was closed from 1898 to 1900 and its personnel reassigned. By 1912, oil replaced coal in warships and again the Yard was scheduled for closure and the land relinquished by the Navy.\nSubmarine base established.\nThe Navy Yard was spared permanent closure in 1912 by an impassioned plea from Congressman Edwin W. Higgins of Norwich, who was worried about the loss of Federal spending in the region.\nOn 18 October 1915, the submarines \"G-1\", \"G-2\", and \"G-4\" arrived in Groton, along with the monitor serving as a submarine tender. The submarines \"D-1\", \"D-2\", \"D-3\", and \"E-1\" arrived shortly after, along with the submarine tender \"Tonopah\" and the destroyer \"Columbus\".\nAdditional submarines and support craft arrived the following year, and the facility was named as the Navy's first submarine base. The first commander of the Yard was retired Commodore Timothy A. Hunt, who was recalled to service. He was living in New Haven, and he used the Central Hotel on State Street, New London when in town to attend to Yard duties on an \"as needed\" basis. The submarine base is physically located in the Town of Groton, but New London became associated with it because the base had its post office, main offices, and housing in New London. The Navy established schools and training facilities at the base after World War I.\nWartime expansion.\nThe base property expanded during the latter part of World War I. Congress since approved over a million dollars for base real estate and facilities expansion. By the end of the war, 81 buildings had been built to support 1,400 men and 20 submarines, although the land expansion was slowed through much of the 1920s. However, the Great Depression of the 1930s saw an expansion and enhancement of the physical plant of the base. President Franklin D. Roosevelt created a series of Federal Government employment programs that contributed significantly to the submarine base.\nOver 26 high quality warehouses, barracks, and workshops were built at the base under these Federal job-spending programs. The second largest expansion of the base occurred during World War II, when it grew from 112 acres to . The Submarine Force leaped in size, and the base accommodated thousands of men to serve the growing combat fleet. Immediately after World War II, the Submarine Force was significantly reduced and many submarines were sent into storage. Most of the World War II fleet was sold for scrap metal during the early 1960s.\nFrom 1930 to 1994, the most recognizable structure on the base was the Escape Training Tank. Generations of submariners learned to escape in up to of water using buoyant ascent, and were trained in the use of the Momsen lung or Steinke hood. In 2007, the Escape Training Tank was replaced by the Submarine Escape Trainer, which has two types of escape trunks in up to of water. The Steinke hood was replaced by the Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment in the 2000s.\nSubmarine school.\nThe New London base is home port to 16 attack submarines and full Navy base situated in Groton, Connecticut. The base is also neighbor to the major submarine construction yard of General Dynamics' Electric Boat Division. All officer and enlisted submariners are stationed at Groton during their training, except for nuclear trained Electronics Technicians (ETs), Electrician's Mates (EMs), and Machinist's Mates (MMs). Enlisted sailors attending sub school will first go through Basic Enlisted Sub School (BESS), an eight-week program that teaches the rigours of undersea life. BESS includes training in shoring, patching leaks and ruptured pipes, firefighting, and boat handling techniques. After BESS, sailors will either go to a boat or to follow-on schools.\nThe main base occupies more than plus over of family housing. It also supports more than 70 tenant commands, including Naval Submarine School (NAVSUBSCOL), Naval Submarine Support Facility (NSSF), three Submarine Squadron staffs, and the housing and support facilities for more than 21,000 civilian workers, active-duty service members, and their families.\nBase realignment and proposed closure.\nOn 13 May 2005, the Pentagon recommended that the base be closed. After review, the 2005 Base Realignment and Closure Commission voted on 24 August 2005 to strike New London from the list of possible closures, thus allowing the base to remain open.\nGarrison.\nCurrent units stationed at NSBNL include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37552", "revid": "35585582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37552", "title": "Thetis", "text": "Nereid of Greek mythology\nThetis ( , or ; ) is a figure from Greek mythology with varying mythological roles. She mainly appears as a sea nymph, a goddess of water, and one of the 50 Nereids, daughters of the ancient sea god Nereus.\nWhen described as a Nereid in Classical myths, Thetis was the daughter of Nereus and Doris, and a granddaughter of Tethys with whom she sometimes shares characteristics. Often she seems to lead the Nereids as they attend to her tasks. Sometimes she also is identified with Metis.\nSome sources argue that she was one of the earliest of deities worshipped in Archaic Greece, the oral traditions and records of which are lost. Only one written record, a fragment, exists attesting to her worship and an early Alcman hymn exists that identifies Thetis as the creator of the universe. Worship of Thetis as the goddess is documented to have persisted in some regions by historical writers, such as Pausanias.\nIn the Trojan War cycle of myth, the wedding of Thetis and the Greek hero Peleus is one of the precipitating events in the war which also led to the birth of their child Achilles.\nOne of her epithets was \"Halosydne\" (), meaning \"sea-nourished\" or \"sea-born\" goddess.\nAs a goddess.\nMost extant material about Thetis concerns her role as mother of Achilles, but there is some evidence that she was more central to the religious beliefs and practices of Archaic Greece in her role as a sea-goddess. The pre-modern etymology of her name, from \"tithemi\" (\u03c4\u03af\u03b8\u03b7\u03bc\u03b9), \"to set up, establish\", suggests a perception among Classical Greeks of an early political role. Walter Burkert considers her name a transformed doublet of Tethys.\nAfter Achilles's death, Thetis does not need to appeal to Zeus for immortality for her son, as the two have an established rapport (due to Thetis helping him in a dispute with three other Olympians) and snatches him away to the White Island \"Leuke\" in the Black Sea, an alternate Elysium, where he has transcended death, and where an Achilles cult lingered into historical times.\nMythology.\nThetis and the other deities.\nPseudo-Apollodorus's \"Bibliotheke\" asserts that Thetis was courted by both Zeus and Poseidon, but she was married off to the mortal Peleus because of their fears about the prophecy by Themis (or Prometheus, or Calchas, according to others) that her son would become greater than his father. Thus, she is revealed as a figure of cosmic capacity, quite capable of unsettling the divine order. (Slatkin 1986:12)\nWhen Hephaestus was thrown from Olympus, whether cast out by Hera for his lameness or evicted by Zeus for taking Hera's side, the Oceanid Eurynome and the Nereid Thetis caught him and allowed him to stay on the volcanic isle of Lemnos, while he labored for them as a smith, \"working there in the hollow of the cave, and the stream of Okeanos around us went on forever with its foam and its murmur\" (\"Iliad\" 18.369).\nThetis is not successful in her role protecting and nurturing a hero (the theme of \"kourotrophos\"), but her role in succoring deities is emphatically repeated by Homer. Diomedes recalls that when Dionysus was expelled by Lycurgus with the Olympians' aid, he took refuge in the Erythraean Sea with Thetis in a bed of seaweed (6.123ff). These accounts associate Thetis with \"a divine past\u2014uninvolved with human events\u2014with a level of divine invulnerability extraordinary by Olympian standards. Where within the framework of the \"Iliad\" the ultimate recourse is to Zeus for protection, here the poem seems to point to an alternative structure of cosmic relations.\"\nOnce, Thetis and Medea argued in Thessaly over which was the most beautiful; they appointed the Cretan Idomeneus as the judge, who gave the victory to Thetis. In her anger, Medea called all Cretans liars, and cursed them to never say the truth.\nMarriage to Peleus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nZeus had received a prophecy that Thetis's son would become greater than his father, as Zeus had dethroned his father to lead the succeeding pantheon. In order to ensure a mortal father for her eventual offspring, Zeus and his brother Poseidon made arrangements for her to marry a human, Peleus, son of Aeacus, but she refused him.\nProteus, an early sea-god, advised Peleus to find the sea nymph when she was asleep and bind her tightly to keep her from escaping by changing forms. She did shapeshift, becoming flame, water, a raging lioness, and a serpent. Peleus held fast. Subdued, she then consented to marry him. Thetis is the mother of Achilles by Peleus, who became king of the Myrmidons.\nAccording to classical mythology, the wedding of Thetis and Peleus was celebrated on Mount Pelion, outside the cave of Chiron, and attended by the deities: there they celebrated the marriage with feasting. Apollo played the lyre and the Muses sang, Pindar claimed. At the wedding Chiron gave Peleus an ashen spear that had been polished by Athena and had a blade forged by Hephaestus. While the Olympian goddesses brought him gifts: from Aphrodite, a bowl with an embossed Eros, from Hera a chlamys while from Athena a flute. His father-in-law Nereus endowed him a basket of the salt called 'divine', which has an irresistible virtue for overeating, appetite and digestion, explaining the expression \"'she poured the divine salt\"'. Zeus then bestowed the wings of Arce to the newly-wed couple which was later given by Thetis to her son, Achilles. Furthermore, the god of the sea, Poseidon gave Peleus the immortal horses, Balius and Xanthus. Eris, the goddess of discord, had not been invited, however, and in spite, she threw a golden apple into the midst of the goddesses that was to be awarded only \"to the fairest.\" In most interpretations, the award was made during the Judgement of Paris and eventually occasioned the Trojan War.\nAs is recounted in the \"Argonautica\", written by the Hellenistic poet Apollonius of Rhodes, Thetis, in an attempt to make her son Achilles immortal, would burn away his mortality in a fire at night and during the day, she would anoint the child with ambrosia. When Peleus caught her searing the baby, he let out a cry.\nThetis heard him, and catching up the child threw him screaming to the ground, and she like a breath of wind passed swiftly from the hall as a dream and leapt into the sea, exceeding angry, and thereafter returned never again.\nSome myths relate that because she had been interrupted by Peleus, Thetis had not made her son physically invulnerable. His heel, which she was about to burn away when her husband stopped her, had not been protected. (A similar myth of immortalizing a child in fire is seen in the case of Demeter and the infant Demophoon). In a variant of the myth first recounted in the \"Achilleid\", an unfinished epic written between 94 and 95 AD by the Roman poet Statius, Thetis tried to make Achilles invulnerable by dipping him in the River Styx (one of the five rivers that run through Hades, the realm of the dead). However, the heel by which she held him was not touched by the Styx's waters and failed to be protected.\nPeleus gave the boy to Chiron to raise. Prophecy said that the son of Thetis would have either a long but dull life, or a glorious but brief one. When the Trojan War broke out, Thetis was anxious and concealed Achilles, disguised as a girl, at the court of Lycomedes, king of Scyros. Achilles was already famed for his speed and skill in battle. Calchas, a priest of Agamemnon, prophesied the need for the great soldier within their ranks. Odysseus was subsequently sent by Agamemnon to try and find Achilles. Scyros was relatively close to Achilles's home and Lycomedes was also a known friend of Thetis, so it was one of the first places that Odysseus looked. When Odysseus found that one of the girls at court was not a girl, he came up with a plan. Raising an alarm that they were under attack, Odysseus knew that the young Achilles would instinctively run for his weapons and armour, thereby revealing himself. Seeing that she could no longer prevent her son from realizing his destiny, Thetis then had Hephaestus make a shield and armor.\nIliad and the Trojan War.\nThetis played a key part in the events of the Trojan War. Beyond the fact that the Judgement of Paris, which kicked off the war, occurred at her wedding to Peleus, Thetis consistently influenced the actions of the Twelve Olympians and her son, Achilles.\nNine years after the beginning of the Trojan War, Homer's \"Iliad\" starts with Agamemnon (king of Mycenae and the commander of the Achaeans) and Achilles (son of Thetis) arguing over Briseis, a woman married to Mynes (son of the king of Lyrnessus). She was kidnapped and enslaved by Achilles. After initially refusing, Achilles relents and gives Briseis to Agamemnon. However, Achilles feels disrespect for having to hand over Briseis and prays to Thetis, his mother, for restitution of his lost honor. She urges Achilles to wait until she speaks with Zeus to rejoin the fighting, and Achilles listens. When she finally speaks to Zeus, Thetis convinces him to do as she bids, and he seals his agreement with her by bowing his head, the strongest oath that he can make.\nFollowing the death of Patroclus, who wore Achilles's armor in the fighting, Thetis comes to Achilles to console him in his grief. She vows to return to him with armor forged by Hephaestus, the blacksmith of the gods, and tells him not to arm himself for battle until he sees her coming back. While Thetis is gone, Achilles is visited by Iris, the messenger of the gods, sent by Hera, who tells him to rejoin the fighting. He refuses, however, citing his mother's words and his promise to her to wait for her return. Thetis, meanwhile, speaks with Hephaestus and begs him to make Achilles armor, which he does. First, he makes for Achilles a splendid shield, and having finished it, makes a breastplate, a helmet, and greaves. When Thetis goes back to Achilles to deliver his new armor, she finds him still upset over Patroclus. Achilles fears that while he is off fighting the Trojans, Patroclus's body will decay and rot. Thetis, however, reassures him and places ambrosia and nectar in Patroclus's nose in order to protect his body against decay.\nAfter Achilles uses his new armor to defeat Hector in battle, he keeps Hector's body to mutilate and humiliate. However, after nine days, the gods call Thetis to Olympus and tell her that she must go to Achilles and pass him a message, that the gods are angry that Hector's body has not been returned. She does as she is bid, and convinces Achilles to return the body for ransom, thus avoiding the wrath of the gods.\nWorship in Laconia and other places.\nA noted exception to the general observation resulting from the existing historical records, that Thetis was not venerated as a goddess by cult, was in conservative Laconia, where Pausanias was informed that there had been priestesses of Thetis in archaic times, when a cult that was centered on a wooden cult image of Thetis (a \"xoanon\"), which preceded the building of the oldest temple; by the intervention of a highly placed woman, her cult had been re-founded with a temple; and in the second century AD she still was being worshipped with utmost reverence. The Lacedaemonians were at war with the Messenians, who had revolted, and their king Anaxander, having invaded Messenia, took as prisoners certain women, and among them Cleo, priestess of Thetis. The wife of Anaxander asked for this Cleo from her husband, and discovering that she had the wooden image of Thetis, she set up the woman Cleo in a temple for the goddess. This Leandris did because of a vision in a dream, but the wooden image of Thetis is guarded in secret.\nIn one fragmentary hymn by the seventh-century BC Spartan poet Alcman, Thetis appears as a demiurge, beginning her creation with \"poros\" (\u03c0\u03cc\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2) 'path, track' and \"tekmor\" (\u03c4\u03ad\u03ba\u03bc\u03c9\u03c1) 'marker, end-post'; third was \"skotos\" (\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) 'darkness', and then the Sun and the Moon. A close connection has been argued between Thetis and Metis, another shapeshifting sea-power later beloved by Zeus, that was bound by prophecy to bear a son greater than his father.\nHerodotus noted that the Persians sacrificed to \"Thetis\" at Cape Sepias. By the process of \"interpretatio graeca\", Herodotus identifies a sea-goddess of another culture (probably Anahita) as the familiar Hellenic \"Thetis\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37553", "revid": "42530687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37553", "title": "Duverger's law", "text": "Winner-takes-all voting systems tend to result in only two viable parties\nIn political science, Duverger's law ( ) holds that in political systems with single-member districts and the first-past-the-post voting system, as in, for example, the United States and United Kingdom, only two powerful political parties tend to control power. Citizens do not vote for small parties because they fear splitting votes away from the major party.\nBy contrast, in countries with proportional representation or two-round elections, such as France, Sweden, New Zealand or Spain, there is no two-party duopoly on power. There are usually more than two significant political parties. Citizens are actively encouraged to create, join and vote for new political parties if they are unhappy with current parties.\nMechanism.\nA two-party system is most common under plurality voting. Voters typically cast one vote per race. Maurice Duverger argued there were two main mechanisms by which plurality voting systems lead to fewer major parties: (i) small parties are disincentivized to form because they have great difficulty winning seats or representation, and (ii) voters are wary of voting for a smaller party whose policies they actually favor because they do not want to \"waste\" their votes (on a party unlikely to win a plurality) and therefore tend to gravitate to one of two major parties that is more likely to achieve a plurality, win the election, and implement policy.\nFor legislatures where each seat represents a geographical area and the candidate with the most votes wins that seat, minor parties that are spread fairly evenly across many districts win less representation than geographically concentrated ones with the same overall level of public support. An example of this was the Liberal Democrats in the United Kingdom, whose proportion of seats in the legislature was, until recently, significantly less than their proportion of the national vote. The Green Party of Canada is another example; the party received about 5% of the popular vote from 2004 to 2011 but had only won one seat (out of 308) in the House of Commons in the same span of time. Another example was seen in the 1992 U.S. presidential election, when Ross Perot's candidacy received zero electoral votes despite receiving 19% of the popular vote. Gerrymandering is sometimes used to try to collect a population of like-minded voters within a geographically cohesive district so that their votes are not \"wasted\", but it tends to require that minor parties have both a geographic concentration and a redistricting process that seeks to represent them. These disadvantages tend to suppress the ability of a third party to engage in the political process.\nThe second challenge to a third party is both statistical and tactical. Duverger presents the example of an election in which 100,000 moderate voters and 80,000 radical voters are to vote for candidates for a single seat or office. If two moderate parties and one radical party ran candidates, and every voter voted, the radical candidate would tend to win unless one of the moderate candidates gathered fewer than 20,000 votes. Appreciating this risk, moderate voters would be inclined to vote for the moderate candidate they deemed likely to gain more votes, with the goal of defeating the radical candidate. To win, then, either the two moderate parties must merge, or one moderate party must fail, as the voters gravitate to the two strongest parties. Duverger called this trend polarization.\nDirection of effect.\nKenneth Benoit suggested causal influence between electoral and party systems might be bidirectional or in either direction. Josep Colomer agreed, arguing that changes from a plurality system to a proportional system are typically preceded by the emergence of more than two effective parties, and increases in the effective number of parties happen not in the short term, but in the mid-to-long term.\nSwap between parties.\nThe political chaos in the United States immediately preceding the Civil War allowed the Republican Party to replace the Whig Party as the progressive half of the American political landscape. Loosely united on a platform of country-wide economic reform and federally funded industrialization, the decentralized Whig leadership failed to take a decisive stance on the slavery issue, effectively splitting the party along the Mason\u2013Dixon line. Southern rural planters, initially attracted by the prospect of federal infrastructure and schools, aligned with the pro-slavery Democrats, while urban laborers and professionals in the northern states, threatened by the sudden shift in political and economic power and losing faith in the failing Whig candidates, flocked to the increasingly vocal anti-slavery Republican Party.\nStrength of effect.\nWilliam Clark and Matt Golder (2006) find the effect largely holds up, noting that different methods of analyzing the data might lead to different conclusions. They emphasize other variables like the nuances of different electoral institutions and the importance that Duverger also placed on sociological factors. Thomas R. Palfrey argued Duverger's law can be proven mathematically at the limit when the number of voters approaches infinity for one single-winner district and where the probability distribution of votes is known (perfect information).\nDuverger did not regard this principle as absolute, suggesting instead that plurality would act to delay the emergence of new political forces and would accelerate the elimination of weakening ones, whereas proportional representation would have the opposite effect.\nThe U.S. system has two major parties that have won, on average, 98% of all state and federal seats. There have only been a few rare elections where a minor party was competitive with the major parties, occasionally replacing one of the major parties in the 19th century.\nIn Matt Golder's 2016 review of the empirical evidence to-date, he concluded that despite some contradicting cases, the law remains a valid generalization.\nSteven R. Reed argued in 2001 that Duverger's law could be observed in Italy, with 80% of electoral districts gradually but significantly shifting towards two major parties. He finds a similar effect in Japan through a slow trial-and-error process that shifted the number of major parties towards the expected outcome.\nEric Dickson and Kenneth Scheve argued in 2007 that Duverger's law is strongest when a society is homogenous or closely divided, but is weakened when multiple intermediate identities exist. As evidence of this, Duhamel cites the case of India, where over 25 percent of voters vote for parties outside the two main alliances.\nTwo-party politics may also emerge in systems that use a form of proportional representation, with Duverger and others arguing that Duverger's Law mostly represents a limiting factor (like a brake) on the number of major parties in other systems more than a prediction of equilibrium for governments with more proportional representation.\nExceptions.\nFirst-past-the-post voting can result in landslide victories, where one party wins all seats, for example 2022 Barbadian general election.\nRegional parties.\nSome minor parties in winner-take-all systems have managed to translate their support into winning seats in government by focusing on local races, taking the place of a major party, or changing the political system.\nWilliam H. Riker, citing Douglas W. Rae, noted that strong regional parties can lead to more than two parties receiving seats in the national legislature, even if there are only two parties competitive in any single district. In systems outside the United States, like Canada, United Kingdom and India, multiparty parliaments exist due to the growth of minor parties finding strongholds in specific regions, potentially lessening the psychological fear of a wasted vote by voting for a minor party for a legislative seat. Riker credits Canada's highly decentralized system of government as encouraging minor parties to build support by winning seats locally, which then sets the parties up to get representatives in the House of Commons of Canada.\nDifferent voting systems.\nAbsent a major reform like switching to proportional representation, minor reforms like ranked-choice voting have the potential to allow for more choice in a winner-take-all system. Under proportional representation, legislative seats are allocated according to the percentage of votes a party receives, making their success dependent on their received support. Proportional representation weakens two-party dominance. Since smaller parties no longer rely on plurality, they have a better chance of success. In a ranked-choice voting system (RCV) voters rank candidates in order of preference rather than casting a single vote. This system is used in countries with multi-party politics like Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand. RCV systems were utilized in the US to manage or create intra-party factionalism but were repealed in most states for being unpredictable. Duverger argued that \"a majority vote on two ballots is conducive to a multiparty system, inclined toward forming coalitions\": that the two-round system encourages a multiparty system, but to a lesser degree than proportional representation does.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37554", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37554", "title": "William H. Riker", "text": "American political scientist (1920\u20131993)\nWilliam Harrison Riker (September 22, 1920 \u2013 June 26, 1993) was an American political scientist known for applying game theory and mathematics to political science. He helped establish University of Rochester as a center of the behavioral revolution in political science.\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam Harrison Riker was born on September 22, 1920, in Des Moines, Iowa. He had 4 children, 2 sons and 2 daughters, with wife Mary Elizabeth. He earned his bachelor's degree in economics at Indiana's DePauw University in 1942 and received his Ph.D. at Harvard University in 1948. While a student at DePauw, he was initiated into the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity. Before his Ph.D., Riker worked at the RCA (then Radio Corporation of America), where he worked as a time-and-motion analyst.\nAcademic career.\nRiker took on a professorship at Lawrence University in Appleton, Wisconsin (then Lawrence College), where he published \"The Theory of Political Coalitions\" (1962). In 1962, he became the chair of the Political Science Department at the University of Rochester, where he remained chair until 1977, and remained active until his death.\nRiker was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1974.\nRiker founded the now-mainstream field of positive political theory, which introduced game theory and the axiomatic method of social choice theory to political science. Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Kenneth Shepsle in their memoir write that \"These have proved crucial to predictive tests for political theory.\"\nRiker is also often credited with being the founder of rational choice theory with his work on applying economic theory to mathematical models of politics.\nAmong other contributions, Riker is known for work on the theory and history of federalism and on what he called \"heresthetic\"\u2014the art of changing political outcomes without changing peoples' underlying preferences by manipulating the decision-making process, for example by changing the order in which decisions are made. In his book \"Liberalism Against Populism\", he argued that the instability of majority rule, demonstrated in Arrow's impossibility theorem and the McKelvey\u2013Schofield chaos theorem, meant that \"populist\" interpretations of democracy as implementing a collective will of the people were untenable. Instead, democratic leaders aimed to build disparate coalitions; a piece of successful coalition-building could cause realigning elections, in which blocs of voters swiftly changed their allegiance.\nConcerning political coalition for the benefit of minorities, Riker argued that the larger the coalition, the shorter-lived it is. In his book The Theory of Political Coalitions (1962), Riker argued that in situations where there is conflict over finite resources, actors will seek to create coalitions that are large enough to ensure that they get access to the resources, but that the coalitions will not be larger than that (because the actors will not want to dilute the resources more than they have to).\nThe William H. Riker Prize for excellence in undergraduate teaching is awarded by the University of Rochester bi-annually in his honor. The Political Economy section of the American Political Science Association awards an annual book prize in his name as well.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37555", "revid": "29201297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37555", "title": "Enriched uranium", "text": "Uranium processed to increase the percentage of uranium-235\nEnriched uranium is a type of uranium in which the percent composition of uranium-235 (written 235U) has been increased through the process of isotope separation. Naturally occurring uranium is composed of three major isotopes: uranium-238 (238U with 99.2732\u201399.2752% natural abundance), uranium-235 (235U, 0.7198\u20130.7210%), and uranium-234 (234U, 0.0049\u20130.0059%). 235U is the only nuclide existing in nature (in any appreciable amount) that is fissile with thermal neutrons.\nEnriched uranium is a critical component for both civil nuclear power generation and military nuclear weapons. Low-enriched uranium (below 20% 235U) is necessary to operate light water reactors, which make up almost 90% of nuclear electricity generation. Highly enriched uranium (above 20% 235U) is used for the cores of many nuclear weapons, as well as compact reactors for naval propulsion and research, as well as breeder reactors. There are about 2,000\u00a0tonnes of highly enriched uranium in the world.\nEnrichment methods were first developed on a large scale by the Manhattan Project. Its gaseous diffusion method was used in the 1940s and 1950s, when the gas centrifuge method was developed in the Soviet Union, and became widespread.\nThe 238U remaining after enrichment is known as depleted uranium (DU), and is considerably less radioactive than natural uranium, though still very dense. Depleted uranium is used as a radiation shielding material and for armor-penetrating weapons.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGrades.\nUranium as it is taken directly from the Earth is not suitable as fuel for most nuclear reactors and requires additional processes to make it usable (the CANDU design is a notable exception). Uranium is mined either underground or in an open pit depending on the depth at which it is found. After the uranium ore is mined, it must go through a milling process to extract the uranium from the ore. \nThis is accomplished by a combination of chemical processes with the end product being concentrated uranium oxide, which is known as \"yellowcake\", contains roughly 80% uranium whereas the original ore typically contains as little as 0.1% uranium.\nThis yellowcake is further processed to obtain the desired form of uranium suitable for nuclear fuel production. After the milling process is complete, the uranium must next undergo a process of conversion, \"to either uranium dioxide, which can be used as the fuel for those types of reactors that do not require enriched uranium, or into uranium hexafluoride, which can be enriched to produce fuel for the majority of types of reactors\". Naturally occurring uranium is made of a mixture of 235U and 238U. The 235U is fissile, meaning it is easily split with neutrons while the remainder is 238U, but in nature, more than 99% of the extracted ore is 238U. Most nuclear reactors require enriched uranium, which is uranium with higher concentrations of 235U ranging between 3.5% and 4.5% (although a few reactor designs using a graphite or heavy water moderator, such as the RBMK and CANDU, are capable of operating with natural uranium as fuel). There are two commercial enrichment processes: gaseous diffusion and gas centrifugation. Both enrichment processes involve the use of uranium hexafluoride and produce enriched uranium oxide.\nReprocessed uranium (RepU).\nReprocessed uranium (RepU) undergoes a series of chemical and physical treatments to extract usable uranium from spent nuclear fuel. RepU is a product of nuclear fuel cycles involving nuclear reprocessing of spent fuel. RepU recovered from light water reactor (LWR) spent fuel typically contains slightly more 235U than natural uranium, and therefore could be used to fuel reactors that customarily use natural uranium as fuel, such as CANDU reactors. It also contains the undesirable isotope uranium-236, which undergoes neutron capture, wasting neutrons (and requiring higher 235U enrichment) and creating neptunium-237, which would be one of the more mobile and troublesome radionuclides in deep geological repository disposal of nuclear waste. Reprocessed uranium often carries traces of other transuranic elements and fission products, necessitating careful monitoring and management during fuel fabrication and reactor operation.\nLow-enriched uranium (LEU).\nLow-enriched uranium (LEU) has a lower than 20% concentration of 235U; for instance, in commercial LWR, the most prevalent power reactors in the world, uranium is enriched to 3 to 5% 235U. Slightly enriched uranium (SEU) has a concentration of under 2% 235U.\nHigh-assay LEU (HALEU).\nHigh-assay LEU (HALEU) is enriched between 5% and 20% and is called for in many small modular reactor (SMR) designs. Fresh LEU used in research reactors is usually enriched between 12% and 19.75% 235U; the latter concentration is used to replace HEU fuels when converting to LEU.\nHighly enriched uranium (HEU).\nHighly enriched uranium (HEU) has a 20% or higher concentration of 235U. This high enrichment level is essential for nuclear weapons and certain specialized reactor designs. The fissile uranium in nuclear weapon primaries usually contains 85% or more of 235U known as weapons grade, though theoretically for an implosion design, a minimum of 20% could be sufficient (called weapon-usable) although it would require hundreds of kilograms of material and \"would not be practical to design\"; even lower enrichment is hypothetically possible, but as the enrichment percentage decreases the critical mass for unmoderated fast neutrons rapidly increases, with for example, an infinite mass of 5.4% 235U being required. For criticality experiments, enrichment of uranium to over 97% has been accomplished.\nThe first uranium bomb, Little Boy, dropped by the United States on Hiroshima in 1945, used of 80% enriched uranium. Wrapping the weapon's fissile core in a neutron reflector (which is standard on all nuclear explosives) can dramatically reduce the critical mass. Because the core was surrounded by a neutron reflector, at explosion it comprised almost 2.5 critical masses. Neutron reflectors, compressing the fissile core via implosion, fusion boosting, and \"tamping\", which slows the expansion of the fissioning core with inertia, allow nuclear weapon designs that use less than what would be one bare-sphere critical mass at normal density. The presence of too much of the 238U isotope inhibits the runaway nuclear chain reaction that is responsible for the weapon's power. The critical mass for 85% highly enriched uranium is about , which at normal density would be a sphere about in diameter. The highly enriched uranium core used in the first Chinese nuclear test, Project 596, weighed about 15 kilograms, corresponding to a diameter of 11.4 cm.\nLater U.S. nuclear weapons usually use plutonium-239 in the primary stage, but the jacket or tamper secondary stage, which is compressed by the primary nuclear explosion, often uses HEU with enrichment between 40% and 80% along with the fusion fuel lithium deuteride. This multi-stage design enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of nuclear weapons, allowing for greater control over the release of energy during detonation. For the secondary of a large nuclear weapon, the higher critical mass of less-enriched uranium can be an advantage as it allows the core at explosion time to contain a larger amount of fuel. This design strategy optimizes the explosive yield and performance of advanced nuclear weapons systems. The 238U is not said to be fissile but still is fissionable by fast neutrons (&gt;2 MeV) such as the ones produced during D\u2013T fusion.\nHEU is also used in fast neutron reactors, whose cores require about 20% or more of fissile material, as well as in naval reactors, where it often contains at least 50% 235U, but typically does not exceed 90%. These specialized reactor systems rely on highly enriched uranium for their unique operational requirements, including high neutron flux and precise control over reactor dynamics. The Fermi-1 commercial fast reactor prototype used HEU with 26.5% 235U. Significant quantities of HEU are used in the production of medical isotopes, for example molybdenum-99 for technetium-99m generators. The medical industry benefits from the unique properties of highly enriched uranium, which enable the efficient production of critical isotopes essential for diagnostic imaging and therapeutic applications.\nEnrichment methods.\nIsotope separation is difficult because two isotopes of the same element have nearly identical chemical properties, and can only be separated gradually using small mass differences. (235U is only 1.26% lighter than 238U.) This problem is compounded because uranium is rarely separated in its atomic form, but instead as a compound (235UF6 is only 0.852% lighter than 238UF6).\nA cascade of identical stages produces successively higher concentrations of 235U. Each stage passes a slightly more concentrated product to the next stage and returns a slightly less concentrated residue to the previous stage.\nThere are currently two commercial methods employed internationally for enrichment: gaseous diffusion (referred to as first generation) and gas centrifuge (second generation), which consumes only 2% to 2.5% as much energy as gaseous diffusion. Some work is being done that would use nuclear resonance; however, there is no reliable evidence that any nuclear resonance processes have been scaled up to production.\nDiffusion techniques.\nGaseous diffusion.\nGaseous diffusion is a technology used to produce enriched uranium by forcing gaseous uranium hexafluoride ('hex') through semi-permeable membranes. This produces a slight separation between the molecules containing 235U and 238U. Throughout the Cold War, gaseous diffusion played a major role as a uranium enrichment technique, and as of 2008 accounted for about 33% of enriched uranium production, but in 2011 was deemed an obsolete technology that is steadily being replaced by the later generations of technology as the diffusion plants reach their ends of life. In 2013, the Paducah facility in the U.S. ceased operating; it was the last commercial 235U gaseous diffusion plant in the world.\nThermal diffusion.\nThermal diffusion uses the transfer of heat across a thin liquid or gas to accomplish isotope separation. The process exploits the fact that the lighter 235U gas molecules will diffuse toward a hot surface, and the heavier 238U gas molecules will diffuse toward a cold surface. At the S-50 plant in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, during World War II, liquid uranium hexafluoride was placed between two concentric vertical pipes, with the inner pipe heated and the outer pipe cooled. This caused lighter 235U molecules to migrate toward the hot inner wall and heavier 238U molecules toward the cold outer wall, with convection currents carrying the enriched uranium upward for collection, and the height of the columns directly influenced the degree of separation. The facility was used to prepare feed material for the Electromagnetic Isotope Separation (EMIS) process but was later abandoned in favor of gaseous diffusion.\nCentrifuge techniques.\nGas centrifuge.\nThe gas centrifuge process uses a large number of rotating cylinders in series and parallel formations. Each cylinder's rotation creates a strong centripetal force so that the heavier gas molecules containing 238U move tangentially toward the outside of the cylinder and the lighter gas molecules rich in 235U collect closer to the center. It requires much less energy to achieve the same separation than the older gaseous diffusion process, which it has largely replaced and so is the current method of choice and is termed second generation. It has a separation factor per stage of 1.3 relative to gaseous diffusion of 1.005, which translates to about one-fiftieth of the energy requirements. Gas centrifuge techniques produce close to 100% of the world's enriched uranium. The cost per separative work unit is approximately 100 dollars per Separative Work Units (SWU), making it about 40% cheaper than standard gaseous diffusion techniques.\nZippe centrifuge.\nThe Zippe-type centrifuge is an improvement on the standard gas centrifuge, the primary difference being the use of heat. The bottom of the rotating cylinder is heated, producing convection currents that move the 235U up the cylinder, where it can be collected by scoops. This improved centrifuge design is used commercially by Urenco to produce nuclear fuel and was used by Pakistan in its nuclear weapons program.\nLaser techniques.\nLaser processes promise lower energy inputs, lower capital costs and lower tails assays, hence significant economic advantages. Several laser processes have been investigated or are under development. Separation of isotopes by laser excitation (SILEX) is well developed and is licensed for commercial operation as of 2012. Separation of isotopes by laser excitation is a very effective and cheap method of uranium separation, able to be done in small facilities requiring much less energy and space than previous separation techniques. The cost of uranium enrichment using laser enrichment technologies is approximately $30 per SWU which is less than a third of the price of gas centrifuges, the current standard of enrichment. Separation of isotopes by laser excitation could be done in facilities virtually undetectable by satellites. More than 20 countries have worked with laser separation over the 1990s and 2000s, the most notable of these countries being Iran and North Korea, though all countries have had very limited success up to this point. \nAtomic vapor laser isotope separation (AVLIS).\nAtomic vapor laser isotope separation employs specially tuned lasers to separate isotopes of uranium using selective ionization of hyperfine transitions. The technique uses lasers tuned to frequencies that ionize 235U atoms and no others. The positively charged 235U ions are then attracted to a negatively charged plate and collected.\nMolecular laser isotope separation (MLIS).\nMolecular laser isotope separation uses an infrared laser directed at UF6, exciting molecules that contain a 235U atom. A second laser frees a fluorine atom, leaving uranium pentafluoride, which then precipitates out of the gas.\nSeparation of isotopes by laser excitation (SILEX).\nSeparation of isotopes by laser excitation is an Australian development that also uses UF6. After a protracted development process involving U.S. enrichment company USEC acquiring and then relinquishing commercialization rights to the technology, GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy (GEH) signed a commercialization agreement with Silex Systems in 2006. GEH has since built a demonstration test loop and announced plans to build an initial commercial facility. Details of the process are classified and restricted by intergovernmental agreements between United States, Australia, and the commercial entities. SILEX has been projected to be an order of magnitude more efficient than existing production techniques but again, the exact figure is classified. In August 2011 Global Laser Enrichment, a subsidiary of GEH, applied to the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) for a permit to build a commercial plant. In September 2012, the NRC issued a license for GEH to build and operate a commercial SILEX enrichment plant, although the company had not yet decided whether the project would be profitable enough to begin construction, and despite concerns that the technology could contribute to nuclear proliferation. The fear of nuclear proliferation arose in part due to laser separation technology requiring less than 25% of the space of typical separation techniques, as well as requiring only the energy that would power 12 typical houses, putting a laser separation plant that works by means of laser excitation well below the detection threshold of existing surveillance technologies. Due to these concerns the American Physical Society filed a petition with the NRC, asking that before any laser excitation plants are built that they undergo a formal review of proliferation risks. The APS even went as far as calling the technology a \"game changer\" due to the ability for it to be hidden from any type of detection.\nOther techniques.\nAerodynamic processes.\nAerodynamic enrichment processes include the Becker jet nozzle techniques developed by E. W. Becker and associates using the LIGA process and the vortex tube separation process. These aerodynamic separation processes depend upon diffusion driven by pressure gradients, as does the gas centrifuge. They in general have the disadvantage of requiring complex systems of cascading of individual separating elements to minimize energy consumption. In effect, aerodynamic processes can be considered as non-rotating centrifuges. Enhancement of the centrifugal forces is achieved by dilution of UF6 with hydrogen or helium as a carrier gas achieving a much higher flow velocity for the gas than could be obtained using pure uranium hexafluoride. The Uranium Enrichment Corporation of South Africa (UCOR) developed and deployed the continuous Helikon vortex separation cascade for high production rate low-enrichment and the substantially different semi-batch Pelsakon low production rate high enrichment cascade both using a particular vortex tube separator design, and both embodied in industrial plant. A demonstration plant was built in Brazil by NUCLEI, a consortium led by Industrias Nucleares do Brasil that used the separation nozzle process. All methods have high energy consumption and substantial requirements for removal of waste heat; none is currently still in use.\nElectromagnetic isotope separation.\nIn the electromagnetic isotope separation process (EMIS), metallic uranium is first vaporized, and then ionized to positively charged ions. The cations are then accelerated and subsequently deflected by magnetic fields onto their respective collection targets. A production-scale mass spectrometer named the calutron was developed during World War II that provided some of the 235U used for the Little Boy nuclear bomb, which was dropped over Hiroshima in 1945. Properly the term 'calutron' applies to a multistage device arranged in a large oval around a powerful electromagnet. Electromagnetic isotope separation has been largely abandoned in favour of more effective methods.\nChemical methods.\nOne chemical process has been demonstrated to pilot plant stage but not used for production. The French CHEMEX process exploited a very slight difference in the two isotopes' propensity to change valency in oxidation/reduction, using immiscible aqueous and organic phases. An ion-exchange process was developed by the Asahi Chemical Company in Japan that applies similar chemistry but effects separation on a proprietary resin ion-exchange column.\nPlasma separation.\nPlasma separation process (PSP) describes a technique that makes use of superconducting magnets and plasma physics. In this process, the principle of ion cyclotron resonance is used to selectively energize the 235U isotope in a plasma containing a mix of ions. France developed its own version of PSP, which it called RCI. Funding for RCI was drastically reduced in 1986, and the program was suspended around 1990, although RCI is still used for stable isotope separation.\nSeparative work unit.\n\"Separative work\"\u2014the amount of separation done by an enrichment process\u2014is a function of the concentrations of the feedstock, the enriched output, and the depleted tailings; and is expressed in units that are so calculated as to be proportional to the total input (energy / machine operation time) and to the mass processed. Separative work is \"not\" energy. The same amount of separative work will require different amounts of energy depending on the efficiency of the separation technology. Separative work is measured in \"Separative work units\" SWU, kg SW, or kg UTA (from the German \"Urantrennarbeit\" \u2013 literally \"uranium separation work\"). Efficient utilization of separative work is crucial for optimizing the economic and operational performance of uranium enrichment facilities. \nCost issues.\nIn addition to the separative work units provided by an enrichment facility, the other important parameter to be considered is the mass of natural uranium (NU) that is needed to yield a desired mass of enriched uranium. As with the number of SWUs, the amount of feed material required will also depend on the level of enrichment desired and upon the amount of 235U that ends up in the depleted uranium. However, unlike the number of SWUs required during enrichment, which increases with decreasing levels of 235U in the depleted stream, the amount of NU needed will decrease with decreasing levels of 235U that end up in the DU.\nFor example, in the enrichment of LEU for use in a light water reactor it is typical for the enriched stream to contain 3.6% 235U (as compared to 0.7% in NU) while the depleted stream contains 0.2% to 0.3% 235U. In order to produce one kilogram of this LEU it would require approximately 8 kilograms of NU and 4.5 SWU if the DU stream was allowed to have 0.3% 235U. On the other hand, if the depleted stream had only 0.2% 235U, then it would require just 6.7 kilograms of NU, but nearly 5.7 SWU of enrichment. Because the amount of NU required and the number of SWUs required during enrichment change in opposite directions, if NU is cheap and enrichment services are more expensive, then the operators will typically choose to allow more 235U to be left in the DU stream whereas if NU is more expensive and enrichment is less so, then they would choose the opposite.\nWhen converting uranium (hexafluoride, hex for short) to metal, 0.3% is lost during manufacturing.\nDownblending.\nThe opposite of enriching is downblending; surplus HEU can be downblended to LEU to make it suitable for use in commercial nuclear fuel. Downblending is a key process in nuclear non-proliferation efforts, as it reduces the amount of highly enriched uranium available for potential weaponization while repurposing it for peaceful purposes.\nThe HEU feedstock can contain unwanted uranium isotopes: 234U is a minor isotope contained in natural uranium (primarily as a product of alpha decay of 238U\u2014because the half-life of 238U is much larger than that of 234U, it is produced and destroyed at the same rate in a constant steady state equilibrium, bringing any sample with sufficient 238U content to a stable ratio of 234U to 238U over long enough timescales); during the enrichment process, its concentration increases but remains well below 1%. High concentrations of 236U are a byproduct from irradiation in a reactor and may be contained in the HEU, depending on its manufacturing history. 236U is produced primarily when 235U absorbs a neutron and does not fission. The production of 236U is thus unavoidable in any thermal neutron reactor with 235U fuel. HEU reprocessed from nuclear weapons material production reactors (with an 235U assay of approximately 50%) may contain 236U concentrations as high as 25%, resulting in concentrations of approximately 1.5% in the blended LEU product. 236U is a neutron poison; therefore the actual 235U concentration in the LEU product must be raised accordingly to compensate for the presence of 236U. While 234U also absorbs neutrons, it is a fertile material that is turned into fissile 235U upon neutron absorption. If 236U absorbs a neutron, the resulting short-lived 237U beta decays to 237Np, which is not usable in thermal neutron reactors but can be chemically separated from spent fuel to be disposed of as waste or to be transmutated into 238Pu (for use in nuclear batteries) in special reactors. Understanding and managing the isotopic composition of uranium during downblending processes is essential to ensure the quality and safety of the resulting nuclear fuel, as well as to mitigate potential radiological and proliferation risks associated with unwanted isotopes.\nThe blendstock can be NU or DU; however, depending on feedstock quality, SEU at typically 1.5 wt% 235U may be used as a blendstock to dilute the unwanted byproducts that may be contained in the HEU feed. Concentrations of these isotopes in the LEU product in some cases could exceed ASTM specifications for nuclear fuel if NU or DU were used. So, the HEU downblending generally cannot contribute to the waste management problem posed by the existing large stockpiles of depleted uranium. Effective management and disposition strategies for depleted uranium are crucial to ensure long-term safety and environmental protection. Innovative approaches such as reprocessing and recycling of depleted uranium could offer sustainable solutions to minimize waste and optimize resource utilization in the nuclear fuel cycle.\nA major downblending undertaking called the Megatons to Megawatts Program converts ex-Soviet weapons-grade HEU to fuel for U.S. commercial power reactors. From 1995 through mid-2005, 250 tonnes of high-enriched uranium (enough for 10,000 warheads) was recycled into low-enriched uranium. The goal is to recycle 500 tonnes by 2013. The decommissioning programme of Russian nuclear warheads accounted for about 13% of total world requirement for enriched uranium leading up to 2008. This ambitious initiative not only addresses nuclear disarmament goals but also serves as a significant contributor to global energy security and environmental sustainability, effectively repurposing material once intended for destructive purposes into a resource for peaceful energy production.\nThe United States Enrichment Corporation has been involved in the disposition of a portion of the 174.3 tonnes of highly enriched uranium (HEU) that the U.S. government declared as surplus military material in 1996. Through the U.S. HEU Downblending Program, this HEU material, taken primarily from dismantled U.S. nuclear warheads, was recycled into low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuel, used by nuclear power plants to generate electricity. This innovative program not only facilitated the safe and secure elimination of excess weapons-grade uranium but also contributed to the sustainable operation of civilian nuclear power plants, reducing reliance on newly enriched uranium and promoting non-proliferation efforts globally\nGlobal enrichment facilities.\nThe following countries are known to operate enrichment facilities: Argentina, Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Iran, Japan, the Netherlands, North Korea, Pakistan, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Belgium, Iran, Italy, and Spain hold an investment interest in the French Eurodif enrichment plant, with Iran's holding entitling it to 10% of the enriched uranium output. Countries that had enrichment programs in the past include Libya and South Africa, although Libya's facility was never operational. The Australian company Silex Systems has developed a laser enrichment process known as SILEX (separation of isotopes by laser excitation), which it intends to pursue through financial investment in a U.S. commercial venture by General Electric, Although SILEX has been granted a license to build a plant, the development is still in its early stages as laser enrichment has yet to be proven to be economically viable, and there is a petition being filed to review the license given to SILEX over nuclear proliferation concerns. It has also been claimed that Israel has a uranium enrichment program housed at the Negev Nuclear Research Center site near Dimona.\nCodename.\nDuring the Manhattan Project, weapons-grade highly enriched uranium was given the codename oralloy, a shortened version of Oak Ridge alloy, after the location of the plants where the uranium was enriched. The term \"oralloy\" is still occasionally used to refer to enriched uranium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37556", "revid": "48100228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37556", "title": "Asperger syndrome", "text": "Formerly recognized subtype of autism\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAsperger syndrome (AS), also known as Asperger's syndrome or Asperger's, is a diagnostic label that was historically used to describe a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by significant difficulties in social interaction and nonverbal communication, along with restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior and interests. Asperger syndrome has been merged with other conditions into autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and is no longer a diagnosis in the WHO's ICD-11 or the APA's DSM-5-TR. It was considered milder than other diagnoses, which were merged into ASD, due to relatively unimpaired spoken language and intelligence.\nThe syndrome was named in 1976 by English psychiatrist Lorna Wing after the Austrian pediatrician Hans Asperger, who in 1944 described children in his care who struggled to form friendships, did not understand others' gestures or feelings, engaged in one-sided conversations about their favorite interests, and were clumsy. In 1990 (coming into effect in 1993), the diagnosis of Asperger syndrome was included in the tenth edition (ICD-10) of the World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases, and in 1994 it was also included in the fourth edition (DSM-4) of the American Psychiatric Association's \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\". With the publication of DSM-5 in 2013, the syndrome was removed, and the symptoms are now included within autism spectrum disorder along with classic autism and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS). It was similarly merged into autism spectrum disorder in the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11) in 2018 (published, coming into effect in 2022).\nThe exact cause of autism, including what was formerly known as Asperger syndrome, is not well understood. While it has high heritability, the underlying genetics have not been determined conclusively. Environmental factors are also believed to play a role. Brain imaging has not identified a common underlying condition. There is no single treatment, and the UK's National Health Service (NHS) guidelines suggest that \"treatment\" of any form of autism should not be a goal, since autism is not \"a disease that can be removed or cured\". According to the Royal College of Psychiatrists, while co-occurring conditions might require treatment, \"management of autism itself is chiefly about the provision of the education, training, and social support/care required to improve the person's ability to function in the everyday world\". The effectiveness of particular interventions for autism is supported by only limited data. Interventions may include social skills training, cognitive behavioral therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, parent training, and medications for associated problems, such as mood or anxiety. Autistic characteristics tend to become less obvious in adulthood, but social and communication difficulties usually persist.\nIn 2015, Asperger syndrome was estimated to affect 37.2 million people globally, or about 0.5% of the population. The exact percentage of people affected has still not been firmly established. Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed in males more often than females, and females are typically diagnosed at a later age. The modern conception of Asperger syndrome came into existence in 1981 and went through a period of popularization. It became a standardized diagnosis in the 1990s, and was merged into ASD in 2013. Many questions and controversies about the condition remain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nThe extent of the overlap between Asperger syndrome and other forms of autism, particularly what was sometimes called high-functioning autism is unclear. The ASD classification is to some extent an artifact of how autism was discovered, and it may not reflect the true nature of the spectrum; methodological problems have beset Asperger syndrome as a valid diagnosis from the outset. As noted above, in the 2010s, Asperger syndrome, as a separate diagnosis, was eliminated and folded into autism spectrum disorder in the DSM-5 and the ICD-11. Like the diagnosis of Asperger syndrome, the change was controversial.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) previously defined Asperger syndrome (AS) as one of the pervasive developmental disorders (PDD), which are a spectrum of psychological disorders that are characterized by abnormalities of social interaction and communication that pervade the individual's functioning, and by restricted and repetitive interests and behavior. Like other neurodevelopmental conditions, ASD begins in infancy or childhood, has a steady course without remission or relapse, and has impairments that result from maturation-related changes in various systems of the brain.\nCharacteristics.\nAs a pervasive developmental disorder, Asperger syndrome is distinguished by a pattern of symptoms rather than a single symptom. It is characterized by qualitative impairment in social interaction, by stereotyped and restricted patterns of behavior, activities, and interests, and by no clinically significant delay in cognitive development or general delay in language. Intense preoccupation with a narrow subject, one-sided verbosity, restricted prosody, and physical clumsiness are typical of the condition, but are not required for diagnosis.\nSuicidal thoughts and behaviors are a serious concern within the autistic population. One study found that adults with Asperger syndrome exhibited suicidal thoughts at 9 times the rate of the general population. Of autistic study participants, 66% had experienced suicidal ideation, while 35% had planned or attempted suicide.\nSocial interaction.\nA lack of demonstrated empathy affects aspects of social relatability for persons with Asperger syndrome. Individuals with Asperger syndrome experience difficulties in basic elements of social interaction, which may include a failure to develop friendships or to seek shared enjoyments or achievements with others (e.g., showing others objects of interest); a lack of social or emotional reciprocity; and impaired nonverbal behaviors in areas such as eye contact, facial expression, posture, and gesture.\nPeople with Asperger syndrome may not be as withdrawn around others, compared with those with other forms of autism; they approach others, even if awkwardly. For example, a person with Asperger syndrome may engage in a one-sided, long-winded speech about a favorite topic, while misunderstanding or not recognizing the listener's feelings or reactions, such as a wish to change the topic of talk or end the interaction. This social awkwardness has been called \"active but odd\". Such failures to react appropriately to social interaction may appear as disregard for other people's feelings and may come across as rude or insensitive. However, not all individuals with Asperger syndrome will approach others. Some may even display selective mutism, not speaking at all to most people and excessively to specific others.\nThe cognitive ability of children with Asperger syndrome often allows them to articulate social norms in a laboratory context, where they may be able to show a theoretical understanding of other people's emotions; however, they typically have difficulty acting on this knowledge in fluid, real-life situations. People with Asperger syndrome may analyze and distill their observations of social interaction into rigid behavioral guidelines and apply these rules in awkward ways, such as forced eye contact, resulting in a demeanor that appears rigid or socially na\u00efve. A history of failed attempts to establish reciprocal social relationships can cause autistic individuals to isolate themselves and cease attempts to engage; however, autistic people overwhelmingly report a desire for social contact and friendship.\nViolent or criminal behavior.\nThe hypothesis that individuals with Asperger syndrome are predisposed to violent or criminal behavior has been investigated but is unsupported by data. More evidence suggests that children diagnosed with Asperger syndrome are more likely to be victims, rather than offenders.\nA 2008 review found that about 80% of reported violent criminals with Asperger syndrome also had other coexisting psychotic psychiatric disorders such as schizoaffective disorder. The sample size of this review was small (\"n\" = 37).\nEmpathy.\nPeople with an Asperger profile might not be recognized for their empathetic qualities, due to variation in the ways empathy is felt and expressed. Some people feel deep empathy, but do not outwardly communicate these sentiments through facial expressions or language. Some people come to empathy through intellectual processes, using logic and reasoning to arrive at the feelings. People with Asperger profiles may be bullied or excluded by peers, and might as a result be guarded around people, which could appear as lack of empathy. People with Asperger profiles can still be caring individuals; indeed, it is particularly common for those with the profile to feel and exhibit deep concern for individual rights, human welfare, animal rights, environmental protection, and other global and humanitarian causes.\nEvidence suggests that in the \"double empathy problem model, autistic people have a unique interaction style which is significantly more readable by other autistic people, compared to non-autistic people.\"\nRestricted and repetitive interests and behavior.\nPeople with Asperger syndrome can display behavior, interests, and activities that are restricted and repetitive and are sometimes abnormally intense or focused. They may stick to inflexible routines, move in stereotyped and repetitive ways, preoccupy themselves with parts of objects, or engage in compulsive behaviors like lining objects up to form patterns.\nThe pursuit of specific and narrow areas of interest is one of the most striking among possible features of AS. Individuals with AS may collect volumes of detailed information on a relatively narrow topic such as weather data or star names without necessarily having a genuine understanding of the broader topic. For example, a child might memorize camera model numbers while caring little about photography. This behavior is usually apparent by age five or six. Although these special interests may change from time to time, they typically become more unusual and narrowly focused and often dominate social interaction so much that the entire family may become immersed. Because narrow topics often capture the interest of children, this symptom may go unrecognized.\nStereotyped and repetitive motor behaviors, called stimming, are a core part of the diagnosis of AS and other ASDs. Stims are believed to be used for self-soothing and regulate sensory input. They include hand movements such as flapping or twisting, and complex whole-body movements. These are typically repeated in longer bursts and look more voluntary or ritualistic than tics, which are usually faster, less rhythmical, and less often symmetrical. Stimming may have a connection with tics, and studies have reported a consistent comorbidity between AS and Tourette syndrome in the range of 8\u201320%, with one figure as high as 80% for tics of some kind or another, for which several explanations have been put forward, including common genetic factors and dopamine, glutamate, or serotonin abnormalities.\nAccording to the Adult Asperger Assessment (AAA) diagnostic test, a lack of interest in fiction and a positive preference towards non-fiction is common among adults with AS.\nSpeech and language.\nAlthough individuals with Asperger syndrome acquire language skills without significant general delay and their speech typically lacks significant abnormalities; language acquisition and use is often atypical. Abnormalities include verbosity, abrupt transitions, literal interpretations and miscomprehension of nuance, use of metaphor meaningful only to the speaker, auditory perception deficits; unusually pedantic, formal, or idiosyncratic speech; and oddities in loudness, pitch, intonation, prosody, and rhythm. Echolalia has also been observed in individuals with AS.\nThree aspects of communication patterns are of clinical interest: poor prosody, tangential and circumstantial speech, and marked verbosity. Although inflection and intonation may be less rigid or monotonic than in classic autism, people with AS often have a limited range of intonation: speech may be unusually fast, jerky, or loud. Speech may convey a sense of incoherence; the conversational style often includes monologues about topics that bore the listener, fails to provide context for comments, or fails to suppress internal thoughts. Individuals with AS may fail to detect whether the listener is interested or engaged in the conversation. The speaker's conclusion or point may never be made, and attempts by the listener to elaborate on the speech's content or logic, or to shift to related topics, are often unsuccessful.\nChildren with AS may have a sophisticated vocabulary at a young age and such children have often been colloquially called \"little professors\" but have difficulty understanding figurative language and tend to use language literally. Children with AS appear to have particular weaknesses in areas of nonliteral language that include humor, irony, teasing, and sarcasm. Although individuals with AS usually understand the cognitive basis of humor, they seem to lack understanding of the intent of humor to share the enjoyment with others. Despite strong evidence of impaired humor appreciation, anecdotal reports of humor in individuals with AS seem to challenge some psychological theories of AS and autism.\nMotor and sensory perception.\nIndividuals with Asperger syndrome may have signs or symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis but can affect the individual or the family. These include differences in perception and problems with motor skills, sleep, and emotions.\nIndividuals with AS often have excellent auditory and visual perception. Children with ASD often demonstrate enhanced perception of small changes in patterns such as arrangements of objects or well-known images; typically this is domain-specific and involves processing of fine-grained features. Conversely, compared with individuals with high-functioning autism, individuals with AS have deficits in some tasks involving visual-spatial perception, auditory perception, or visual memory. Many accounts of individuals with AS and ASD report other unusual sensory and perceptual skills and experiences. They may be unusually sensitive or insensitive to sound, light, and other stimuli; these sensory responses are found in other developmental disorders and are not specific to AS or to ASD. There is little support for increased fight-or-flight response or failure of habituation in autism; there is more evidence of decreased responsiveness to sensory stimuli, although several studies show no differences.\nHans Asperger's initial accounts and other diagnostic schemes include descriptions of physical clumsiness. Children with AS may be delayed in acquiring skills requiring dexterity, such as riding a bicycle or opening a jar, and may seem to move awkwardly or feel \"uncomfortable in their own skin\". They may be poorly coordinated or have an odd or bouncy gait or posture, poor handwriting, or problems with motor coordination. They may show problems with proprioception (sensation of body position) on measures of developmental coordination disorder (motor planning disorder), balance, tandem gait, and finger-thumb apposition. There is no evidence that these motor skills problems differentiate AS from other high-functioning ASDs.\nChildren with AS are more likely to have sleep problems, including difficulty in falling asleep, frequent nocturnal awakenings, and early morning awakenings. AS is also associated with high levels of alexithymia, which is difficulty in identifying and describing one's emotions. Although AS, lower sleep quality, and alexithymia are associated with each other, their causal relationship is unclear.\nCauses.\nHans Asperger described common traits among his patients' family members, especially fathers, and research supports this observation and suggests a genetic contribution to Asperger syndrome. Although no specific genetic factor has yet been identified, multiple factors are believed to play a role in the expression of autism, given the variability in symptoms seen in children. Hundreds of genes have been linked to AS, and these genes play crucial role in a multitude of biological processes, exerting influence over the maturation and functioning of the brain. Evidence for a genetic link is that AS tends to run in families where more family members have limited behavioral symptoms similar to AS (for example, some problems with social interaction, or with language and reading skills). Most behavioral genetic research suggests that all autism spectrum disorders have shared genetic mechanisms. There may be shared genes in which particular alleles make an individual vulnerable, and varying combinations result in differing severity and symptoms in each person with AS.\nA few ASD cases have been linked to exposure to teratogens (agents that cause birth defects) during the first eight weeks from conception. Although this does not exclude the possibility that ASD can be initiated or affected later, it is strong evidence that ASD arises very early in development. Many environmental factors have been hypothesized to act after birth, but none has been confirmed by scientific investigation. These environmental elements can act as independent and significant risk factors, or they can potentially influence pre-existing genetic factors in people who have a genetic predisposition.\nMechanism.\nAsperger syndrome appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems, as opposed to localized effects.\nAlthough the specific underpinnings of AS or factors that distinguish it from other ASDs are unknown, and no clear pathology common to individuals with AS has emerged, it is still possible that AS's mechanism is separate from other ASDs.\nNeuroanatomical studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that the mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception. Abnormal fetal development may affect the final structure and connectivity of the brain, resulting in altered neural circuits controlling thought and behavior. Several theories of mechanism are available; none are likely to provide a complete explanation.\nGeneral-processing theories.\nOne general-processing theory is weak central coherence theory, which hypothesizes that a limited ability to see the big picture underlies the central disturbance in ASD. A related theory\u2014enhanced perceptual functioning\u2014focuses more on the superiority of locally oriented and perceptual operations in autistic individuals.\nMirror neuron system (MNS) theory.\nThe mirror neuron system (MNS) theory hypothesizes that alterations to the development of the MNS interfere with imitation and lead to Asperger syndrome's core feature of social impairment. One study found that activation is delayed in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with AS. This theory maps well to social cognition theories like the theory of mind, which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from impairments in ascribing mental states to oneself and others; or hyper-systemizing, which hypothesizes that autistic individuals can systematize internal operation to handle internal events but are less effective at empathizing when handling events generated by other agents.\nDiagnosis.\nStandard diagnostic criteria require impairment in social interaction and repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, activities, and interests, without significant delay in language or cognitive development. Unlike the international standard, the DSM-IV-TR criteria also required significant impairment in day-to-day functioning; As noted above, in the 2010s, Asperger syndrome, as a separate diagnosis, was eliminated and folded into autism spectrum disorder in the DSM-5 and the ICD-11. Other sets of diagnostic criteria have been proposed by Szatmari \"et al.\" and by Gillberg and Gillberg.\nDiagnosis of ASD (and previously AS) is most commonly made between the ages of four and eleven. A comprehensive assessment involves a multidisciplinary team that observes across multiple settings, and includes neurological and genetic assessment as well as tests for cognition, psychomotor function, verbal and nonverbal strengths and weaknesses, style of learning, and skills for independent living. The \"gold standard\" in diagnosing ASDs combines clinical judgment with the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R), a semistructured parent interview; and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), a conversation and play-based interview with the child. Delayed or mistaken diagnosis can be traumatic for individuals and families; for example, misdiagnosis can lead to medications that worsen behavior.\nUnderdiagnosis and overdiagnosis may be problems. The cost and difficulty of screening and assessment can delay diagnosis. Conversely, the increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has motivated providers to overdiagnose ASD. There are indications AS has been diagnosed more frequently in recent years, partly as a residual diagnosis for children of normal intelligence who are not autistic but have social difficulties.\nThere are questions about the external validity of the AS diagnosis. That is, it is unclear whether there is a practical benefit in distinguishing AS from autism or PDD-NOS; different screening tools may render different diagnoses for the same person.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nMany children with AS are initially misdiagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Diagnosing adults is more challenging, as standard diagnostic criteria are designed for children and the expression of AS changes with age. Adult diagnosis requires painstaking clinical examination and thorough medical history gained from both the individual and other people who know the person, focusing on childhood behavior.\nConditions that must be considered in a differential diagnosis along with ADHD include other ASDs, the schizophrenia spectrum, personality disorders, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, major depressive disorder, semantic pragmatic disorder, nonverbal learning disorder, social anxiety disorder, Tourette syndrome, stereotypic movement disorder, bipolar disorder, social-cognitive deficits due to brain damage from alcohol use disorder, and obsessive\u2013compulsive personality disorder (OCPD).\nScreening.\nParents of children with Asperger syndrome can typically trace differences in their children's development to as early as 30 months of age. Developmental screening during a routine check-up by a general practitioner or pediatrician may identify signs that warrant further investigation. The United States Preventive Services Task Force in 2016 found it was unclear if screening was beneficial or harmful among children in whom there are no concerns.\nDifferent screening instruments are used to diagnose AS, including the Asperger Syndrome Diagnostic Scale (ASDS); Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire (ASSQ); Childhood Autism Spectrum Test (CAST), previously called the Childhood Asperger Syndrome Test; Gilliam Asperger's disorder scale (GADS); Krug Asperger's Disorder Index (KADI); and the autism-spectrum quotient (AQ), with versions for children, adolescents, and adults. None have been shown to reliably differentiate between AS and other ASDs.\nManagement.\nTreatment attempts to manage distressing symptoms and to teach age-appropriate social, communication, and vocational skills that are not naturally acquired during development. Intervention is tailored to the needs of the individual based on multidisciplinary assessment. Although progress has been made, data supporting the efficacy of particular interventions are limited.\nTherapies.\nManaging ASD may involve multiple therapies that address core symptoms of the disorder. While many professionals agree that the earlier the professional support the better, there is no combination that is recommended above others. Professional support for ASD varies depending on the individual; it takes into account the linguistic capabilities, verbal strengths, and nonverbal vulnerabilities of individuals.\nMany of those diagnosed with ASD or similar disorders advocate against behavioral therapies, like Applied behavior analysis (ABA) and Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), often as part of the autism rights movement, on the grounds that these approaches frequently reinforce the demand on autistic people to mask their neurodivergent characteristics or behaviors to favor a more 'neurotypical' and narrow conception of normality. ABA has faced a great deal of criticism over the years. Recently, studies have shown that ABA may be abusive and can increase PTSD symptoms in patients. The Autistic Self Advocacy Network campaigns against the use of ABA in autism.\nIn the case of CBT and talking therapies, the effectiveness varies, with many reporting that they appeared 'too self-aware' to gain significant benefit, as the therapy was designed with neurotypical people in mind. In autistic children, specifically, they also report that it is only mildly beneficial in aiding with their anxieties.\nA typical program of professional support generally includes:\nOf the many studies on behavior-based early intervention programs, most are case reports of up to five participants and typically examine a few problem behaviors such as self-injury, aggression, noncompliance, stereotypies, or spontaneous language; unintended side effects are largely ignored. Despite the popularity of social skills training, its effectiveness is not firmly established. A randomized controlled study of a model for training parents in problem behaviors in their children with AS showed that parents attending a one-day workshop or six individual lessons reported fewer behavioral problems, while parents receiving the individual lessons reported less intense behavioral problems in their AS children. Vocational training may be important to teach job interview etiquette and workplace behavior to older children and adults with AS, and organization software and personal data assistants can improve the work and life management of people with AS.\nFecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT) is an innovative therapy for AS that aims to restore microbial balance in the patient's gastrointestinal tract by introducing healthy fecal microbiota acquired from people with a diverse microbial composition. This approach attempts to reconstruct the patient's gut microbiota by taking into account the intricate interactions between the human gut and the central nervous system via the gut-brain axis (GBA). Any disruption in gut health has been linked to an increased susceptibility to diverse neurodevelopmental disorders.\nIt is vital to remember that research of AS specifically operates upon the out-dated classification of this syndrome as external to ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder). Similarly, we should also note that ASD is a spectrum and support varies dramatically depending on the individual.\nMedications.\nNo medications directly treat the core symptoms of AS. Although research into the efficacy of pharmaceutical intervention for AS is limited, it is essential to diagnose and treat comorbid conditions. Deficits in self-identifying emotions or in observing effects of one's behavior on others can make it difficult for individuals with AS to see why medication may be appropriate. Medication can be effective in combination with behavioral interventions and environmental accommodations in treating comorbid symptoms such as anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, inattention, and aggression. The atypical antipsychotic medications risperidone, olanzapine and aripiprazole have been shown to reduce the associated symptoms of AS; risperidone can reduce repetitive and self-injurious behaviors, aggressive outbursts, and impulsivity, and improve stereotypical patterns of behavior and social relatedness. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and sertraline have been effective in treating restricted and repetitive interests and behaviors, while stimulant medication, such as methylphenidate, can reduce inattention. In addition, scientists have made a noteworthy finding that oxytocin, a hormone, plays a significant role in shaping human social behavior and the formation of interpersonal connections.\nCare must be taken with medications, as side effects may be more common and harder to evaluate in individuals with AS, and tests of drugs' effectiveness against comorbid conditions routinely exclude individuals from the autism spectrum. Abnormalities in metabolism, cardiac conduction times, and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes have been raised as concerns with antipsychotic medications, along with serious long-term neurological side effects. SSRIs can lead to manifestations of behavioral activation such as increased impulsivity, aggression, and sleep disturbance. Weight gain and fatigue are commonly reported side effects of risperidone, which may also lead to increased risk for extrapyramidal symptoms such as restlessness and dystonia and increased serum prolactin levels. Sedation and weight gain are more common with olanzapine, which has also been linked with diabetes. Sedative side-effects in school-age children have ramifications for classroom learning. Individuals with AS may be unable to identify and communicate their internal moods and emotions or to tolerate side effects that for most people would not be problematic.\nPrognosis.\nThere is some evidence that children with AS may see a lessening of symptoms; up to 20% of children may no longer meet the diagnostic criteria as adults, although social and communication difficulties may persist. As of 2006[ [update]], no studies addressing the long-term outcome of individuals with Asperger syndrome are available and there are no systematic long-term follow-up studies of children with AS. Individuals with AS appear to have normal life expectancy, but have an increased prevalence of comorbid psychiatric conditions, such as major depressive disorder and anxiety disorders that may significantly affect prognosis. Although social impairment may be lifelong, the outcome is generally more positive than with individuals with lower-functioning autism spectrum disorders; for example, ASD symptoms are more likely to diminish with time in children with AS or forms of autism sometimes described as \"high functioning\". Most students with AS and forms of autism sometimes seen as \"high functioning\" have average mathematical ability and test slightly worse in mathematics than in general intelligence. However, mathematicians are at least three times more likely to have autism-spectrum traits than the general population, and are more likely to have family members with autism.\nAlthough many attend regular education classes, some children with AS may attend special education classes such as separate classroom and resource room because of their social and behavioral difficulties. Adolescents with AS may exhibit ongoing difficulty with self-care or organization, and disturbances in social and romantic relationships. Despite high cognitive potential, most young adults with AS remain at home, yet some do marry and work independently. The \"different-ness\" adolescents experience can be traumatic. Anxiety may stem from preoccupation over possible violations of routines and rituals, from being placed in a situation without a clear schedule or expectations, or from concern with failing in social encounters; the resulting stress may manifest as inattention, withdrawal, reliance on obsessions, hyperactivity, or aggressive or oppositional behavior. Depression is often the result of chronic frustration from repeated failure to engage others socially, and mood disorders requiring treatment may develop. Clinical experience suggests the rate of suicide may be higher among those with AS, but this has not been confirmed by systematic empirical studies.\nEducation of families is critical in developing strategies for understanding strengths and weaknesses; helping the family to cope improves outcomes in children. Prognosis may be improved by diagnosis at a younger age that allows for early interventions, while interventions in adulthood are valuable but less beneficial. There are legal implications for individuals with AS as they run the risk of exploitation by others and may be unable to comprehend the societal implications of their actions.\nEpidemiology.\nFrequency estimates vary enormously. In 2015, it was estimated that 37.2 million people globally are affected. A 2003 review of epidemiological studies of children found autism rates ranging from 0.03 to 4.84 per 1,000, with the ratio of autism to Asperger syndrome ranging from 1.5:1 to 16:1; combining the geometric mean ratio of 5:1 with a conservative prevalence estimate for autism of 1.3 per 1,000 suggests indirectly that the prevalence of AS might be around 0.26 per 1,000. Part of the variance in estimates arises from differences in diagnostic criteria. For example, a relatively small 2007 study of 5,484 eight-year-old children in Finland found 2.9 children per 1,000 met the ICD-10 criteria for an AS diagnosis, 2.7 per 1,000 for Gillberg and Gillberg criteria, 2.5 for DSM-IV, 1.6 for Szatmari \"et al.\", and 4.3 per 1,000 for the union of the four criteria. Boys seem to be more likely to have AS than girls; estimates of the sex ratio range from 1.6:1 to 4:1, using the Gillberg and Gillberg criteria. Females with autism spectrum disorders may be underdiagnosed.\nComorbidities.\nAnxiety disorders and major depressive disorder are the most common conditions seen at the same time; comorbidity of these in persons with AS is estimated at 65%. Reports have associated AS with medical conditions such as aminoaciduria and ligamentous laxity, but these have been case reports or small studies and no factors have been associated with AS across studies. One study of males with AS found an increased rate of epilepsy and a high rate (51%) of nonverbal learning disorder. AS is associated with tics, Tourette syndrome and bipolar disorder. The repetitive behaviors of AS have many similarities with the symptoms of obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder and obsessive\u2013compulsive personality disorder, and 26% of a sample of young adults with AS were found to meet the criteria for schizoid personality disorder (which is characterised by severe social seclusion and emotional detachment), more than any other personality disorder in the sample. However many of these studies are based on clinical samples or lack standardized measures; nonetheless, comorbid conditions are relatively common.\nCorrelated characteristics.\nResearch indicates that individuals with Aspergers have significantly higher rates of LGBT identities and feelings than the general population. They are also significantly more likely to be non-theistic.\nHistory.\nAsperger syndrome was named after the Austrian pediatrician Hans Asperger (1906\u20131980), but not coined by him. Asperger syndrome was a relatively new diagnosis in the field of autism, though a syndrome like it was described as early as 1925 by Soviet child psychiatrist Grunya Sukhareva (1891\u20131981). As a child, Asperger appears to have exhibited some features of the very condition named after him, such as remoteness and talent in language. In 1944, Asperger gave detailed descriptions of four representative children in his practice who had difficulty in integrating themselves socially and showing empathy towards peers. They also lacked nonverbal communication skills and were physically clumsy. Asperger described this \"autistic psychopathy\" as social isolation. Fifty years later, several standardizations of AS as a medical diagnosis were tentatively proposed, many of which diverge significantly from Asperger's original work.\nUnlike what became known as AS, Asperger believed autistic psychopathy could be found in people of all levels of intelligence, including those with intellectual disability: as such, Asperger's understanding of autistic pathology was more akin to what is known as the autism spectrum today. Asperger defended the value of so-called \"high-functioning\" autistic individuals, writing: \"We are convinced, then, that autistic people have their place in the organism of the social community. They fulfill their role well, perhaps better than anyone else could, and we are talking of people who as children had the greatest difficulties and caused untold worries to their care-givers.\" Asperger also believed some would be capable of exceptional achievement and original thought later in life.\nAsperger's paper was published during World War II and in German, so it was not widely read elsewhere. Lorna Wing used the term \"Asperger syndrome\" in 1976, and popularized it to the English-speaking medical community in her February 1981 publication of case studies of children showing the symptoms described by Asperger, and Uta Frith translated Asperger's paper to English in 1991. Sets of diagnostic criteria were outlined by Gillberg and Gillberg in 1989 and by Szatmari \"et al.\" in the same year. AS became a standard diagnosis when it was included in the tenth edition of the World Health Organization's diagnostic manual, \"International Classification of Diseases\" (ICD-10), published in 1990 and coming into effect in 1993; and in the fourth edition of the American Psychiatric Association's diagnostic reference, \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM-IV), published in 1994.\nHundreds of books, articles, and websites later described AS and prevalence estimates increased dramatically for ASD, with AS recognized as an important subgroup. Whether AS should be seen as distinct from autism, particularly forms of autism sometimes described as \"high functioning\", became an issue receiving significant attention and disagreement, along with questions about the empirical validation of the DSM-IV and ICD-10 criteria.\nWith the publication of the next major editions of the DSM and ICD, the DSM-5 (published in 2013) and the ICD-11 (published in 2018, coming into effect in 2022), AS was eliminated as a separate diagnosis and folded into the autism spectrum. A scale of \"severity\" levels was included in the DSM-5, whereby most people previously diagnosed with AS would have been classified as \"level 1\"; but these levels are widely opposed by the autistic community and are not included in the ICD-11. The ICD-11 characterizes ASD with qualifiers describing the presence of disorders of intellectual development and the degree of functional language impairment; the former diagnosis of Asperger syndrome is characterized as \"autism spectrum disorder without disorder of intellectual development and with mild or no impairment of functional language\".\nSociety and culture.\nPeople identifying with Asperger syndrome may refer to themselves in casual conversation as \"aspies\" (a term first used in print in the \"Boston Globe\" in 1998). Some autistic people have advocated a shift in perception of autism spectrum disorders as complex syndromes, neurodivergences, and/or neurominority cognitive styles rather than diseases that must be cured. Proponents of this neurodiversity paradigm reject the notion that there is an \"ideal\" brain configuration and that any deviation from the norm is pathological; they promote tolerance of neurodiversity. These views are the basis for the autistic rights and autistic pride movements, within the broader neurodiversity movement. There is a contrast between the attitude of people with AS, who typically do not want to be cured and are proud of their identity; and parents of children with AS, who more often seek a \"cure\" of their children's autism.\nSome researchers have argued that AS and other autism can be viewed as a different cognitive style, not a disorder, and that it should be removed from psychiatric and medical manuals classifying diseases (\"ICD\") or mental disorders (\"DSM\"), much as homosexuality was removed.\nEven some people typically associated with a pathology paradigm for autism are willing to consider AS a neutral difference. For example, in 2002, Simon Baron-Cohen wrote of those with AS: \"In the social world, there is no great benefit to a precise eye for detail, but in the worlds of maths, computing, cataloging, music, linguistics, engineering, and science, such an eye for detail can lead to success rather than failure.\" Baron-Cohen cited two reasons why it might still be useful to consider AS to be a disability: to ensure provision for legally required special support, and to recognize emotional difficulties from reduced empathy, which was commonly associated with autism during that time but has since lost support. Baron-Cohen argues that the genes for ASD's combination of abilities have operated throughout recent human evolution and have made remarkable contributions to human history.\nBy contrast, Pier Jaarsma and Welin wrote in 2011 that the \"broad version of the neurodiversity claim, covering low-functioning as well as high-functioning autism, is problematic. Only a narrow conception of neurodiversity, referring exclusively to high-functioning autists, is reasonable.\" They say that \"higher functioning\" individuals with autism may \"not [be] benefited with such a psychiatric defect-based diagnosis ... some of them are being harmed by it, because of the disrespect the diagnosis displays for their natural way of being\", but \"think that it is still reasonable to include other categories of autism in the psychiatric diagnostics. The narrow conception of the neurodiversity claim should be accepted but the broader claim should not.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37558", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37558", "title": "Tazio Nuvolari", "text": "Italian racing driver (1892\u20131953)\nTazio Giorgio Nuvolari (; 16 November 1892 \u2013 11 August 1953) was an Italian racing driver. He first raced motorcycles and then concentrated on sports cars and Grand Prix racing. Originally of Mantua, he was nicknamed (\"the Flying Mantuan\") and (\"Cloud\"). His victories\u201472 major races, 150 in all\u2014included 24 Grands Prix, five Coppa Cianos, two Mille Miglias, two Targa Florios, two RAC Tourist Trophies, a Le Mans 24-hour race, and a European Championship in Grand Prix racing. Ferdinand Porsche called him \"the greatest driver of the past, the present, and the future\".\nBiography.\nNuvolari started racing motorcycles in 1920 at the age of 27, winning the 1925 350cc European Championship. Having raced cars as well as motorcycles from 1925 until 1930, he then concentrated on cars, and won the 1932 European Championship with the Alfa Romeo factory team, Alfa Corse.\nAfter Alfa Romeo officially withdrew from Grand Prix racing, Nuvolari drove for Scuderia Ferrari. The team was owned by Enzo Ferrari, who ran the Alfa Romeo cars semi-officially. In 1933, Nuvolari won Le Mans in an Alfa Romeo as a member of Ferrari's team, and a month later won the Belgian Grand Prix in a works Maserati, having switched teams a week before the race. Mussolini helped persuade Ferrari to take Nuvolari back for 1935, and in that year he won the German Grand Prix in Ferrari's outdated Alfa Romeo, defeating more powerful rivals from Mercedes-Benz and Auto Union. It was the only time a non-German car won a European Championship race from 1935 to 1939.\nThe relationship with Ferrari deteriorated during 1937, and Nuvolari raced an Auto Union in that year's Swiss Grand Prix. He rejoined the Auto Union team for the 1938 season and stayed with them through 1939 until Grand Prix racing was put on hiatus by World War II. The only major European race he never won was the Czechoslovakian Grand Prix.\nWhen Nuvolari resumed racing after the war he was 54 and in poor health. In his final appearance in competition, driving a Cisitalia-Abarth Tipo 204A at a Palermo hillclimb on 10 April 1950, he won his class and placed fifth overall. He died in 1953 from a stroke.\nPersonal and early life.\nNuvolari was born in Castel d'Ario, near Mantua, on 16 November 1892 to Arturo Nuvolari and his wife Elisa Zorzi. The family was well acquainted with motor racing, as Arturo and his brother Giuseppe were both bicycle racers\u2014Giuseppe was a multiple winner of the Italian national championship and was particularly admired by a young Tazio.\nNuvolari was married to Carolina Perina, and together they had two children: Giorgio (born 4 September 1918), who died in 1937 aged 19 from myocarditis, and Alberto, who died in 1946 aged 18 from nephritis.\nRacing career.\nMotorcycle racing.\nNuvolari obtained his license for motorcycle racing in 1915 at the age of 23. He served in the Italian army as an ambulance driver in World War I, and in 1920 took part in his first motorcycle race at the Circuito Internazionale Motoristico in Cremona but did not finish. He also raced cars, winning the Coppa Verona reliability trial in 1921.\nIn 1925 he became the 350\u00a0cc European Motorcycling champion by winning the European Grand Prix. At the time, the European Grand Prix was considered the most important race of the motorcycling season and the winners in each category were designated \"European Champions\". He won the Nations Grand Prix four times between 1925 and 1928, and the Lario Circuit race five times between 1925 and 1929, all in the 350\u00a0cc class on a Bianchi motorcycle.\nIt was also in 1925 that Alfa Romeo, seeking a driver to replace Antonio Ascari, who had been killed in the French Grand Prix in July, tested Nuvolari in their Grand Prix car with a view to running him in the Italian Grand Prix in September. He crashed when the gearbox seized, and severely lacerated his back. He was not picked for the team. Six days later, in bandages, with a cushion strapped to his stomach, and lifted onto his motorcycle by Bianchi mechanics for a push-start, he won the rain-soaked Nations Grand Prix at Monza.\nAuto racing.\n1930\u20131932: Alfa Corse.\n1930\nIn 1930, Nuvolari won his first RAC Tourist Trophy (he won again in 1933). Motor racing legend has it that when one of the drivers broke the window of a butcher's shop, Nuvolari drove onto the pavement and tried to grab a ham as he passed. According to Sammy Davis who met him there, Nuvolari enjoyed dark humour and situations when everything went wrong. For example, after he got a ticket for a journey home from the Sicilian Targa Florio he said to Enzo Ferrari, \"What a strange businessman you are. What if I am brought back in a coffin?\".\nNuvolari and co-driver Battista Guidotti won the Mille Miglia in a Zagato-bodied Alfa Romeo 6C 1750 GS, becoming the first to complete the race at an average of over . At night, leading on elapsed time but still lying behind his teammate Achille Varzi on the road because he had started after him, he tailed Varzi at speeds of up to with his headlights switched off, so that he could not be seen in the other car's rear-view mirrors. He eventually switched them on to overtake \"the shocked\" Varzi near the finish at Brescia.\n1931\nTowards the end of 1930, Nuvolari decided to stop racing motorcycles and concentrate fully on cars for 1931. Regulations for the season required Grand Prix races to be at least 10\u00a0hours long. For the Italian Grand Prix, Nuvolari was to share an Alfa Romeo with Baconin Borzacchini. The car started from ninth place on the grid, and when it retired with mechanical problems after 33 laps Nuvolari teamed up with Giuseppe Campari. The pair took the race win, although Nuvolari could not receive the championship points. Apart from the Belgian Grand Prix, where he came second, the only other European Championship race was the French Grand Prix, where he finished 11th. The same year, he won both the Coppa Ciano at Livorno and the arduous Targa Florio, which was run on the 92-mile (146 km) \"Grande\" variant of the super-twisty course that year.\n1932\nFor 1932, Grands Prix had to be between five and ten hours long. It was the only season in which Nuvolari regularly drove one of the fastest cars, the Alfa Romeo P3, and he took two wins and a second place from the three European Championship Grands Prix, plus victory in the championship by four points from Borzacchini. He achieved four other race wins that year, including the prestigious Monaco Grand Prix and a second Targa Florio. Of the latter, his mechanic Mabelli said: \"Before the start, Nuvolari told me to go down on the floor of the car every time he shouts, which was a signal that he went to a curve too fast and that we need to lower the car's center of mass. I spent the whole race on the floor. Nuvolari started to shout in the first curve and wouldn't stop until the last one.\"\nOn 28 April 1932 the writer Gabriele d'Annunzio gave him a golden tortoise badge. Thereafter Nuvolari wore it as a talisman, and it became famously associated with him, along with his initialled yellow jumper.\n1933\u20131937: Scuderia Ferrari and Maserati.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Tazio Nuvolari was not simply a racing driver. To Italy he became an idol, a demi-god, a legend, epitomising all that young Italy aspired to be; the man who 'did the impossible', not once but habitually, the David who slew the Goliaths in the great sport of motor racing. He was Il Maestro.\"\nCyril Posthumus\n1933\nThe 1933 season began a two-year hiatus in the European Championship, and although Alfa Romeo ceased official involvement in Grands Prix their cars continued racing with Enzo Ferrari's privateer team. For economic reasons, the P3 was not passed on to Ferrari so they used its predecessor, the Monza. Maserati, with a much-improved car, provided the main opposition.\nIt has been alleged that Nuvolari was involved in a race-fixing scandal at the Tripoli Grand Prix. The story is that he conspired with Achille Varzi and Baconin Borzacchini to fix the race in order to profit from the Libyan state lottery, in which 30 tickets were drawn before the race\u2014one for each starter\u2014and the holder of the ticket corresponding to the victorious driver won 7.5 million lire. Others say the allegation was unfounded and that it originated with Alfred Neubauer, the Mercedes-Benz team manager at the time, who was well known as a raconteur with a penchant for spicing up a story. Neubauer's version does not altogether hold true with documented records of events, which indicate that Nuvolari, Varzi, and Borzacchini agreed to pool the prize money should one of them win.\nFor the 1933 24 Hours of Le Mans, Alfa Romeo teamed Nuvolari with Raymond Sommer. Sommer asked to drive the majority of the race as he was more familiar with the circuit and thought Nuvolari would probably break the car. When Nuvolari countered that he was a leading Grand Prix driver and Le Mans was a simple layout that would not trouble him, they agreed to divide the driving equally. In the race, they built a two-lap lead before a leaking fuel tank forced them to stop at the pits, where the leak was plugged by chewing gum. More stops were necessary as the makeshift repair came undone several times. Nuvolari, driving through to the end of the race, broke the lap record nine times and won by approximately .\n1934\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Let any who say it was foolhardy at least be honest and admit it was one of the finest exhibitions of pluck and grit ever seen. By such men are victories won!\"\nEarl Howe, on Nuvolari racing in the 1934 AVUS-Rennen with a broken leg in a plaster cast\nIn April 1934 Nuvolari entered the Monaco Grand Prix in a privately owned Bugatti and worked up to third place before brake problems forced him back to fifth at the finish, two laps behind the winner, Guy Moll. Racing in heavy rain at Alessandria in the \"Circuito di Pietro Bordino\" race, he crashed and broke a leg: balked by Trossi's Alfa Romeo P3, he lost control of his privately entered Maserati 8CM, which skidded, rolled, and hit a tree. Bored in hospital, he decided to enter the AVUS-Rennen just over four weeks later. As his left leg was too badly injured to operate the clutch, his Maserati was modified for him to work the pedals with his right foot. Troubled by cramp, he finished fifth.\nBy the time of the Penya Rhin Grand Prix in late June, Nuvolari's leg was finally out of plaster but still painful. He retired his Maserati with technical problems.\nIn the Italian Grand Prix, he debuted Maserati's new 6C-34 model. It performed poorly and Nuvolari could finish only fifth, three laps behind the Mercedes-Benz W25s of Caracciola and Fagioli, and also trailing the Auto Union As of Stuck and Leiningen, and the Alfa Romeo P3s of Trossi, Comotti, and Chiron.\nAt the end of September, he finished third in the Czechoslovakian Grand Prix (Masaryk Circuit), behind Caracciola and Stuck.\n1935\nFor 1935, Nuvolari set his sights on a drive with the German Auto Union team. It lacked top-line drivers but relented to pressure from Achille Varzi, which did not want Nuvolari in the team. Nuvolari then approached Enzo Ferrari, who at first rebuffed him as he had previously walked out on the team. Italy's prime minister Mussolini helped persuade Ferrari to take Nuvolari back.\nThis was the year that Nuvolari achieved 'The Impossible Victory', which many regard as the greatest win in all of motor racing history: driving an outclassed Alfa Romeo P3 (3167\u00a0cc, supercharged, 265\u00a0hp) in the German Grand Prix at the N\u00fcrburgring, he beat all the dominant German cars\u2014five Mercedes-Benz W25s (3990\u00a0cc, 8C, supercharged, driven by Caracciola, Fagioli, Lang, von Brauchitsch, and Geyer), and four Auto Union Bs (4950\u00a0cc, 16C, supercharged, driven by Rosemeyer, Varzi, Stuck, and Pietsch). The crowd of 300,000 applauded Nuvolari, but the representatives of Nazi Germany were enraged.\n1936\nNuvolari had a big accident in May during practice for the Tripoli Grand Prix and it is alleged that he broke some vertebrae. Despite a limp, he took part in the race the following day and finished eighth. In October, he traveled to the U.S. for the American Automobile Association (AAA) sanctioned Vanderbilt Cup. Starting eighth, Nuvolari took the lead from Antonio Brivio on the second lap of the 75-lap event, leading from then until the finish.\n1937\nAt the beginning of 1937, Alfa Romeo took its works team back from Ferrari and entered it as part of the Alfa Corse team. Nuvolari stayed with Alfa Romeo despite becoming increasingly frustrated with the poor build quality of its racing cars.\nAt the Coppa Acerbo, Alfa Romeo's new 12C-37 car proved to be slow and unreliable. Frustrated, Nuvolari handed his car over to Giuseppe Farina mid-race. Not wanting to leave Alfa Romeo, he drove an Auto Union in the Swiss Grand Prix as a one-off. After the Italian Grand Prix, Alfa Romeo withdrew from racing for the remainder of the season and dismissed Vittorio Jano, its chief designer.\n1938\u20131939: Auto Union.\n1938\nAlthough Nuvolari started 1938 as an Alfa Romeo driver, a split fuel tank in the first race of the season at Pau was enough for him to walk out on the team, critical of the poor workmanship that was exhibited. He announced his retirement from Grand Prix racing and took a holiday in America. At the same time, Auto Union was having to rely on inexperienced drivers. Following the Tripoli Grand Prix they contacted Nuvolari who, having been refreshed from his break, agreed to drive for the highly successful German team, who were running radical mid-engined cars. Nuvolari found further success with Auto Union; now driving a faster and more reliable car that enabled him to compete for victories and the European Championship, Nuvolari won his home Grand Prix at Monza and won the Donington Grand Prix in England.\n1939\nIn 1939 he won Belgrade Grand Prix which was held on 3 September 1939, the last one before outbreak of World War II.\nPost-war racing.\nIn 1946 Nuvolari took part in thirteen races, winning the Grand Prix of Albi in a Maserati 4CL, finishing 4th in the Grand Prix of Nations and 13th in the Coppa Brezzi, and retiring from the others. It was noted that when he raced at Milan in September, he steered with mostly one hand; the other held a bloodstained handkerchief over his mouth.\nThrough 1947 and 1948 he raced eleven times, winning twice. He finished 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 7th, and retired from the remaining five races. His Maserati did not qualify for the 1949 Marseilles Grand Prix. Battered by health problems as well as the loss of his two sons, Nuvolari was nevertheless persuaded by Enzo Ferrari to race in the 1948 edition of the Mille Miglia. Paired with mechanic Sergio Scapinelli, Nuvolari took the lead in the early stages of the race. He was eventually forced to retire the car in Reggio Emilia when he had a 27-minutes lead. \nHis last appearance in competition was at the Palermo-Montepellegrino hillclimb on 10 April 1950, driving a Squadra Abarth Cisitalia-Abarth 204. He won his class and finished fifth overall.\nDeath and legacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u2026there will never be another Nuvolari and I shall always think of him as incomparable, the greatest of them all.\"\nFrom editor John Cooper's Nuvolari obituary in \"The Autocar\", 21 August 1953\nNuvolari never formally announced his retirement, but his health deteriorated and he became increasingly solitary. In 1952 a stroke left him partially paralysed, and he died in bed a year later from a second one. Between 25,000 and 55,000 people, at least half the population of Mantua, attended his funeral in a mile-long procession, with the coffin placed on a car chassis that was pushed by Alberto Ascari, Luigi Villoresi, and Juan Manuel Fangio. He is buried in the family tomb in the Cimitero Degli Angeli, on the road from Mantua to Cremona. The inscription over the door reads: .\nThe Museum Tazio Nuvolari is located in his homestead at Giulia Romano via N. Sauro in Mantua.\nIn Castel d'Ario there is a bronze statue of Nuvolari on a marble plinth inscribed \"Nivola \u2013 Campione Automobilistico di Tutti Tempi\" (Nivola \u2013 Champion Driver of All Time); and at the end of Mantua's Via delle Rimembranze, the street where he lived towards the end of his life, is a square that is now called Piazza Nuvolari.\nThe Cisitalia 202 SMM Nuvolari Spider, EAM Nuvolari S1, and Audi Nuvolari Quattro are named after him, and Maserati offers the colour Grigio-Nuvolari from their custom palette.\nNuvolari was an early exponent (if not the inventor, according to Enzo Ferrari) of the four-wheel drift cornering technique which was later utilised by drivers such as Stirling Moss.\nAn Italian pay-TV channel featuring motor sports is also named \"Nuvolari\".\nThe online video interview platform \"Tazio\" is named after him.\nIn the 1961 \"The Twilight Zone\" episode, \"A Game of Pool\", Tazio Nuvolari is referenced by Jonathan Winters (Fats Brown) when talking to Jack Klugman (Jessie Cardiff) about great men in history.\nNuvolari was mentioned in 1969 comedy film \"Monte Carlo or Bust!\" when Angelo Pincilli and Marcelo Agosti, two Italian policemen taking part in the Monte Carlo Rally, hope to become as famous as Nuvolari and land speed record holder Malcolm Campbell by winning the race.\nThe 1976 album \"Automobili\" by Italian singer-songwriter Lucio Dalla, included the song \"Nuvolari\", with lyrics by poet Roberto Roversi.\nA Six Metre racing yacht built in the 1978 for Luca and Tony Bassani was named Nuvolari in honour of the racing driver. That yacht was restored in 2016 and currently races in Victoria, BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37559", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37559", "title": "List of political scientists", "text": "The following is a list of notable political scientists. Political science is the scientific study of politics, a social science dealing with systems of governance and power.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37560", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37560", "title": "Tricon Global Restaurants", "text": ""}
{"id": "37561", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37561", "title": "Pizza Hut", "text": "American multinational restaurant chain\nPizza Hut, LLC is an American multinational pizza restaurant chain and international franchise founded in 1958 in Wichita, Kansas, by brothers Dan and Frank Carney. The chain, headquartered in Plano, Texas, operates 19,866 restaurants worldwide as of 2023.\nWhile studying at Wichita State University, the Carneys opened their first location, which quickly expanded to six outlets within a year. The brand began franchising in 1959, and its distinctive building style was designed by Chicago architect George Lindstrom in 1963. Pizza Hut experienced significant growth, including the acquisition by PepsiCo in 1977, followed by a spin-off into Tricon Global Restaurants, Inc., later renamed Yum! Brands in 2002, who are the current owners.\nPizza Hut introduced PizzaNet in 1994, an early internet ordering experiment, and continued innovation with offerings like stuffed crust pizza introduced in 1995. Pizza Hut has adapted its model to include various restaurant formats, including the family-style dine-in locations, carry-out, and hybrid locations. It has ventured into international markets, tailoring its menu to local tastes. The brand faced challenges, including the closure of numerous dine-in locations in the United States and adjustments to its franchise operations. Despite these hurdles, Pizza Hut remains a significant player in the global fast-food industry, known for its innovative products and marketing strategies.\nHistory.\nPizza Hut was launched on May 31, 1958, by two brothers, Dan and Frank Carney, both Wichita State students, as a single location in Wichita, Kansas. Six months later they opened a second outlet, and within a year they were operating six locations. The brothers began franchising in 1959. \nOne early employee was future Pro Football Hall of Fame head coach Bill Parcells, who had worked for the company while a college student and football player at Wichita State University. Parcells was considering a franchise for a career (as well as law school), but instead chose to enter coaching, eventually becoming a head coach in the National Football League.\nThe iconic Pizza Hut building style with the distinctive red roof was introduced in 1969, and was later incorporated into the corporate logo.\nPepsiCo acquired Pizza Hut in November 1977. On May 30, 1997, PepsiCo spun off Pizza Hut, along with Taco Bell and Kentucky Fried Chicken, into a new company named Tricon Global Restaurants, Inc. The company assumed the name of Yum! Brands on May 22, 2002.\nThe first Pizza Hut restaurant east of the Mississippi River was opened in Athens, Ohio, in 1966 by Lawrence Berberick and Gary Meyers.\nIn the early 1970s, Pizza Hut opened several other chains to diversify its menu. These included the fast-food Mexican eatery Taco Kid; hamburger restaurant Next Door; steakhouse Flaming Steer; and barbecue restaurant Sutphen's. All four ventures were unsuccessful and closed by the end of the decade.\nIn August 1994, Pizza Hut and the Santa Cruz Operation (SCO) announced &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;PizzaNet, a pilot program in the Santa Cruz area that allowed consumers to use their own computer to order pizza delivery from a local Pizza Hut restaurant, with connection being made over the Internet to a central Pizza Hut server in Wichita, Kansas. The PizzaNet application software was developed by SCO's Professional Services group. PizzaNet was based on the first commercially licensed and bundled Internet operating system, SCO Global Access.\nOn March 31, 2011, Priszm, who was the largest franchisee for Pizza Hut restaurants in Canada at the time, went into bankruptcy protection in Ontario and British Columbia.\nIn 2015, the oldest continuously operating Pizza Hut, which was the restaurant located in the Aggieville District of Manhattan, Kansas, closed after having opened as the 8th location in 1960.\nThe company announced a rebrand that began on November 19, 2014, in an effort to increase sales, which had dropped in the previous two years. The menu was expanded to introduce various items such as crust flavors and 11 new specialty pizzas, and the company's employee uniforms were redesigned. In 2017, Pizza Hut was listed by UK-based company Richtopia at number 24 in the list of 200 Most Influential Brands in the World.\nOn June 25, 2019, Pizza Hut announced it was bringing back the logo and the red roof design that was used from 1976 until 1999.\nOn August 7, 2019, Pizza Hut announced its intention to close about 500 of its 7,496 dine-in restaurants in the US, by the middle of 2021.\nOn August 18, 2020, Pizza Hut announced it would be closing up to 300 restaurants after the bankruptcy of NPC International, one of its largest franchisees. In March 2021, Flynn Restaurant Group acquired NPC's 937 Pizza Hut locations.\nBranding.\nA significant part of the Pizza Hut brand is the red roof emblem. It was introduced as a distinctive part of the store building design in 1969, and was later incorporated into the logo. Accounts differ as to its origin; some sources state that the buildings were designed in 1963 by the Chicago architect George Lindstrom, while others state that the buildings were designed by the Wichita architect and college friend of the Carney brothers, Richard D. Burke, for the fee of $100 per store built to this design. \nThe Pizza Hut logo on roadside signage at this time featured \"Pizza Pete\", a stereotypical Italian chef mascot, but this character was later replaced by a graphical red roof emblem. Some people consider that the red roof emblem resembles a wide-brimmed red hat, especially in German-speaking countries, where the word \"\" means \"hat\".\nConcept.\nIn 1975, Pizza Hut began testing concepts with Applegate's Landing. with restaurants that featured Colonial-style exteriors and eclectic interiors that included a truck with a salad bar in the bed. The chain offered much of the same pizza and pasta dishes, with some additions like hamburgers and bread pudding. Applegate's Landing went defunct in the mid-1980s except for one location in McPherson, Kansas, that closed in late 1995.\nAn upscale concept was unveiled in 2004, called Pizza Hut Italian Bistro. At 50 US locations, the Bistro is similar to a traditional Pizza Hut but with a menu that included previously unseen items, such as penne pasta, chicken pomodoro, and toasted sandwiches. Instead of black, white, and red, Bistro locations feature a burgundy and tan motif. In some cases, Pizza Hut has replaced a red roof location with the new concept. Pizza Hut Express locations are fast food restaurants that offer a limited menu with many products not seen at a traditional Pizza Hut. These stores are often paired in a colocation with WingStreet in the US and Canada, or other sibling brands such as KFC or Taco Bell and found on college campuses, food courts, theme parks, bowling alleys, and within stores such as Target.\nVintage locations featuring the red roof, designed by architect Richard D. Burke, can be found in the United States and Canada; several exist in the UK, Australia, and Mexico. In his book \"Orange Roofs, Golden Arches\", Phillip Langdon wrote that the Pizza Hut red roof architecture \"is something of a strange object \u2013 considered outside the realm of significant architecture, yet swiftly reflecting shifts in popular taste and unquestionably making an impact on daily life. These buildings rarely show up in architectural journals, yet they have become some of the most numerous and conspicuous in the United States today.\"\nIn 2014, \"Curbed.com\" reported, \"Despite Pizza Hut's decision to discontinue the form when they made the shift toward delivery, there were still 6,304 traditional units standing as of 2004, each with the shingled roofs and trapezoidal windows signifying equal parts suburban comfort and strip-mall anomie.\" This building style was common in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The name \"red roof\" is somewhat anachronistic now since many locations have brown roofs. Dozens of these restaurants have closed or been relocated or rebuilt.\nMany of the older locations with the red roof design serve beer or have a full bar, music from a jukebox, and in some cases an arcade. In the mid-1980s, the company moved into other formats, including delivery or carryout and the fast food \"Express\" model.\nIn June 2024, some locations reportedly brought back the all you can eat lunch buffet.\nProducts.\nIn North America, Pizza Hut has notably sold:\nThe \"stuffed crust\" pizza was introduced on March 26, 1995. By the end of the year, it had become one of their most popular lines.\nRegional differences are seen in the products and bases. The company has localized to Southeast Asia with a baked rice dish called Curry Zazzle.\nOn May 9, 2008, Pizza Hut created \"The Natural\" pizza, which featured natural ingredients and was sold in Seattle, Denver and Dallas. This was discontinued on October 27, 2009, in the Dallas market.\nPizza Hut developed a pizza to be delivered to the International Space Station in 2001. It was vacuum-sealed and about 6 in (15\u00a0cm) in diameter to fit in the station's oven. It was launched on a Soyuz and eaten by Yuri Usachov in orbit.\nIn the 2010s, the chain saw a downturn in profits. In 2015, the franchise stated it would be pumping more capital into its London branches. Pizza Hut is installing cocktail bars in its London branches as part of a \u00a360 million bid to win back \"the Nando's generation\".\nIn January 2019, Pizza Hut announced it had expanded beer delivery to 300 locations across the US., with plans to expand to 1,000 locations by the middle of the year.\nIn March 2019, Pizza Hut announced the return of the P'Zone after a hiatus of several years.\nIn March 2020, Pizza Hut Hong Kong announced that it had partnered with furniture retailer IKEA on a joint venture. IKEA launched a new side table called S\u00c4VA, which was designed to resemble a pizza saver. The table would be boxed in packaging resembling a pizza box, and the building instructions included a suggestion to order a Swedish meatball pizza from Pizza Hut, which would contain the same meatballs served in IKEA restaurants. A 2021 menu addition, designed to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the introduction of stuffed crust pizza, was \"nothing but the stuffed crust\", a ring of dough filled with cheese.\nWingStreet.\nWingStreet is the name used for Pizza Hut's chicken wing menu.\nIn 2003, Yum! launched WingStreet in combination with existing Pizza Hut franchises. The chain predicted aggressive growth, adding more than 4,000 locations by 2010. In 2012, Pizza Hut opened a standalone pilot store in Denton, Texas. The store was unsuccessful and closed the following year.\nInternational.\nPizza Hut's international presence under Yum! Brands includes:\nPizza Hut's China operations are part of the Yum! spinoff Yum China. Pizza Hut was one of the first American franchises to open in Iraq.\nAustralia.\nPizza Hut expanded to Australia in 1970, opening its first dine-in restaurant in Belfield in April 1970. In September 2016, private equity firm Allegro Funds and a local management team bought the master franchise agreement for Pizza Hut in Australia from Yum! Brands. \nIn November 2016, Pizza Hut acquired Australian pizza chain Eagle Boys. Half of the Eagle Boys stores were converted to Pizza Hut stores by Christmas 2016 while the remainder were converted by April\u00a02017.\nIn June 2023, Allegro sold Pizza Hut Australia to US franchise operator Flynn Restaurant Group. As of June 2023, there are about 260 Pizza Hut stores in Australia.\nIn May 2024, Australian franchisee Pizza Pan Group was penalized with a AU$2.5 million fine for sending 10 million marketing spam messages over four months in violation of Australian spam laws. It had been directed to report regularly to the Australian Communications and Media Authority.\nChina.\nIn China, Pizza Hut () used an altered business model, offering a fine-dining atmosphere with knives and forks and using an expanded menu catering to Chinese tastes. By 2008, Pizza Hut operated restaurants and delivery locations. That year, the company introduced \"Pizza Hut Express\", opening locations in Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Hangzhou. The 160 restaurants were in 40 Chinese cities in 2005. As of 2015, Pizza Hut had 1,903 restaurants in China. As of the end of March 2024, Pizza Hut has over 3400 outlets in over 700 cities.\nSavio S. Chan (\u9673\u5c11\u5b8f, Pinyin: \"Ch\u00e9n Sh\u00e0oh\u00f3ng\") and Michael Zakkour, authors of \"\", stated middle-class Chinese perceive Pizza Hut as \"akin to fine dining\", though Pizza Hut was \"China's largest and most successful foreign casual-dining chain\".\nEthiopia.\nIn 2018, Pizza Hut officially opened in Ethiopia.\nNew Zealand.\nThe first Pizza Hut store in New Zealand was established in New Lynn 1974 by businessman Garry Melville-Smith, who bought the franchise rights for the country. By 1990, 36 stores had been established across New Zealand. The franchise originated as a dine-in restaurant targeting families and also served alcohol, pasta, salad bars and desserts. Pizza Hut dominated the New Zealand fast food market during the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, holding 75% of the market share at its peak. The franchise's success encouraged other fast food chains including Domino's, Eagle Boys, Pizza Haven and Hell Pizza to enter the New Zealand market. In 1996, Melville-Smith sold the New Zealand franchise back to PepsiCo, which subsequently rebranded as Restaurant Brands in 1997.\nIn 1998, Pizza Hut shifted from a dine-in restaurant chain towards a takeaway and delivery service in response to changes in consumer behaviour. In 2000, Restaurant Brands acquired Eagle Boys' New Zealand operations, which were rebranded as Pizza Hut stores. In February 2016, the original New Lynn dine-in restaurant was demolished and replaced with a takeaway store. In late September 2024, Pizza Hut celebrated the 50th anniversary of its establishment in New Zealand by holding pop-up lunch and dinner buffet and dessert events in Auckland.\nPakistan.\nPizza Hut Pakistan () is the Pakistani franchisee of Pizza Hut. It is owned by MCR (Pvt) Ltd and is headquartered in Karachi, Pakistan. The first outlet was opened in Karachi in 1993. Currently, Pizza Hut has a presence in 23 major cities.\nSouth Korea.\nAs of August 2018, Pizza Hut has 324 franchises in South Korea since it opened its first store in 1985.\nUnited Kingdom.\nPizza Hut first opened in the UK in 1973. In 2023, UK Pizza Hut restaurants added Beyond Meat Pepperoni to its menus with pizzas that include the Big New Yorker with vegan cheese and Beyond Pepperoni.\nIn October 2025, Pizza Hut entered administration in the UK, with plans to close 68 of its restaurants, which will result in the loss of 1,277 jobs. 64 remaining restaurants will be acquired by Yum! III (UK) Limited as part of a prepackaged deal. The list of Pizza Hut restaurants facing closure in the UK includes popular branch locations such as Romford Retail Park, Greenwich Peninsula, and Hayes Retail Park, \"The Standard\" reports.\nAdvertising.\nUnited States.\nPizza Hut's first television commercial was produced in 1965 by Bob Walterscheidt for the Harry Crow agency in Wichita, and was entitled \"Putt-Putt to the Pizza Hut\". The ad looks just like an old movie and is set in fast motion. It features a man in a business suit and tie, played by Ron Williams, who was then a production manager for Wichita's ABC affiliate KAKE-TV, as he orders take-out, leaves his house, and gets into his 1965 Mustang JR to drive to Pizza Hut, where he is chased by a variety of townspeople, portrayed by neighborhood kids, Walterscheidt and his daughter, and various employees for Harry Crow and KAKE-TV. He goes inside Pizza Hut to pick up his pizza and drives home. People eat all the pizza before the man who ordered it can get any, which makes the man very upset, so he calls Pizza Hut again. The ad first aired on November 19, 1966, during halftime of the Notre Dame vs. Michigan State \"Game of the Century\", and dramatically increased sales for the franchise. \"Putt-Putt to the Pizza Hut\" ran on TV for eight years and was nominated for a Clio Award.\nUntil early 2007, Pizza Hut's main advertising slogan was \"Gather 'round the good stuff\". From 2008 to 2009, the advertising slogan was \"Now You're Eating!\" From 2009 to 2012, the advertising slogan was \"Your Favorites. Your Pizza Hut\" From 2012 to 2016, the advertising slogan was \"Make it great\", a variation of the 1987\u20131995 slogan \"Makin' it great!\". From 1995 to 1999, the slogan was \"You'll love the stuff we're made of\". The advertising slogan is currently \"No one outpizzas the hut\".\nPizza Hut sponsored the film \"Back to the Future Part II\" (1989) and offered a free pair of futuristic sunglasses, known as \"Solar Shades\", with the purchase of Pizza Hut pizza. Pizza Hut also engaged in product placement within the film, having a futuristic version of their logo with their trademarked red hut printed on the side of a mylar dehydrated pizza wrapper in the McFly family dinner scene, and appear on a storefront in Hill Valley in the year 2015.\nThe 1990 NES game \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Arcade Game\" came with a coupon for a free pizza. The game included Pizza Hut product placement in the form of background advertisements and pizza that would refill the character's life.\nIn 1995, Donald Trump and his ex-wife Ivana Trump appeared in a commercial. The last scene of the commercial showed Ivana asking for the last slice, to which Donald replied, \"Actually, you're only entitled to half\", a play on the couple's recent divorce.\nIn 1995, Ringo Starr appeared in a Pizza Hut commercial that teased to a Beatles reunion, but featured three members of The Monkees. A commercial with Rush Limbaugh dates from the same year, in which he boasts \"nobody is more right than me\", yet he states for the first time he will do something wrong, which was to participate in Pizza Hut's then \"eating pizza crust first\" campaign regarding their stuffed crust pizzas.\nIn 1999, the announcer says, \"The best pizzas under one roof\" in the Big New Yorker pizza commercial seen on the PlayStation Pizza Hut Demo Disc 1. Also, in 1999, the game \"Crazy Taxi\" for Sega Dreamcast featured Pizza Hut as one of the locations to which players were able to drive and drop off customers. However, in the game's 2010 re-release for Xbox Live and PlayStation Network, all of the product placement, including the Pizza Hut locations, were removed and replaced with generic locations.\nEarly 2007 had Pizza Hut move into several more interactive ways of marketing to the consumer. Using mobile-phone SMS technology and their MyHut ordering site, they aired several television commercials (commencing just before the Super Bowl) containing hidden words that viewers could type into their phones to receive coupons. Other innovative efforts included their \"MySpace Ted\" campaign, which took advantage of the popularity of social networking, and the burgeoning user-submission marketing movement via their Vice President of Pizza contest.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1996, as part of Pizza Hut's global advertising strategy using celebrities, Formula One driver Damon Hill and BBC motorsport commentator Murray Walker advertised the stuffed crust pizza, which parodies Walker's extravagant style.\nTalk show host Jonathan Ross co-starred in an ad with American model Caprice Bourret. They advertised the new stuffed crust pizza, with Jonathan Ross saying \"stuffed cwust\" due to his rhotacism.\nFollowing England's defeat to Germany on penalties in the semifinals of Euro '96, Gareth Southgate, Stuart Pearce, and Chris Waddle featured in an advertisement, which shows Southgate wearing a paper bag over his head in shame as his penalty miss allowed England to lose the shootout. Waddle and Pearce, who both missed in a shootout vs West Germany at World Cup '90, are ridiculing him, emphasizing the word \"miss\" at every opportunity. After Southgate finishes his pizza, he takes off his paper bag, heads for the door, and bangs his head against the wall. Pearce responds with, \"this time he's hit the post\".\nRussia.\nFormer Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev starred in a 1998 Pizza Hut commercial with his granddaughter Anastasia Virganskaya to raise money for the Perestroyka Archives. The ad \"obviously exploited the shock value of having a former world leader appear... [and] played on the fact that Gorbachev was far more popular outside Russia than inside it\". It was filmed on a multi-million budget with a cinematic quality, including mounting cameras on the Kremlin and shutting down Red Square to get the establishing shots of the square, and dialogue entirely in Russian with English subtitles, to show Pizza Hut as a global brand compared to its American rivals.\nMore recently, Pizza Hut has had various celebrity spokespeople, including Jessica Simpson, the Muppets, Damon Hill, and Murray Walker.\nIn 2000, Pizza Hut paid for their logo to appear on a Russian Proton rocket, which launched the Russian Zvezda module.\nPasta Hut.\nOn April 1, 2008, Pizza Hut in America sent emails to customers advertising their pasta items. The email (and similar advertising on the company's website) stated: \"Pasta so good, we changed our name to Pasta Hut!\" The name change was a publicity stunt held on April Fools' Day, extending through the month of April, with the company's Dallas headquarters changing its exterior logo to Pasta Hut.\nThis name change was also used to promote the new Tuscani Pasta line and the new Pizza Hut dine-in menu. The first Pasta Hut advertisement shows the original Pizza Hut restaurant being imploded and recreated with a \"Pasta Hut\" sign.\nA version of this stunt was re-created by Pizza Hut's UK operation later that year in October 2008, which included ten locations in London temporarily taking on new \"Pasta Hut\" signage. Pizza Hut UK's chief executive at the time has insisted that this was solely intended as a \"PR exercise\" and the chain never planned on permanently changing its name in the UK or elsewhere.\nBook It!\nPizza Hut has sponsored the Book It! reading-incentive program since it started in January 1985. Students who read books according to the goal set by the classroom teacher, in any month from October through March, are rewarded with a Pizza Hut certificate good for a free, one-topping Personal Pan Pizza; and the classroom whose students read the most books is rewarded with a pizza party. Book It! was conceived in 1984 during a dinner with Art Gunther, President of Pizza Hut, and Bud Gates, SVP of Marketing at Pizza Hut, as a way to help Gunther's son read more.\nThe program has been criticized by some psychologists on the grounds it may lead to overjustification and reduce children's intrinsic interest in reading. Book It! was also criticized by the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood in 2007 who described it as \"one of corporate America's most insidious school-based brand promotions.\" A pamphlet produced by the group argued the program promoted junk food to a captive market, made teachers into promoters for Pizza Hut, and undermined parents by making visits to the chain an integral part of bringing up their children to be literate. However, a study of the program found participation in the program neither increased nor decreased reading motivation. The program's 25th anniversary was in 2010. The Book It! program in Australia ceased in 2002.\nCriticism.\nIn the United Kingdom, Pizza Hut was criticized in October 2007 for the high salt content of its meals, some of which were found to contain more than twice the daily recommended amount of salt for an adult.\nTo meet the Food Standards Agency 2010 target for salt levels in foods, between 2008 and 2010, the company removed over 15% of salt across its menu.\nIn July 2014, delivery drivers in the United States filed a class-action lawsuit over Pizza Hut \"paying delivery drivers net wages below minimum wage due to unreimbursed automobile expenses\" in violation of the 1938 Fair Labor Standards Act. An attempt by Pizza Hut to have the case dismissed in November 2015 failed. In December 2016, the case, \"Linkovich v. Capital Pizza Huts, Inc., et al.,\" was decided by arbitration, in which Pizza Hut paid damages.\nAnimal welfare.\nIn 2021, Yum! Brands, the owner of Pizza Hut, committed to using only cage-free eggs in the majority of its locations by 2026, and in all locations globally by 2030. The commitment came following the \"largest public cage-free campaign\" at that time.\nHowever, Pizza Hut was the target of criticism by a World Animal Protection assessment in 2018, which claimed that it demonstrated \"limited evidence\" of concern with the humane handling of livestock in its operations.\nIn film and popular culture.\nThe film \"Slice of Life: The American Dream. In Former Pizza Huts\", directed by Matthew Salleh and released in 2024, is a documentary about people who have converted former Pizza Hut buildings across America into a variety of new enterprises.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37563", "revid": "28177457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37563", "title": "Taco Bell", "text": "American fast-food chain\nTaco Bell Corp. is an American multinational chain of fast food restaurants founded in 1962 by Glen Bell (1923\u20132010) in Downey, California. Taco Bell is a subsidiary of Yum! Brands, Inc. The restaurants serve a variety of Mexican-inspired foods, including tacos, burritos, quesadillas, nachos, novelty, and specialty items, and a variety of \"value menu\" items. As of 2023[ [update]], Taco Bell serves over customers each year, at 8,212 restaurants, more than 94 percent of which are owned and operated by independent franchisees and licensees.\nPepsiCo purchased Taco Bell in 1978. PepsiCo later spun off its restaurants division as Tricon Global Restaurants; subsequently, it changed its name to Yum! Brands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nTaco Bell was founded by Glen Bell, an entrepreneur who first opened a hot dog stand called Bell's Drive-In, in San Bernardino, California, in 1948. Bell watched long lines of customers at a Mexican restaurant called the Mitla Cafe, located across the street, which became famous among residents for its hard-shelled tacos. Bell attempted to reverse-engineer the recipe, and eventually the owners, along with head chef Gloria Hoyle, allowed him to see how the tacos were made. Hoyle (Mitla Cafe still has a special named after her today) taught Glen Bell her version of the Dorado taco style which Mitla Cafe was known for. Bell took what he had learned and opened a taco stand in 1951. The name underwent several changes, from Taco-Tia through El Taco, before settling on Taco Bell.\nGlen Bell opened the first Taco Bell on July 6, 1962 at 7112 Firestone Boulevard in Downey, California. The original location was a building about the size of a two-car garage, and was built with mission-style arches that covered a walk-up window that served the original menu items: tacos, burritos, tostadas, Chiliburgers and frijoles, all for 19 cents each ($ in 2024 dollars ). The first restaurant closed in 1986, while the building was saved from demolition November 19, 2015, and was moved to the Taco Bell Corporate Office at 1 Glen Bell Way in Irvine, California and is currently stored intact on the corporate parking lot premises and known as \"Taco Bell Numero Uno\". Currently, there is a Taco Bell location across the street at 7127 Firestone Blvd, in Downey, which opened in 1996. The oldest operating Taco Bell location is store #2 (now operating as store #40400) at 1822 Santa Fe, in Long Beach, CA, which opened on August 7, 1962. Initially designed exactly like \"Numero Uno\", the building has since remodeled extensively. Two former \"Numero Uno\" buildings still operate as other businesses, including another one in Long Beach, California (opened in early 1963), and one in Hawaiian Gardens, California (opened as store #3 in September 1962).\nIn 1964, the first franchise was purchased by former police officer Kermit Bekke. This location, located at 1654 West Carson Street in Torrance, California, had its grand opening on May 28, 1965. Bekke sold his franchise a year and a half later. This location closed in 1975 when it moved across the street to store #1130 at 1619 West Carson Street, which itself would close in the late 1990s and subsequently be repurposed. On January 20, 1967, the 100th Taco Bell grand opening took place in Anaheim, located at 400 South Brookhurst (store #63); this location would later be replaced by a new location at 324 South Brookhurst in 1993. The first Taco Bell restaurant east of the Mississippi River (the 270th to open, store #258) opened at 2050 East Main Street in Springfield, Ohio, on September 20, 1968. Original Taco Bells featured only walk-up window service without indoor seating or drive-thru service. Inside seating was added sporadically in 1968 and drive-thru service was not generally available until 1980. As of 2025, seven original mission-style operating Taco Bell restaurants still remain, located in California and Colorado. A mission-style location (opened in April 1976) that operated in Honolulu, Hawaii (store #1281) remodeled in 2024, and another Mission-style location in Scottsdale, Arizona (store #31, opened circa July 3, 1966) closed on April 12, 2025. Many former mission-style Taco Bell locations still survive which have been repurposed, frequently as other Mexican fast food restaurants. In 1970, Taco Bell went public with 325 restaurants.\nThe corporate office has had a few locations, and previously maintained an office at 2516 Via Tejon in Palos Verdes, then at 2424 Moreton Street in Torrance before settling into Irvine (at 17901 Von Karman Avenue) in 1976.\nPepsiCo subsidiary.\nIn 1978, PepsiCo purchased Taco Bell from Glen Bell. In the 1980s, Taco Bell entered rapid expansion when it acquired several other fast food joints and turned those locations into their own. This included Taco Charley, a San Mateo, California-based chain, in 1982, Pup 'N' Taco, a Long Beach, California-based chain in 1984, and Zantigo, a Minneapolis, Minnesota-based Mexican chain, in 1986. These acquisitions (and later conversions) resulted in many early Taco Bell stores closing and moving to these newer facilities. Taco Bell also dropped its existing Mexican-based branding, replacing it with a more mainstream design in 1984. In 1990, the Hot 'n Now chain was acquired. Taco Bell sold Hot 'n Now to a Connecticut company in 1997.\nIn 1991, Taco Bell opened the first Taco Bell Express in San Francisco. Taco Bell Express locations operate primarily inside convenience stores, truck stops, shopping malls, and airports; this concept had been experimented with as early as 1984, with several test mall locations opening. Taco Bell began co-branding with KFC in 1995 when the first such co-brand opened in Clayton, North Carolina. The chain has since co-branded with Pizza Hut and Long John Silver's as well.\nIn 1997, PepsiCo experimented with a new \"fresh grill\" concept, opening at least one Border Bell restaurant in Mountain View, California, on El Camino Real (SR 82). Close to the time that PepsiCo spun off its restaurant business in 1997,&lt;ref name=\"TRICON-GLOBAL-RESTAURANTS-Aug-1997-10-12B/A\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; the Border Bell in Mountain View was closed and converted to a Taco Bell restaurant which was still open in 2018.\nIn September 2000, up to $50 million worth of Taco Bell-branded shells were recalled from supermarkets. The shells contained a variety of genetically modified corn called StarLink that was not approved for human consumption. StarLink was approved only for use in animal feed because of questions about whether it can cause allergic reactions in people. It was the first-ever recall of genetically modified food (GMO). Corn was not segregated at grain elevators and the miller in Texas did not order that type. In 2001, Tricon Global announced a $60 million settlement with the suppliers. They stated that it would go to Taco Bell franchisees and TGR would not take any of it.\nYum! Brands subsidiary.\nPepsiCo spun out Taco Bell and its other restaurant chains in late 1997 in Tricon Global Restaurants.&lt;ref name=\"TRICON-GLOBAL-RESTAURANTS-Jul-1997-10-12B/A\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; With the purchase of Yorkshire Global Restaurants, the owners of A&amp;W and Long John Silver's chains, Tricon changed its name to Yum! Brands on May 16, 2002.\nIn March 2005, the Coalition of Immokalee Workers (CIW) won a landmark victory in its national boycott of Taco Bell for human rights. Taco Bell agreed to meet all the coalition's demands to improve wage and working conditions for Florida tomato pickers in its supply chain. After four years of boycott, Taco Bell and Yum! Brands agreed to make an agreement called the \"CIW-Yum agreement\" with representatives of CIW at Yum! Brands headquarters.\nTaco Bell began experimenting with fast-casual and urban concepts when it created U.S. Taco Co. and Urban Taproom in 2014 reflecting a market shift due to the popularity of Chipotle Mexican Grill. The menu consisted of tacos with American fillings, and did not sell the food sold in Taco Bell restaurants, such as burritos. It was launched in Huntington Beach, California, in August 2014.\nU.S. Taco Co. closed on September 15, 2015, so the company could focus on its new similar Taco Bell Cantina concept, which featured special menu items and served alcohol. It opened its first location a few days later in Chicago's Wicker Park neighborhood, followed by a location in San Francisco about a month later, located less than a block away from AT&amp;T Park. In 2016, Taco Bell launched the Taco Bell Cantina flagship store located on the Las Vegas Strip. The 24-hour restaurant serves alcohol, unique menu items, and features a DJ. It was announced in August 2017 that the store would begin hosting weddings. Taco Bell Cantina currently has locations in San Francisco, Berkeley, Chicago (2 locations), Las Vegas, Austin, Fayetteville, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Atlanta, Newport Beach, San Diego, San Jose, Sacramento, Nashville, with them once having plans to open soon in Somerville, Massachusetts, but as of 2025, there are instead Taco Bell Cantinas in Brookline and Allston, Massachusetts. In March 2020, Taco Bell announced that it would be converting 3 of its suburban stores into Cantinas this year as part of a test run.\nIn March 2016, Taco Bell introduced private beta testing of an artificial intelligence bot on the messaging platform Slack designed to take orders of select menu items from local Taco Bell locations and have the orders delivered. Taco Bell planned to have a wider roll-out of this functionality in the coming months.\nPreviously, Taco Bell's hot sauces were only available in packets at the chain itself. In February 2014, Taco Bell made its hot sauces available at grocery stores, sold in bottles. These would be followed by further grocery store products including chips in May 2018 and shredded cheese in 2019. In September 2016, Taco Bell opened a pop-up in New York City in the SoHo, Manhattan area called the Taco Bell VR Arcade. Taco Bell and VR fans could demo PlayStation VR, games, and food.\nIn 2016, Taco Bell built a restaurant out of five cargo shipping containers for the Texas music festival, South by Southwest. Due to popularity, the franchise decided to move the restaurant to a lot in South Gate, California, and it opened to the public a year later. The restaurant features Taco Bell's full menu, with outdoor seating, a walk-up window, and a drive-thru, but no indoor seating unlike regular Taco Bell locations. Taco Bell announced plans in November 2017 to open 300 more urban and Cantina-style locations by 2022, with 50 to be located about New York City's five boroughs. In 2019, Taco Bell opened a pop-up hotel called \"The Bell: A Taco Bell Hotel and Resort\" for one weekend in August. Upon the announcement, the hotel was booked up in two minutes.\nTaco Bell announced plans to stay in its current corporate headquarters in Irvine until 2030.\nMenu and advertising.\nThe first Taco Bell commercials premiered in 1968, featuring advertisements with Mel Blanc, Pat Harrington, and the then-host of \"Truth or Consequences\", Bob Barker.\nIn 1992, Johnny Cash starred in a television commercial for Taco Bell's value menu.\nIn 1993, Taco Bell was part of product placement for the movie \"Demolition Man\" and updated their currently used logo.\nFrom August 1997 to July 2000, Gidget the Chihuahua was the brand's advertising mascot, a campaign developed by TBWA. Voiced by Carlos Alazraqui, slogans included \u201c\u00a1Yo quiero Taco Bell\u201d (I want Taco Bell!), \u201cDrop the Chalupa,\u201d and \u201c\u00a1Viva Gorditas!\u201d All became catchphrases in popular culture.\nIn 2000, \"Taco Bell: Tasty Temple Challenge\" was released for DOS by Taco Bell as the publisher and developed by BrandGames as a kid-friendly first-person 3D action shooter with gameplay similar to that of \"Doom\" and \"Wolfenstein 3D\" in terms of combat and exploration, serving as an advertisement for the brand. The player controls Baja Bill, who explores a temple of a lost jungle civilization, battling snakes and scorpions with Taco Bell's hot and wild sauce. Food from the brand also appears in game and is used to replenish the protagonist's health.\nIn March 2001, Taco Bell announced a promotion to coincide with the re-entry of the Mir space station. They towed a large target out into the Pacific Ocean, announcing that if the target was hit by a falling piece of Mir, every person in the United States would be entitled to a free Taco Bell taco. The company bought a sizable insurance policy for this gamble. No piece of the station struck the target.\nIn 2004, a local Taco Bell franchisee bought the naming rights to the Boise State Pavilion in Boise, Idaho, and renamed the stadium Taco Bell Arena. Also, in 2004, Mountain Dew offered Taco Bell stores the exclusive right to carry Mountain Dew Baja Blast, a tropical lime flavor of the popular soft drink.\nIn 2005, Taco Bell released the menu item called the Crunchwrap Supreme as a limited-time offer. Due to its success, the Crunchwrap Supreme was made a permanent menu offering in 2006.\nIn 2007, Taco Bell first offered the \"Steal a Base, Steal a Taco\" promotion\u2014if any player from either team stole a base in the World Series, the company would give away free tacos to everyone in the United States in a campaign similar to the Mir promotion, albeit with a much higher likelihood of being realized. After Jacoby Ellsbury of the Boston Red Sox stole a base in Game 2, the company made good on the promotion on October 30, 2007. The promotion has subsequently been offered in multiple World Series.\nTaco Bell sponsors a promotion at home games for both the Portland Trail Blazers and the Cleveland Cavaliers in which everyone in attendance receives a coupon for a free Chalupa if the home team scores 100 points or more.\nIn 2009, Taco Bell introduced a music video style commercial entitled \"It's all about the Roosevelts\"; the video was composed and produced by Danny de Matos at his studio for Amber Music on behalf of DraftFCB Agency. Featuring, Varsity Fanclub's Bobby Edner, the rap music style commercial shows a group of friends gathering change as they drive toward Taco Bell. The commercial represents Taco Bell's first foray into movie theater advertising, featuring the ad during the opening previews of \"\" and \"Public Enemies\" as well as screens in some movie theater lobbies.\nOn July 1, 2009, Taco Bell replaced 20-year sponsor McDonald's as the fast-food partner of the NBA. Taco Bell and the NBA agreed on a four-year deal allowing them to advertise on ABC, TNT, and ESPN, and NBA-themed promotions. On July 21, 2009, Gidget, the Chihuahua featured in Taco Bell ads in the late 1990s, was euthanized after suffering a stroke. She was 15 years old. 2009 commercials for the \"Frutista Freeze\" frozen drink feature Snowball, an Eleonora cockatoo noted for his ability to dance to human music. In an effort to promote its $2 Meal Deals, Taco Bell started a Facebook group in June 2010 to collect signatures on a petition that appeals to the Federal Reserve to produce more two-dollar bills.\nA large advertising push by Taco Bell had begun in late February 2011 in response to a consumer protection lawsuit filed against the company by an Alabama law firm. The promotion sought to counter allegations that the company falsely advertised the ratio of ingredients in its beef filling for its tacos. The spots featured employees and franchisees stating that the filling has always been a mixture of 88% beef and various spices and binders and nothing else. The ad followed several full-page print ads in the \"New York Times\" and other newspapers that featured the headline \"Thank you for suing us.\" Additionally, the chain added a new social campaign using Twitter and Facebook. The company invested heavily in the campaign, spending more than $3 million (USD) putting out its message\u2014about 20 percent more than the company usually spends on an advertising program. The various campaigns came shortly before the company began its official response to the suit in the United States District Court for the Central District of California and were designed to bring public opinion into their camp. Various analysts stated that the company would have been better off using a grass-root campaign that involved in store advertising and other non-broadcast media. The suit was eventually withdrawn, and the company continued its advertising response by publicly requesting an apology from the suing firm of Beasley Allen. Analyst Laura Ries, of marketing strategy firm Ries &amp; Ries, stated she believed Taco Bell's latest response was a mistake. She commented that reviving memories of a suit that the majority of the public had forgotten after the initial burst of publicity was the wrong strategy from Taco Bell.\nIn March 2012, Taco Bell teamed up with Frito-Lay and created the Doritos Locos Tacos, which is a taco with a Dorito Nacho Cheese flavored taco shell. In May 2012, Taco Bell released a drink named Mountain Dew A.M, a mixture of Mountain Dew and orange juice. On June 6, 2012, Taco Bell announced it would be testing a new \"Cantina Menu\" with upscale items in their Kentucky and California restaurants. The new menu was created by celebrity chef Lorena Garcia, and featured the addition of: Black Beans; Cilantro Rice; Citrus &amp; Herb Marinated Chicken; and Cilantro Dressing.\nThe \"Cool Ranch Doritos Taco\", became available to order on March 7, 2013. Shortly before its release, Taco Bell launched a promotion advertising that fans could get the new flavor at its stores a day early if they \"just asked\" on March 6. However, they neglected to inform the majority of their stores of this \u2013 leading to numerous complaints on its social media accounts and news sites from disappointed consumers who were unable to obtain the new taco.\nOn July 23, 2013, Taco Bell announced they were discontinuing the sale of kids' meals and accompanying toys at all of their U.S.\u2013based restaurants by January 2014. Some outlets ceased their sale as early as July 2013.\nOn August 6, 2013, the chain announced it was expanding its test market of \"Waffle Tacos\" to \u2248100 restaurants in Fresno, California, Omaha, Nebraska, and Chattanooga, Tennessee, beginning on August 8 of that year. The Waffle Taco included scrambled eggs, sausage, and a side of syrup. It was the top\u2013selling item during breakfast hours at the five Southern California restaurants where they had been test\u2013released earlier in 2013. The breakfast menu started on March 27, 2014. Other items include: the A.M. Crunchwrap, Cinnabon Delights, Breakfast Burrito, A.M. Grilled Sausage Flatbread Melt, Hash Browns, Coffee and Orange Juice. The ad\u2013campaign, which began March 27, used twenty-five men who were named Ronald McDonald, a reference to the famous clown mascot of McDonald's. Another commercial advertisement for the Waffle Taco features the narrator singing, \"I've been eating Egg McMuffins since 1984. But when I saw Taco Bell made a Waffle Taco, I figured I would get with the times\" set to the tune of \"Old MacDonald Had a Farm\"\u2014 another shot at McDonald's.\nOn April 28, 2014, Taco Bell ridiculed McDonald's for its \"out\u2013dated muffins\", in a breakfast campaign devised by Taylor. The advertisement stated the claim that the McMuffin belonged in 1984. In October 2014, Taco Bell launched the \"Pink Strawberry Starburst Freeze\" beverage for a limited time. In August 2016, Taco Bell brought back its Pink Strawberry Starburst Freeze. In October 2015, Taco Bell launched a certified vegetarian menu.\nIn August 2016, Taco Bell announced it would begin testing a mashup known as Cheetos Burritos at select Taco Bell restaurants On September 19, 2016, Taco Bell launched Airheads Freeze, a drink inspired by the candy Airheads White Mystery, and allow people to guess its flavor on social media. On September 15, 2016, Taco Bell introduced the Cheddar Habanero Quesarito, a quesadilla shelled burrito. In April 2017, Taco Bell announced that it would begin testing the Naked Breakfast Taco in Flint, Michigan in mid-April. The breakfast taco, which uses a fried egg as the shell for potato bites, nacho cheese, shredded cheddar, and bacon or sausage crumble.\nIn 2017, the company released the Naked Chicken Chalupa that uses a chalupa shell made from chicken, using a similar idea to the Double Down and later that year the Naked Chicken Chips, which are chicken nuggets shaped like chips with nacho cheese. In July 2017, Taco Bell announced a partnership with Lyft in which Lyft passengers in Orange County, California, can request \"Taco Mode\" on their way to their destination from 9 PM to 2 AM, having a stop at Taco Bell. The program was cancelled after much negative feedback from drivers.\nOn September 21, 2018, Taco Bell announced National Taco Day celebrating its global reach outside of the United States, to be celebrated in 20 countries.\nIn January 2019, Taco Bell nearly doubled its television advertising spending to US$64 million. In September 2019, Taco Bell revamped its menu for the fall season.\nIn July 2020, Taco Bell announced the Grilled Cheese Burrito. The burrito is a recurring menu item that occasionally reappears for a limited time.\nIn January 2021, Taco Bell announced the return of potatoes to the menu after a brief discontinuation in August 2020 in efforts to streamline processes in their restaurants in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to the potatoes, the company had announced plans to expand their vegetarian menu by introducing Beyond Meat as a plant-based vegetarian customization option. In April 2021, Taco Bell said that it would start reusing hot sauce packets in partnership with the recycling company TerraCycle, aiming to reduce the environmental pollution. In August 2021, Taco Bell announced the Crispy Chicken Sandwich Taco.\nOn January 6, 2022, Taco Bell launched a digital taco subscription service called the Taco Lover's Pass through the company app. For the cost of $10, a customer can order one of seven different tacos each day for 30 consecutive days. On April 18, 2022, Taco Bell announced that Mexican Pizza would return to its menu on May 19, after its having previously been discontinued in November 2020.\nFrom July to August 2022, filmmaker Sam Reid ate nothing but Taco Bell for 30 days, testing the nutritional content of the food in a similar vein to \"Super Size Me\". The stunt gained widespread national attention for both Sam and the fast food chain, including multiple news stations covering his diet and a mention by Jimmy Fallon on The Tonight Show. Reid published a documentary about the challenge on his YouTube channel in October the same year. While the 30-day stunt was not an officially endorsed marketing campaign by Taco Bell, then CEO Mark King later invited Reid to Taco Bell's headquarters in Irvine, California. Reid was also a guest on an official Taco Bell podcast in 2023, discussing the stunt and its effect on his physical health.\nIn 2023, the company test-marketed a vegan Crunchwrap Supreme in Los Angeles, New York, and Orlando to gauge the potential of a national roll out. \"Bon App\u00e9tit\" tested a vegan Crunchwrap alongside a non-vegan Crunchwrap purchased at the store in midtown Manhattan and said \"the differences between the two were also genuinely difficult to discern.\"\nOn August 29, 2025, the company announced that it would be abrogating its artificial intelligence-powered drive-thrus due to technical difficulties and \"trolling,\" including one instance where a customer ordered 18,000 waters. According to reports, the AI would erroneously tell customers that the store was out of all ingredients except for soda and sauce packets. There were also reports of the AI bots simply disallowing customers to modify their orders, such as replacing meat with beans. The phenomenon quickly became an internet meme. One video on TikTok appeared to show a customer attempting to order McDonald's food items from Taco Bell, which was allowed by the system. Dane Mathews, the chain's Chief Digital and Technology Officer, told the \"Wall Street Journal\": \"We\u2019re learning a lot, I\u2019m going to be honest with you. [...] I can tell you it's a very active conversation inside Taco Bell in partnership with our franchisees. I think at the end of the day, it's really, really early. And we feel that. And I think other brands feel that, too.\" Taco Bell stated that it was seeking to address the situation with a \"hybrid approach.\"\nDollar Cravings.\nOn August 18, 2014, Taco Bell launched a new value menu called Dollar Cravings. Replacing the old Why Pay More menu, Dollar Cravings featured thirteen food items all priced at a United States dollar.\nIt was renamed \"Cravings Value Menu\", when prices were increased on some of the items. In April 2019, they introduced a \"loaded nacho taco\" for a dollar. As of January 2024, the company featured 10 items.\nDiscontinued menu items.\nOne of Taco Bell's original 1962 menu items was the Chiliburger, renamed the Bell Burger in 1969, then the Bell Beefer in 1979; this was a loose meat sandwich originally filled with taco-seasoned ground beef in mild red sauce with shredded lettuce and diced onion served on a steamed hamburger bun. Later, shredded cheese and diced tomato were added to the sandwich. Taco Bell discontinued the Bell Beefer around 1986 to maintain a more typical Tex-Mex-inspired menu.\nOther discontinued Taco Bell menu items include the Enchirito (name revived for a different menu item); Taco Lite; Taco Grande; Chilito (Chili Cheese Burrito); Beefy Crunch Burrito; Beefy Melt Burrito; Seafood Salad; Chicken Fiesta Burrito; Potatorito; Volcano Taco; BLT Taco; Cheesarito; Cinnamon Crispas; Nacho Crunch Grilled Stuft Burrito; Chicken Caesar Grilled Stuft Burrito; Grilled Stuft Nacho; Fully Loaded Nachos; Crunchwrap Sliders; Blackjack Taco; Bean Burrito Especial; Border Ices; and the Meximelt.\nIn September 2019, Taco Bell made new changes to its menu. Items discontinued include the Beefy Mini Quesadilla; Chips and Salsa; Chipotle Chicken Loaded Griller; Double Decker Taco; Cool Ranch and Fiery Doritos Locos Tacos; Double Tostada; Power Menu Burrito, and the XXL Grilled Stuft Burrito.\nAs of August\u00a013, 2020[ [update]], the menu underwent another update as part of their efforts to streamline processes in their restaurants in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, discontinuing the following items: Grilled Steak Soft Taco; 7-Layer Burrito; Nachos Supreme; Beefy Fritos Burrito; Spicy Tostada; Triple Layer Nachos; Cheesy Fiesta Potatoes; Loaded Grillers, both Cheesy Potato and Beefy Nacho; Chips &amp; Dips; and Mini Skillet Bowl.\nInternational operations.\nBetween 2010 and 2023 the number of outlets grew every year:\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn 2003, Taco Bell entered the Chinese market by opening a restaurant in the Shanghai People's Square, named \"Taco Bell Grande\". Three more TBG restaurants opened before they were closed in 2008. Taco Bell relaunched in the Chinese market when a store opened in Pudong, Shanghai, in late 2016. As of March 2024, Taco Bell has 90 outlets in China.\nIndia.\nIndia's first Taco Bell outlet opened at the Mantri Square mall in Bangalore in 2010. Taco Bell announced an exclusive national master franchise agreement with Burman Hospitality on May 15, 2019. The chain operated 35 outlets across India as on the same date. Yum! Brands stated that it planned to open 600 new Taco Bell outlets in India by 2029.\nIndonesia.\nTaco Bell opened its first Indonesian restaurant in South Jakarta on December 18, 2020. As of 2022, Taco Bell has since opened three more restaurants in Indonesia, all located in Jakarta.\nMalaysia.\nTaco Bell opened its first Malaysian store in Cyberjaya, Sepang on April 2, 2021. It then opened its second store in Bandar Sri Permaisuri, Kuala Lumpur followed by Tropicana Gardens Mall and Setiawangsa outlets. In early 2022, Taco Bell opened up in Wangsa Maju, Sunway Pyramid, Puchong and has continued in expanding to other states as well. It currently has 13 stores scattered across Klang Valley.\nJapan.\nTaco Bell once operated shops in Tokyo and Nagoya in the 1980s but withdrew several years later. Since then, there were shops only at United States Forces Japan bases. In 2015, Taco Bell returned to the Japanese market with a new shop in the downtown area of Shibuya, Tokyo. It had \"Taco rice\" and \"Shrimp and avocado burrito\" on its original menu.\nPhilippines.\nTaco Bell opened its first Philippine branch in October 2004, at the Gateway Mall in Cubao, Quezon City. As of 2023 there are some outlets in the Manila/Quezon City area.\nSingapore.\nTaco Bell in Singapore existed for a number of years, mostly as combination stores with KFC such as the one that operated at the Funan Digital Life Mall, but in 2008, Taco Bell completely pulled out of Singapore.\nSouth Korea.\nThere are currently two locations in Seoul, in the Itaewon and Hongdae districts, which attract the most foreigners and college students. The two branches opened in the summer of 2010, Itaewon's branch coming first. A Taco Bell had long been a presence at the U.S. Army's Yongsan Garrison, which is off-limits to non-military personnel, and for a time there was a tongue-in-cheek grassroots campaign by non-Korean, non-military foreigners in Seoul to get another Taco Bell location.\nSri Lanka.\nIn July 2017, Taco Bell opened an outlet in Colombo, Sri Lanka.\nThailand.\nThere are branches in Bangkok and Pattaya.\nEurope.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nFirst Taco Bell opened in Ilid\u017ea near Sarajevo on October 17, 2024. As of December 2024, there is another branch located in Sarajevo City Center.\nCyprus.\nA Taco Bell opened in Cyprus in December 2009 in Limassol in the MY MALL Limassol. Additionally there are stores in Paphos, Nicosia and Larnaca.\nFinland.\nOn June 15, 2017, Finnish restaurant company Restel announced that it is bringing Taco Bell to Finland. The first restaurant opened in central Helsinki on November 9, 2017. Restaurants in Sello and Iso Omena malls in Espoo opened later in November 2017. Finland is the first country to include pulled oats (a meat substitute) in the menu. In 2019, the Taco bell expanded outside the Helsinki metropolitan area to Lappeenranta and Turku. In July 2021, a new branch was opened in Oulu. As of November 2022 there are 16 Taco Bell restaurants in Finland, most of them in the Helsinki metropolitan area.\nGermany.\nTaco Bell planned to open its first German location in Berlin in July or August 2024. Once established, the franchise company \u0130\u015f Holding (ISH) planned to open 100 to 150 Taco Bell restaurants in Germany within the next five years. Initially, the opening of the first locations in Berlin were delayed until the summer of 2025. In early May 2025, the planned opening of Taco Bell in Germany was canceled after Yum! Brands had already decided to terminate the franchise agreement with ISH back in January after difficulties were experienced in how ISH operated in the German and Turkish markets. The operations of KFC and Pizza Hut Germany remain unaffected after being transferred back directly to Yum!.\nGibraltar.\nThe first and only Taco Bell store in Gibraltar was opened in 2024.\nGreece.\nGreece's first Taco Bell opened in Athens upon the grand opening of the newly constructed Athens Metro Mall on November 30, 2010. The restaurant closed in August 2012 and the chain withdrew from the Greek market due to the country's recession.\nHowever, Taco Bell has returned to Greece and the first new location in the country opened on September 3, 2025, in Chalandri, a suburb in North Athens in the Attica region, with more locations to follow.\nIreland.\nOn May 13, 2025, it was announced that the first Taco Bell restaurant in Ireland would open in the summer of the same year in partnership with Applegreen, with more locations to follow. The first restaurant opened on 16 September 2025 in a new motorway service station off Junction 6 on the M3 in Dunshaughlin, County Meath.\nNetherlands.\nOn April 4, 2017, Taco Bell opened its first restaurant in Eindhoven, Netherlands. On October 12, Taco Bell opened another restaurant in Tilburg. A third restaurant has opened in Breda.\nThe 10th Taco Bell restaurant in the Netherlands opened in Leidsche Rijn, Utrecht on January 11, 2024. This Taco Bell is also the first Taco Bell restaurant worldwide to use batteries to store energy in case the demanded energy is higher than the power grid is able to handle.\nIn July 2025, Taco Bell was declared bankrupt in the Netherlands for the second time in seven years, which resulted in the immediate closure of all 10 of its restaurants in the Netherlands.\nPortugal.\nThe first Taco Bell store was opened in 2019, with 11 restaurants spread across the country in 2021.\nRomania.\nThe first Taco Bell store opened in Romania's capital, Bucharest, on October 12, 2017, and by the end of 2024, it had expanded to 16 locations nationwide.\nSerbia.\nTaco Bell opened its first store in Serbia, in the capital city of Belgrade, on November 20, 2025, at the U\u0161\u0107e Shopping Center. Serbia is the second country of the former Yugoslavia in which Taco Bell is present.\nSpain.\nSpain is the most important market for Taco Bell in Europe. The outlets are in various towns on the mainland, on Mallorca and on the Canary Islands. There are 119 Taco Bell branches by early 2024, more than twice than in 2017 when Taco Bell had 32 branches in Spain. The first Taco Bell in Spain was opened at Naval Station Rota in 2004 and is available only to those authorized to access the naval base. The first Taco Bell for the public was opened in the Islazul Shopping Mall, Madrid, in December 2008. Yum! Brands announced that it would open additional restaurants in Spain in early 2009 as part of a test trial for the European market. The second location of Taco Bell in Spain was opened at the La Vaguada Shopping Mall, Madrid in March 2010.\nSweden.\nThe first Taco Bell store in Sweden was opened on November 27, 2025, marking the second Nordic country to receive a Taco Bell.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom was the first European country with a Taco Bell. In 1986, a location was opened in London on Coventry Street (between Leicester Square and Piccadilly Circus) followed by a second location in Earl's Court near the Earl's Court tube station. One other store opened in Uxbridge but all closed in the mid-1990s. In 1994, the university food provider Compass announced plans for outlets on its university and college sites. However, only one store was opened at Birmingham University, which is now closed.\nAfter the Birmingham University branch closed, there were only two Taco Bell branches in the UK, at the Strategic Air Command and United States Air Force bases at RAF Mildenhall and RAF Lakenheath. Access is restricted to relevant service personnel.\nIn the late 2000s, Yum! Brands announced that it was reopening Taco Bell locations in the United Kingdom as part of a large, planned expansion into Europe. Yum! took advantage of the recent great recession which led to increasing sales at other fast food outlets; it also said that there was now a greater awareness of Mexican food in the UK and that it can be successful with improved menu offerings and marketing. The first new store opened at the Lakeside Shopping Centre in Essex on June 28, 2010. Another store opened in Basildon, Essex, on November 29, 2010, and a third in the Manchester Arndale Food Court on November 7, 2011.\nOn March 1, 2013, it was announced that trace amounts of horse meat from a European supplier had been found in various food products, including Taco Bell's beef in the UK. By August 2017, there were 17 Taco Bell branches in the United Kingdom, all of which were in England and outside of London. The first Scottish branch was opened in Glasgow in December 2017. As of June 2019 there are 39 branches in Scotland and England, including three in London. Beginning in October 2019, Taco Bell locations in the UK began serving Doritos Locos Tacos.\nOn March 2, 2020, the first Welsh Taco Bell branch was opened in Cardiff.\nMore recently, in November 2021, Taco Bell opened its 77th UK store, and a return to the British Midlands with a store in The Royal Town of Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham.\nIn August 2022 a Taco Bell was opened in Torquay, Devon, the second in the county after Plymouth. As of 2024 there are now more than 130 locations in the UK.\nMiddle East.\nA Taco Bell opened in the United Arab Emirates in November 2008 in Dubai at the Dubai Mall. A fourth UAE location was also planned for Bawadi Mall in the city of Al Ain. The locations at Dubai Mall, Deira City Centre, and Mirdif City Centre have all closed and Taco Bell has completely pulled out of the Emirati market. Taco Bell is still open in Kuwait and has not been pulled out ever since from the Kuwaiti market, as the chain is franchised in this region by Kout Food Group.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nTaco Bell has been present in Canada since 1979, with the first store opening in Windsor, Ontario. There are currently Taco Bell locations in 7 of the 10 Canadian provinces: British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Taco Bell had operated in the province of Quebec for close to 15 years, however announced its withdrawal on January 6, 2022. For some time it was possible to order draft beer with one's order. Taco Bell offers free soda refills in its stores.\nOn March 31, 2011, Priszm, who was the largest franchisee for Taco Bell locations in Canada, went into bankruptcy protection in Ontario and British Columbia. On May 6, 2011, Priszm Income Fund was delisted from the Toronto Stock Exchange for failure to meet the continued listing requirements. Since then, some Taco Bell restaurants have been closed down including those in Guelph, Hamilton, and Cambridge, Ontario, among others.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nTaco Bell first opened in Australia in September 1981, but Taco Bell was ordered to change its name after the owner of a local restaurant successfully sued Taco Bell for misleading conduct. The local restaurant was called \"Taco Bell's Casa\" and had been operating in Australia since the 1970s. The owner successfully argued that Sydneysiders would confuse the takeaway chain with his restaurant, and this would damage his reputation. Taco Bell later opened in 1997 in Australia with a store in the cinema district on George Street, Sydney and a year later in 1998 within a few KFC stores in the state of New South Wales, but by 2005, the Taco Bell brand was pulled out of the country.\nOn September 13, 2017, Collins Foods announced that Taco Bell would return to the Australian market, with their first store being situated in the Brisbane suburb of Annerley in Queensland using a refurbished Sizzler restaurant which had closed earlier that year. The Annerley store opened on November 4, 2017. In 2018, Collins Foods signed a development deal with Yum! Brands to open over 50 Taco Bell restaurants across Australia between January 2019 and December 2021. A legal dispute with Victoria-based restaurant chain Taco Bill was resolved in February 2020.\nAs of February 2024, there are 39 Taco Bell restaurants across Australia; 12 in New South Wales, 13 in Queensland, nine in Victoria, and four in Western Australia. There are also plans to open restaurants in other locations, such as Canberra, the Central Coast, Port Macquarie and Toowoomba. While the chain has grown nationwide, both of its two outlets in North Queensland closed in November 2022, which were previously locations in Cairns and Townsville. In April 2025, Taco Bell owner Collins Foods announced to exit the Australian operations.\nNew Zealand.\nTaco Bell officially opened its first New Zealand location on November 12, 2019, in the suburb of New Lynn, Auckland.\nAs of January 2023, there are 14 Taco Bell restaurants across New Zealand; 10 on the North Island and four on the South Island. By city, there are seven in Auckland, three in Christchurch and one each in Dunedin, Rotorua, Taupiri and Wellington. There are two outlets at airports in New Zealand, one at Auckland Airport and the other at Christchurch Airport.\nTerritories of the United States.\nTaco Bell operates several stores in Guam.\nTaco Bell operates one restaurant in the Northern Mariana Islands, located on the island of Saipan.\nIn 2005 Taco Bell started the permitting process to set up a restaurant in American Samoa in Pago Pago.\nTaco Bell also operates stores in Puerto Rico.\nSouth America.\nThere are outlets in Brazil in the S\u00e3o Paulo area, Campinas, Rio de Janeiro and Bras\u00edlia.\nTaco Bell has stores in Chile, which many of them are operated in conjunction (and in the same facilities) with Pizza Hut. All Taco Bell stores are in shopping malls located mainly in Santiago.\nPeru has branches in Lima.\nThere were four outlets in the Bogot\u00e1 area in Colombia, but these closed in late 2018.\nTaco Bell operated in Ecuador between 1993 and 2009, it returned to operate on October 7, 2025, in Quito.\nOther countries.\nTaco Bell is present in the Dominican Republic, Aruba, Costa Rica, Panama and Portugal.\nFormer operations.\nIceland.\nTaco Bell in Iceland was operated as a part of the KFC establishment in Hafnarfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur, suburb of Reykjav\u00edk. It was established in late 2006, after the departure of the U.S. Navy from Naval Air Station Keflavik. A second location opened in the \u00c1rt\u00fansh\u00f6f\u00f0i part of Reykjav\u00edk in November 2008. Taco Bell closed its Hafnarfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur location in late 2023.\nMexico.\nTaco Bell has attempted to enter the Mexican market twice. After a highly publicised launch in Mexico City in 1992, all the restaurants were closed two years later. In September 2007, Taco Bell returned to Monterrey, projecting an American image with an Americanized menu that included french fries, but it closed in January 2010 due to low patronage.\nPoland.\nThe first Polish Taco Bell store was opened in 1993. Following an aggressive campaign of expansion, Taco Bell's efforts soon withered, and the chain withdrew from Poland shortly thereafter.\nRussia.\nIn the early 1990s, PepsiCo opened several Taco Bell locations inside the Moscow Metro on, for example, Park Kultury and Komsomolskaya stations. This experiment lasted only a few years. These locations live on under different ownership and a different name.\nMilitary bases.\nThe AAFES provides Taco Bell for military bases in Bahrain, El Salvador, Germany, Guatemala, Iraq Italy, and Kosovo.\nAnimal welfare.\nTaco Bell is subject to the animal welfare standards of its parent company, Yum! Brands.\nIn 2016, Taco Bell stopped sourcing eggs from egg-laying hens raised in battery cages in their US restaurants.\nIn 2024, Taco Bell announced that it would publish benchmarks on moving away from gestation crates in pork production by the end of 2024. However, no such benchmarks were published that year.\nClothing line.\nIn 2017, Forever 21 produced a clothing line in partnership with Taco Bell, featuring branded T-shirts and sweatshirts, as well as bodysuits made to look like Border Sauce packets.\nIn November 2019, Taco Bell announced \"Taco Bell's Taco Shop\", an online store with Taco Bell branded merchandise including hoodies and tees, holiday ornaments, inflatable sauce packets, and wedding-related items.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37566", "revid": "50278128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37566", "title": "Chardonnay", "text": "Variety of grape mainly used to make wine\nChardonnay (, ; ) is a green-skinned grape variety used in the production of white wine. The variety originated in the Burgundy wine region of eastern France, but is now grown wherever wine is produced, from England to New Zealand. For new and developing wine regions, growing Chardonnay is seen as a 'rite of passage' and an easy entry into the international wine market.\nThe Chardonnay grape itself is neutral, with many of the flavors commonly associated with the wine being derived from such influences as \"terroir\" and oak. It is vinified in many different styles, from the lean, crisply mineral wines of Chablis, France, to New World wines with oak and tropical fruit flavors. In cool climates (such as Chablis, the Willamette Valley of Oregon, and the Carneros AVA of California), Chardonnay wine tends to be medium to light body with noticeable acidity and flavors of green plum, apple, and pear. In warmer locations (such as the Adelaide Hills and Mornington Peninsula in Australia and Gisborne and Marlborough region of New Zealand), the flavors become more citrus, peach, and melon, while in very warm locations, more fig and tropical fruit notes such as banana and mango come out. Wines that have gone through malolactic fermentation tend to have softer acidity and fruit flavors with buttery mouthfeel and hazelnut notes.\nChardonnay is an important component of many sparkling wines around the world, including Champagne and Franciacorta in Italy. Chardonnay's popularity peaked in the late 1980s, then gave way to a backlash among those wine connoisseurs who saw the grape as a leading negative component of the globalization of wine. Nonetheless, it is one of the most widely planted grape varieties, with worldwide, second only to Air\u00e9n among white wine grapes and fifth among all wine grapes.\nHistory.\nFor much of its history, a connection was assumed between Chardonnay and Pinot noir or Pinot blanc. In addition to being found in the same region of France for centuries, ampelographers noted that the leaves of these plants have near-identical shape and structure. Pierre Galet disagreed with this assessment, believing that Chardonnay was unrelated to any other major grape variety. Viticulturalists Maynard Amerine and Harold Olmo proposed descent from a wild \"Vitis vinifera\" vine that was a step removed from white Muscat. Chardonnay's true origins were further obscured by vineyard owners in Lebanon and Syria, who claimed that the grape's ancestry could be traced to the Middle East, from where it was introduced to Europe by returning Crusaders. Little external evidence supports this theory. Another theory stated that it originated from an ancient indigenous vine found in Cyprus.\nModern DNA fingerprinting research at University of California, Davis, now suggests that Chardonnay is the result of a cross between the Pinot noir and Gouais blanc (Heunisch) grape varieties. The Romans are thought to have brought Gouais blanc from Croatia, and it was widely cultivated by peasants in eastern France.\nThe Pinot of the French aristocracy grew in close proximity to the Gouais blanc, giving the two ample opportunity to interbreed. Since the two parents were genetically distant, many of the crosses showed hybrid vigour and were selected for further propagation. These \"successful\" crosses included Chardonnay and siblings such as Aligot\u00e9, Aubin vert, Auxerrois, Bachet noir, Beaunoir, Franc Noir de la-Haute-Sa\u00f4ne, Gamay Blanc Gloriod, Gamay noir, Melon, Knipperl\u00e9, Peurion, Roublot, Sacy, and Dameron.\nClones, crossing, and mutations.\nAs of 2006, 34 clonal varieties of Chardonnay could be found in vineyards throughout France; most of these were developed at the University of Burgundy in Dijon. The so-called \"Dijon clones\" are bred for their adaptive attributes, with vineyard owners planting the clonal variety best suited to their \"terroir\" and which will produce the characteristics that they are seeking in the wine. Examples include the lower-yielding clones 'Dijon-76', '95' and '96' that produce more flavor-concentrated clusters. 'Dijon-77' and '809' produce more aromatic wines with a \"grapey\" perfume, while 'Dijon-75', '78', '121', '124', '125' and '277' are more vigorous and higher-yielding clones. New World varieties include the 'Mendoza' clone, which produced some of the early California Chardonnays. The 'Mendoza' clone is prone to develop \"millerandage\", also known as \"hens and chicks\", where the berries develop unevenly. In places such as Oregon, the use of newer Dijon clones has had some success in those regions of the Willamette Valley with climates similar to that of Burgundy.\nChardonnay has served as parent to several French-American hybrid grapes, as well as crossings with other \"V. vinifera\" varieties. Examples include the hybrid Chardonel, which was a Chardonnay and Seyval blanc cross produced in 1953 at the New York State Agricultural Experiment Station. Mutations of the Chardonnay grape include the rare pink-berried 'Chardonnay Rose'; also 'Chardonnay Blanc Musqu\u00e9', which produces an intensely aromatic wine. Chardonnay Blanc Musqu\u00e9 is mostly found around the M\u00e2connais village of Cless\u00e9 and sometimes confused with the 'Dijon-166' clone planted in South Africa, which yields Muscat-like aromas.\nIn the 1930s, Chardonnay was crossed with a Seibel grape to create the hybrid grape Ravat blanc.\nViticulture.\nChardonnay has a wide-ranging reputation for relative ease of cultivation and ability to adapt to different conditions. The grape is very \"malleable\", in that it reflects and takes on the impression of its \"terroir\" and winemaker. It is a highly vigorous vine, with extensive leaf cover which can inhibit the energy and nutrient uptake of its grape clusters. Vineyard managers counteract this with aggressive pruning and canopy management. When Chardonnay vines are planted densely, they are forced to compete for resources and funnel energy into their grape clusters. In certain conditions, the vines can be very high-yielding, but the wine produced from such vines suffers a drop in quality if yields go much beyond 80 hl/ha (4.5 tons per acre). Producers of premium Chardonnay limit yields to less than half this amount. Sparkling wine producers tend not to focus as much on limiting yields, since concentrated flavors are not as important as the wine's finesse.\nHarvesting time is crucial to winemaking, with the grape rapidly losing acidity as soon as it ripens. Some viticultural hazards include the risk of damage from springtime frost, as Chardonnay is an early-budding vine \u2013 usually a week after Pinot noir. To combat the threat of frost, a method developed in Burgundy involves aggressive pruning just prior to budburst. This \"shocks\" the vine and delays budburst up to two weeks, which is often long enough for warmer weather to arrive. \"Millerandage\" and \"coulure\" can also pose problems, along with powdery mildew attacking the thin skin of the grapes. Because of Chardonnay's early ripening, it can thrive in wine regions with short growing seasons, and in regions such as Burgundy, can be harvested before autumn rain sets in and brings the threat of rot.\nWhile Chardonnay can adapt to almost all vineyard soils, the three it seems to like most are chalk, clay, and limestone, all very prevalent throughout Chardonnay's traditional \"homeland\". The Grand crus of Chablis are planted on hillsides composed of Kimmeridgian marl, limestone, and chalk. The outlying regions, falling under the more basic \"Petit Chablis\" appellation, are planted on portlandian limestone which produces wines with less finesse. Chalk beds are found throughout the Champagne region, and the C\u00f4te-d'Or has many areas composed of limestone and clay. In Burgundy, the amount of limestone to which the Chardonnay vines are exposed also seems to have some effect on the resulting wine. In the Meursault region, the \"premier cru\" vineyards planted at Meursault-Charmes have topsoil almost above limestone and the resulting wines are very rich and rounded. In the nearby Les Perri\u00e8res vineyard, the topsoil is only around above the limestone and the wine from that region is much more powerful, minerally, and tight, needing longer in the bottle to develop fully. In other areas, soil type can compensate for lack of ideal climate conditions. In South Africa, for example, regions with stonier, shaley soils and high clay levels tend to produce lower-yielding and more Burgundian-style wine, despite having a discernibly warmer climate than France. In contrast, South African Chardonnay produced from more sandstone-based vineyards tend to be richer and more weighty.\nConfusion with Pinot blanc.\nDue to some ampelographical similarities, Pinot blanc and Chardonnay were often mistaken for each other and even today share many of the same synonyms. The grape vines, leaves, and clusters look identical at first glance, but some subtle differences are seen. The most visible of these can be observed as the grapes are ripening, with Chardonnay grapes taking on a more golden-green color than Pinot blanc grapes. On closer inspection, the grapevine shows slight differences in the texture and length of the hairs on the vine's shoot, and the veins of a Chardonnay leaf are \"naked\" near the petiolar sinus \u2013 the open area where the leaf connects to the stem is delineated by veins at the edge. Cabernet Sauvignon is one of the few other \"Vitis vinifera\" grape vines to share this characteristic. This confusion between Pinot blanc and Chardonnay was very pervasive throughout northern Italy, where the two vines grew interspersed in the vineyard and were blended in winemaking. The Italian government did not dispatch researchers to try to distinguish the two vines until 1978. A similar situation occurred in France, with the two vines being commonly confused until the mid-19th century, when ampelographers began combing through the vineyards of Chablis and Burgundy, identifying the true Chardonnay and weeding out the Pinot blanc.\nFrance.\nIn France, Chardonnay is the second-most widely planted white grape variety just behind Ugni blanc and ahead of S\u00e9millon and Sauvignon blanc. The grape first rose to prominence in the Chablis and Burgundy regions. In Champagne, it is most often blended with Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier, but is also used to produce single varietal \"blanc de blancs\" styles of sparkling wine. Chardonnay can be found in \"Appellation d'origine contr\u00f4l\u00e9e\" (AOC) wines of the Loire Valley and Jura wine region, as well as the \"vin de pays\" wines of the Languedoc.\nBurgundy.\nChardonnay is one of the dominant grapes in Burgundy, though Pinot noir vines outnumber it by nearly a three-to-one ratio. In addition to Chablis, Chardonnay is found in the C\u00f4te d'Or (largely in the C\u00f4te de Beaune), as well as the C\u00f4te Chalonnaise and M\u00e2connais. It is grown in eight \"grand cru\" vineyards; The \"Montrachets\"-Montrachet, Criots-B\u00e2tard-Montrachet, B\u00e2tard-Montrachet, Chevalier-Montrachet, and Bienvenues-B\u00e2tard-Montrachet, as well as Charlemagne, Corton-Charlemagne, and Le Musigny. In addition to being the most expensive, the Burgundy examples of Chardonnay were long considered the benchmark standard of expressing \"terroir\" through Chardonnay. The Montrachets are noted for their high alcohol levels, often above 13%, as well as deep concentration of flavors. The vineyards around Chassagne-Montrachet tend to have a characteristic hazelnut aroma to them, while those of Puligny-Montrachet have more steely flavors. Both \"grand cru\" and \"premier cru\" examples from Corton-Charlemagne have been known to demonstrate marzipan, while Meursault wines tend to be the most round and buttery examples.\nSouth of the C\u00f4te d'Or are the C\u00f4te Chalonnaise and M\u00e2connais wine regions. The villages of Mercurey, Montagny-l\u00e8s-Buxy, and Rully are the largest producers of Chardonnay in the C\u00f4te Chalonnaise, with the best-made examples rivaling those of the C\u00f4te de Beaune. In the M\u00e2connais, white wine production is centered on the town of M\u00e2con and the Pouilly-Fuiss\u00e9 region. The full-bodied wines of the Pouilly-Fuiss\u00e9 have long held cult wine status with prices that can rival the \"grand cru\" white burgundies. Further south, in the region of Beaujolais, Chardonnay has started to replace Aligot\u00e9 as the main white wine grape and is even replacing Gamay in some areas around Saint-V\u00e9ran. With the exception of Pouilly-Fuiss\u00e9, the wines of the M\u00e2connais are the closest Burgundy example to \"New World\" Chardonnay, though it is not identical. Typically, M\u00e2con blanc, basic Bourgogne, Beaujolais blanc, and Saint-V\u00e9ran are meant to be consumed within two to three years of release. However, many of the well-made examples of white Burgundy from the C\u00f4te d'Or need at least three years in the bottle to develop enough to express the aromas and character of the wine. Hazelnut, licorice, and spice are some of the flavors that can develop as these wines age.\nChablis.\nChardonnay is the only permitted AOC grape variety in the Chablis region, with the wines there developing such worldwide recognition that the name \"Chablis\" has taken on somewhat generic connotations to mean any dry white wine, even those not made from Chardonnay. The name is protected in the European Union and for wine sold in the EU, \"Chablis\" refers only to the Chardonnay wine produced in this region of the Yonne \"\". The region sits on the outer edges of the Paris Basin. On the other side of the basin is the village of Kimmeridge in England, which gives its name to the Kimmeridgean soil that is located throughout Chablis. The French describe this soil as \"argilo-calcaire\" and is a composition of clay, limestone, and fossilized oyster shells. The most expensive examples of Chardonnay from Chablis come from the seven Grand Cru vineyards that account for around on the southwest side of one slope along the Serein River near the towns of Chablis\u2014Blanchots, Bougros, Les Clos, Grenouilles, Preuses, Valmur, and Vaud\u00e9sir. The wines from these crus most often capture the \"go\u00fbt de pierre \u00e0 fusil\" or \"gunflint\" quality that is characteristic of Chablis wine.\nChardonnay was believed to be first planted in Chablis by the Cistercians at Pontigny Abbey in the 12th century. Today, the Chardonnay made in the Chablis region is one of the \"purest\" expression of the varietal character of the grape due to the simplistic style of winemaking favored in this region. Chablis winemakers want to emphasise the \"terroir\" of the calcareous soil and cooler climate that help maintain high acidity. The wines rarely go through malolactic fermentation or are exposed to oak (though its use is increasing). The biting, green apple-like acidity is a trademark of Chablis and can be noticeable in the bouquet. The acidity can mellow with age and Chablis are some of the longest-living examples of Chardonnay. Some examples of Chablis can have an earthy \"wet stone\" flavor that can get mustier as it ages before mellowing into delicate honeyed notes. The use of oak is controversial in the Chablis community, with some winemakers dismissing it as counter to the \"Chablis style\" or \"terroir\", while others embrace its use, though not to the length that would characterise a \"New World\" Chardonnay. The winemakers who use oak tend to favor more neutral oak that does not impart the vanilla characteristic associated with American oak. The amount of \"char\" in the barrel is often very light, which limits the amount of \"toastiness\" perceived in the wine. The advocates of oak in Chablis point to the positive benefits of allowing limited oxygenation with the wine through the permeable oak barrels. This can have the effect of softening the wine and making the generally austere and acidic Chablis more approachable at a younger age.\nChampagne.\nIn the Champagne, Chardonnay is one of three major grape varieties planted in the region. It is most commonly found in the Aube and Marne \"d\u00e9partments\" which, combined with Chablis, accounted for more than half of all plantings of Chardonnay in France during the 20th century. In the C\u00f4te des Blancs (white slope) district of the Marne, Chardonnay thrives on the chalk soil. The three main villages around the C\u00f4te grow Chardonnay that emphasizes certain characteristics that the Champagne producers seek depending on their house style. The village of Avize grows grapes that produce the lightest wines, Cramant makes the most aromatic, and Mesnil produces wines with the most acidity. The C\u00f4te des Blancs is the only district in the Champagne region predominately planted with Chardonnay. In the four other main districts \u2013 Aube, C\u00f4te de S\u00e9zanne, Montagne de Reims, and Vall\u00e9e de la Marne \u2013 Chardonnay lags behind Pinot noir in planting. In the outlying region of Aisne, only Pinot Meunier has a significant presence. Despite being less planted, the \"Blanc de Blancs\" style of Champagne (made from only Chardonnay grapes) is far more commonly produced than \"Blanc de Noirs\". This is partly because Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier produce very coarse and heavy wines that lack the finesse and balance that Chardonnay brings to the mix. Nonsparkling still wine Chardonnay is produced under the Coteaux Champenois AOC. The wine is much more acidic than that of Chablis and is normally made bone-dry.\nDespite receiving the same amount of sunshine as the Chablis region, Chardonnay grapes in Champagne rarely attain full ripeness due to the mean temperature of the region being around , barely above the minimum average temperature needed to ripen grapes. Therefore, the Chardonnay grapes do not fully develop their fruit flavors and the still version of Champagne can taste very \"un-Chardonnay\"-like because of this. However, it does lessen the premium on needing to keep yields low that other wine regions battle, since not much flavor is going to develop in the grapes, anyway. Rather, the element in Chardonnay that Champagne wine-makers look for is the finesse and balance of acidity that it brings to the blend. Some flavors that can emerge from, particularly with extended time on its lees, include creamy and nuttiness with some floral notes.\nOther French regions.\nChampagne, Chablis, and Burgundy account for more than three-fifths of all Chardonnay plantings in France. The next-largest concentration is found in the Languedoc, where it was first planted around the town of Limoux and up to 30% can be blended with Mauzac in the sparkling \"Blanquette de Limoux\". Every year since 1991, Chardonnay production is celebrated in Limoux during the Toques et Clochers festival. By 2000, more than were planted, with many being used for wines under the \"Vin de Pays d'Oc\". These wines were unique in that they were some of the first examples of Chardonnay to be varietally labeled as \"Chardonnay\". Other French wine regions with Chardonnay plantings include Alsace, Ard\u00e8che, Jura, Savoie, and the Loire Valley. In Jura, it is used to create \"vin de paille\" dessert wines. Here, the grape is known as Melon d'Arbois or Gamay blanc and is sometimes blended with Savagnin. It is most widely found in Arbois, C\u00f4tes du Jura, and L'\u00c9toile AOCs. In the Loire, up to 20% of Chardonnay can be included in the Chenin blanc-based wines of \"Anjou blanc\" and more producers are using the grape to soften some of the edges of Chenin blanc. It can also be used in the sparkling wines of Saumur and some Muscadet producers have begun experimenting with oak-aged Chardonnay.\nNorth America.\nIn North America, particularly California, Chardonnay found another region where it could thrive and produce a style of wine noticeably different from that of France. It is the dominant white wine variety of the area, overtaking Riesling in 1990. In the United States, it is found most notably in California, Oregon, Texas, Virginia, and Washington, but also in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Vermont wine. In Canada, Chardonnay is found in British Columbia, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and Quebec., and in Mexico is found in Baja California(Valle de Guadalupe) and in Coahuila(Valle de Parras) states.\nCalifornia.\nThe first successful commercial production of California Chardonnay was from plantings in the Livermore Valley AVA. Wente Vineyards developed a Chardonnay clone that was used to introduce the grape variety in several Californian vineyards throughout the 1940s. In the 1950s, James David Zellerbach, one-time US Ambassador to Italy in Rome, started Hanzell Vineyards winery and dedicated it to making Burgundian-style Chardonnay. His success encouraged other Californian winemakers to follow suit and culminated in Chateau Montelena's victory over Burgundy Chardonnay in the 1976 blind tasting event conducted by French judges known as the Judgment of Paris. In response, the demand for Californian Chardonnay increased and Californian winemakers rushed to increase plantings. In the 1980s, the popularity of Californian Chardonnay increased so much, the number of vines planted in the state eclipsed that of France by 1988. By 2005, nearly accounted for almost 25% of the world's total Chardonnay plantings. The early trend was to imitate the great Burgundy wines, but this soon gave way to more rich buttery and oaked styles. Starting with the 1970s, the focus was on harvesting the grapes at more advanced degrees of ripeness and higher Brix levels. New oak barrels were used to produce wines that were big in body and mouthfeel. Frank J. Prial of \"The New York Times\" was an early critic of this style, particularly because of the lack of \"food friendliness\" that was common with these massive wines. Another criticism of California Chardonnays, and one that has been levied against other Californian wines, is the very high alcohol levels which can make a wine seem out of balance. In recent years, California winemakers have been using process such as reverse osmosis and spinning cones to bring the alcohol levels down to 12 to 14%.\nThe California wine regions that seem to favor producing premium quality Chardonnay are the ones that are most influenced, climatically, by coastal fogs that can slow the ripening of the grape and give it more time to develop its flavors. The regions of Alexander Valley, Los Carneros, Santa Maria Valley, Russian River Valley, and other parts of Sonoma County have shown success in producing wines that reflect more Burgundian styles. Other regions often associated with Chardonnay include Napa Valley, Monterey County, and Santa Barbara County. The California Central Valley is home to many mass-produced Chardonnay brands, as well as box and jug wine production. While the exact style of the wine varies by producer, some of the \"terroir\" characteristics associated with California Chardonnay include \"flinty\" notes with the Russian River Valley and mango and guava from Monterey. A large portion of the Californian sparkling wine industry uses Chardonnay grapes from Carneros, Alexander, and Russian River valleys, with these areas attracting the attention of Champagne producers such as Bollinger, Louis Roederer, Mo\u00ebt et Chandon, and the Taittinger family, which have opened up wineries in last few decades.\nNew York.\nChardonnay was one of the first European grape varieties to have been grown commercially east of the Rocky Mountains. After three centuries of failure with \"V. vinifera\", this achievement was realized in the Finger Lakes region of upstate New York. Frenchman Charles Fournier and Russian Konstantin Frank experimented with Chardonnay and other varietals in hopes of producing sparkling wines based on Old World grapes for the Gold Seal wine company. In the late 1950s, they succeeded in harvesting the first commercial quantities of European grapes in eastern North America. Frank went on to found Konstantin Frank Vinifera Wine Cellars which helped demonstrate that a winery in the eastern US can produce European-style wines as a basis for a winery business. Chardonnay became an important part of that strategy.\nNew York, like Burgundy and Washington, is a cool-climate viticultural region. Being cold tolerant, the Chardonnay grape is well suited for New York. Not only can it endure its cold winters, but also buds late, reducing the risk of spring frosts. New York's comparatively cooler growing season causes slower ripening, requiring a longer time on the vine, which allows the grapes to develop greater complexity and character at more reasonable sugar levels than warmer Chardonnay-producing regions. New York has subsequently developed significant plantings of the variety since Fournier and Frank's early experiments.\nOther states.\nWashington Chardonnays can be very similar to Californian Chardonnays, but tend to have more emphasis on fruit than creaminess. In 2000, it was the most widely planted premium wine grape in the state. Rather than using Dijon clones, Washington vineyards are planted with clones developed at the University of California-Davis that are designed to take longer to ripen in the warmer weather of the state's wine regions. This allows winemakers to maintain the acidity levels that balance the fruity and flint earthiness that have characterized Washington Chardonnay. Apple notes are common, and depending on producer and appellation, can range from flavors of 'Golden Delicious' and 'Fuji' to 'Gala' and 'Jonathan'. In Oregon, the introduction of Dijon clones from Burgundy has helped to adapt the grape to the Oregon climate and soils.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, Chardonnay has seen some success with rich, oaky styles produced in Ontario and lighter styles produced in Quebec and British Columbia. In 2009, Le Clos Jordanne winery, of Jordan Village on the Niagara Peninsula, Ontario, received critical acclaim for its 2005 Claystone Terrace Chardonnay, which won the top spot for Chardonnay in the \"Judgement of Montreal\" experts\u2019 tasting. This recognition, which caught the attention of the wine community, resulted from a blind tasting held in Quebec for \"Cellier\" magazine. Thirty-three years after the \"Judgment of Paris\", \"Cellier\" organized a blind tasting in Montreal based on the Judgment of Paris. In the \"Judgement of Montreal\", 10 judges at the \"Cellier\" tasting assessed 16 red and 14 white wines, primarily from France and California. The Chardonay from Le Clos Jordanne placed first out of the 14 white wines, some of which were notable international wines, including: Chateau Montelena, Mer Soleil, Kumeu River, an aged reserve wine from Rosemount Estates, and a number of Burgundian entrants from producers such as Drouhin, Lamy, Boisset, Maison Louis Jadot, and others. Other great examples of Ontario chardonnay include Closson Chase and Norman Hardie from the Prince Edward County region, and Tawse Winery, Hidden Bench Vineyards, and Southbrook Vineyards from the Niagara region.\nThe Chardonnay vintages of the early 1990s from British Columbia helped generate international attention to the quality of Canadian wines apart from ice wine varietals. In British Columbia, Chardonnay from the Okanagan are characterized by delicate citrus fruits. They are typically light-bodied, but producers who use barrel fermentation and oak aging can produce fuller-bodied wines.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nLike many grape varieties, Chardonnay first came to Australia in the collection of James Busby in 1832, but it only really took off in the 1950s. It is most significant in South Australia, New South Wales \u2014 especially the Hunter Valley - and Victoria. One of the first commercially successful Chardonnays was produced by Murray Tyrrell in the Hunter Valley in 1971. Tyrell's vineyard was planted with Chardonnay cuttings that he \"borrowed\" from Penfolds' experimental plantings by hopping over their barb-wire fence one night and pruning their vines. The export driven Australian wine industry was well situated for the Chardonnay boom of the 1980s and 1990s and Australia responded with a unique style of wine that was characterized by big fruit flavors and easy approachability. To compensate for the very warm climate, richness was enhanced by the use of oak chips and acid was added during fermentation. During this period the number of Chardonnay plants increased fivefold and by 1990 it was the most widely planted white wine grape in Australia and third most planted overall behind Shiraz and Cabernet Sauvignon. Early in the 21st century, demand outpaced supply and there was a shortage of Chardonnay grapes which prompted Australian winemakers to introduce new blending partners like S\u00e9millon (known as \"SemChard\") and Colombard.\nBeing a rather neutral grape, Australian winemakers first approached Chardonnay in the same manner they were making wine from the similarly neutral Sultana grape. Aromatic yeast were added and maceration was extended to get more flavors from skin contact. While the style of Australian Chardonnay is mostly characterized by the mass-produced products of the hot Riverland region, the cooler climates of the Southern Highlands in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania have been creating more crisp, less oaked wines with lime notes. In the Cowra region, Chardonnay's citrus notes are emphasized while Hunter Valley examples have more richness and smoky notes. The Adelaide Hills and Yarra Valley produce a more Burgundian style while Mount Barker in the Great Southern wine region of Western Australia produces Chardonnay that more closely resembles those of Chablis. A rare, isolated clone exists in the Mudgee region that locals believe traces its ancestry back to some of the first vines brought to Australia in the 19th century. While the wine made from this clone is not particularly distinguished, it can still be of very good quality. Overall, there has been a shift in style since the 1980s from deep golden, oily wines with melon and butterscotch flavors to lighter, paler Chardonnays with more structure and notes of white peaches and nectarines. Sparkling wines from Chardonnay are produced in the cool regions of Geelong, Adelaide Hills, Macedon Ranges and Tasmania.\nDespite being more famous for its Sauvignon blanc production, Chardonnay was New Zealand's most widely planted grape variety from 1990 till 2002 when Sauvignon blanc finally surpassed it. The east coast of the North Island, in places like Hawke's Bay and Wairarapa, have seen the most success with Chardonnay wine that has noticeable acidity and leanness. As better clonal varieties are discovered and planted, the overall quality of New Zealand Chardonnay have increased, particularly from places like Canterbury, Marlborough and Nelson. Some producers in the Gisborne region have recently developed a cult following for their Chardonnay among New Zealand wine drinkers. While many New Zealand winemakers are still developing a characteristic style, the Chardonnay produced so far have emphasized the grape's affinity for oak.\nItaly.\nChardonnay has a long history in Italy but for a large part of it, the grape was commonly confused with Pinot blanc\u2014often with both varieties interplanted in the same vineyard and blended together. This happened despite the fact that Chardonnay grapes get more golden-yellow in color close to harvest time and can be visually distinguished from Pinot blanc. In the Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol region this confusion appeared in the synonyms for each grape, with Pinot blanc being known as \"Weissburgunder\" (White Burgundy) and Chardonnay was known as \"Gelber Weissburgunder\" (Golden White Burgundy). By the late 20th century, more concentrated efforts were put into identifying Chardonnay and making pure varietal versions of the wine. In 1984, it was granted its first \"Denominazione di origine controllata\" (DOC) in the province of South Tyrol. By 2000, it was Italy's fourth most widely planted white wine grape.\nThough many varietal forms of Chardonnay are produced, and the numbers are increasing, for most of its history in Italian winemaking Chardonnay was a blending grape. Besides Pinot bianco, Chardonnay can be found in blends with Albana, Catarratto, Cortese, Erbaluce, Favorita, Garganega, Grecanico, Incrocio Manzoni, Nuragus, Procanico, Ribolla Gialla, Verdeca, Vermentino and Viognier. It even blended into a dry White Zinfandel-style Nebbiolo wine that is made from the white juice of the red Nebbiolo grape prior to being dyed with skin contact. Most Chardonnay plantings are located in the northern wine regions, though plantings can be found throughout Italy as far south as Sicily and Apulia. In Piedmont and Tuscany, the grape is being planted in sites that are less favorable to Dolcetto and Sangiovese respectively. In Lombardy, the grape is often used for \"spumante\" and in the Veneto it is often blended with Garganega to give more weight and structure to the wine. Chardonnay is also found in the Valle d'Aosta DOC and Friuli-Venezia Giulia wine region.\nSouth Africa.\nDue to quarantine restrictions, plant cuttings were often smuggled into South Africa in the 1970s and 1980s and many times were misidentified as to what grape variety it really was. A large portion of the Chardonnay plantings from this period turned out to be Auxerrois blanc. A similar event happened in the German wine region of Baden during the 1980s. By the late 1990s, efforts to promote \"authentic\" Chardonnay helped to increase plantings and by 2004 it was the third-most widely planted white wine grape behind Chenin blanc and Colombard. Winemakers in the Western Cape have experimented blending Chardonnay with Riesling and Sauvignon blanc.\nOther wine regions.\nOutside of the regions discussed above, Chardonnay can be found in cooler climate sites in Italy, Greece, Israel and Lebanon as well as Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, England, Georgia, Germany, Slovakia, Hungary, Macedonia, Moldova, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Serbia, Switzerland and Ukraine. In Austria, the grape varieties known as \"Feinburgunder\" in Burgenland &amp; Vienna and \"Morillon\" in Styria was not identified as Chardonnay till the late 1980s. Today, Austrian Chardonnays range from the rich, oaked aged varieties to leaner, more aromatic styles based on Austrian Rieslings to sweet late harvest styles. In nearby Germany, this distinctly French wine grape was slow to gain a footing being only officially sanctioned since 1991. Today it is most commonly found in the Baden, Palatinate and Rheinhessen regions. In Switzerland, Chardonnay is found mostly around B\u00fcndner Herrschaft, Geneva and Valais. In Spain, Chardonnay has been increasingly used in the sparkling wine Cava. It is also permitted in the \"denominaci\u00f3n de origen\" (DO) wines of Costers del Segre, Navarra and Somontano. In the wine regions of the former Soviet Union, Chardonnay has lagged behind in white wine grapes plantings in favor Rkatsiteli, Aligote and Riesling. The Portuguese experimentation with Chardonnay has been mostly influenced by flying winemakers from Australia and the examples produced so far are very New World in style.\nNew World wine regions.\nIn the cool-climate wine regions of Argentina's Uco Valley, Chardonnay has started to develop a presence. In the 1990s, Chardonnay became the second most widely planted white grape variety in Argentina-second only Torront\u00e9s. India and Uruguay have been steadily increasing their plantings.\nWinemaking.\nChardonnay lends itself to almost any style of wine making from dry still wines, to sparkling wines to sweet late harvest and even botrytized wines (though its susceptibility to other less favorable rot makes these wines rarer). The two winemaking decisions that most widely affect the result of a Chardonnay wine is whether or not to use malolactic fermentation and the degree of oak influence used for the wine. With malolactic fermentation (or MLF), the harder malic acid gets converted into the softer lactic acid, and diacetyl which creates the \"buttery-ness\" that is associated with some styles of Chardonnay. The wines that do not go through MLF will have more green (unripe) apple-like flavors. Oak can be introduced during fermentation or after in the form of the barrel aging. Depending on the amount of charring that the oak was treated with, this can introduce a \"toastiness\" and flavors that many wine drinkers mistake as a characteristic of the grape itself. These flavors can include caramel, cream, smoke, spice, coconut, cinnamon, cloves and vanilla.\nOther winemaking decisions that can have a significant effect include the temperature of fermentation and what time, if any, that the wine allowed to spend aging on the lees. Burgundian winemaking tends to favor extended contact on the lees and even \"stirring up\" the lees within the wine while it is aging in the barrel in a process known as \"b\u00e2tonnage\". Colder fermentation temperatures produce more \"tropical\" fruit flavors like mango and pineapple. The \"Old World\" style of winemaking favors the use of wild, or ambient yeast, though some will also use specially cultivated yeast that can impart aromatic qualities to the wine. A particular style of yeast used in Champagne is the \"Prise de Mousse\" that is cultivated for use worldwide in sparkling Chardonnay wines. A potential drawback of using wild yeast is that the fermentation process can go very slowly with the results of the yeasts being very unpredictable and producing potentially a very different wine each year. One Burgundian winemaker that favors the use of only wild yeast is Domaine des Comtes Lafon which had the fermentation of its 1963 Chardonnay batch take five years to complete when the fermentation process normally only takes a matter of weeks.\nThe time of harvesting is a crucial decision because the grape quickly begins to lose acidity as it ripens. For sparkling wine production, the grapes will be harvested early and slightly unripe to maintain the acid levels. Sparkling Chardonnay-based wines tend to exhibit more floral and steely flavors in their youth. As the wine ages, particularly if it spends significant time on lees, the wines will develop \"toasty\" notes. Chardonnay grapes usually have little trouble developing sugar content, even in cooler climates, which translates into high potential alcohol levels and limits the need for chaptalization. On the flip side, low acid levels can be a concern which make the wine taste \"flabby\" and dull. Winemakers can counteract this by adding tartaric acid in a process known as \"acidification\". In cooler climates, the extract and acidity of Chardonnay is magnified which has the potential of producing very concentrated wines that can develop through bottle aging. Chardonnay can blend well with other grapes and still maintain some of its unique character. The grapes most often blended with Chardonnay include Chenin blanc, Colombard and S\u00e9millon.\nWine style.\nDue to the \"malleability\" of Chardonnay in winemaking and its ability to reflect its \"terroir\", there is not one distinct universal \"style\" or set of constants that could be applied to Chardonnay made across the globe. According to Jancis Robinson, a sense of \"smokiness\" is one clue that could be picked up in a blind tasting of Chardonnay but there are many styles that do not have any \"smokey\" notes. Compared to other white wine grapes like Sauvignon blanc, Gew\u00fcrztraminer and Viognier-Chardonnay has a more subtle and muted nose with no overwhelming aromatics that jump out of the wine glass. The identifying styles of Chardonnay are regionally based. For example, pineapple notes are more commonly associated with Chardonnay from Napa Valley while Chablis will have more notes of green apples. While many examples of Chardonnay can benefit from a few years of bottle aging, especially if they have high acidity, most Chardonnays are meant to be consumed in their youth. A notable exception to this is the most premium examples of Chablis and white Burgundies.\nWith food.\nDue to the wide range of styles, Chardonnay has the potential to be paired with a diverse spectrum of food types. It is most commonly paired with roast chicken and other white meats such as turkey. Heavily-oak-influenced Chardonnays do not pair well with more delicate fish and seafood dishes. Instead, those wines tend to go better with smoked fish, spicy southeast Asian cuisine, garlic and guacamole dips. The regional influences of Chardonnay can help it pair with different food styles. Chardonnays from Washington, which is characterized by maintaining more acidity, tend to pair well with tomato-based dishes and items featuring sweet onions. Older, more mellow Chardonnays are often paired with more \"earthy\" dishes like mushroom soup and aged cheese.\nPopularity and backlash.\nChardonnay long had a reputation as one of France's great white wines, but due to the dominance of geographical labeling, the fact that Chardonnay was the grape behind white Burgundy was not widely known by the wine-drinking public. The success of California and new world Chardonnays, partly encouraged by the Californian showing at the Judgment of Paris wine tasting, brought varietal wine labeling to more prominence and the easy to pronounce Chardonnay grape was one of the largest beneficiaries. In the late 1980s, a sort of \"Chardonnay-mania\" developed as wine regions (particularly new and developing ones) dramatically increased their planting of the grape to meet the worldwide demand.\nAs more vineyards responded with massive new plantings of the variety, they found that fashions were changing again. The market was drinking more red wine, and there was a backlash against heavy, oaky, New World Chardonnays in favor of lighter wines such as Pinot grigio. There was a new fashion, \"ABC\" \u2013 Anything But Chardonnay, identified by Frank Prial in 1995. Another reason for the backlash was that Chardonnay was seen as a symbol of the globalization of wine, in which local grape varieties were grubbed up in favor of the big names demanded by international markets. Oz Clarke described a view of Chardonnay as \"the ruthless coloniser and destroyer of the world's vineyards and the world's palates.\" The criticism was centered on the habits of winemakers to pull out or give up on local varieties in order to plant more Chardonnay which offered potentially more income but lack the uniqueness and character of local varieties. Examples of this occurred in south Italy and Spain when ancient Negroamaro, Primitivo, Grenache and Mataro vineyards were ripped up in favor of new Chardonnay plantings.\nChardonnay became very fashionable in the 1990s, as the stereotypical drink of young urban women of the Bridget Jones generation.\nBy 2002, the association of Chardonnay with suburban, unsophisticated tastes was being explored in Australian TV show \"Kath &amp; Kim\", where lower middle class characters mispronounce the varietal as \"kardonnay\".\nDespite the backlash, Chardonnay remains very popular. In 2004, Chardonnay was estimated to be the world's 6th most widely grown grape variety, covering .\nGenetic modification.\nWith the advent of modern gene editing techniques, trials have begun to create transgenic, genetically modified Chardonnay. Some mechanisms of inserting genes or knocking out other genes to potentially change characteristics of the grape have included CRISPR-Cas9 editing, in order to allow modification of gene expression. Additional trials have also included work with plasmids to provide resistance to potential pathogens including both bacteria and fungi. Such trials have included inserting magainin for mildew resistance. Similar experimentation has also taken place for cultivars of yeast used for fermenting Chardonnay. By examining the chemicals produced by different strains of yeast during fermentation, flavor of the final wine can be modified. Trials are underway in the US and South Africa.\nSynonyms.\nDue to the worldwide recognition of the name of \"Chardonnay\", many of these synonyms have fallen out of favor as winemakers use the more marketable Chardonnay:\nArboisier, Arnaison blanc, Arnoison, Aubain, Aubaine, Auvergnat blanc, Auvernas, Auvernas blanc, Auvernat blanc, Auxeras, Auxerras blanc, Auxerrois blanc, Auxois, Auxois blanc, Bargeois blanc, Beaunois, Biela Klevanjika, Blanc de Champagne, Blanc de Cramant, Breisgauer Suessling, Breisgauer Sussling, Burgundi Feher, Chablis, Chardenai, Chardenay, Chardenet, Chardennet, Chardonay, Chardonnet, Chatenait, Chatey Petit, Chatte, Chaudenay, Chaudenet, Chaudent, Cl\u00e4vner, Clevner Weiss, Cravner, Epinette, Epinette blanc, Epinette blanche, Epinette de Champagne, Ericey blanc, Feher Chardonnay, Feherburgundi, Feinburgunder, Gamay blanc, Gelber Weissburgunder, Gentil blanc, Grosse Bourgogne, Klawner, Klevanjka Biela, Klevner, Lisant, Luisant, Luizannais, Luizant, Luzannois, Maconnais, Maurillon blanc, Melon blanc, Melon D'Arbois, Merou\u00e9, Moreau blanc, Morillon blanc, Moulon, Noirien blanc, Obaideh, Petit Chatey, Petit Sainte-Marie, Petite Sainte Marie, Pineau blanc, Pino Sardone, Pino Shardone, Pinot Blanc \u00e0 Cramant, Pinot Blanc Chardonnay, Pinot Chardonnay, Pinot de Bourgogne, Pinot Giallo, Pinot Planc, Plant de Tonnerre, Romere, Romeret, Rouci Bile, Rousseau, Roussot, Rul\u00e4nder Wei\u00df, Sainte Marie Petite, Sardone, Shardone, Shardonne, Sp\u00e4ter Wei\u00df Burgunder, Wei\u00df Burgunder (normally refers to Pinot blanc), Wei\u00df Clevner, Wei\u00df Edler, Wei\u00df Elder, Wei\u00df Klewner, Wei\u00df Silber, Wei\u00dfedler, Wei\u00dfer Clevner, Wei\u00dfer Rulander.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37567", "revid": "4168824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37567", "title": "Shire of Mornington Peninsula", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Mornington Peninsula Shire is a local government area in southeastern Metropolitan Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. It is located to the south of the Melbourne City Centre. It has an area of 724 square kilometres and in June 2018 it had a population of 165,822.\nHistory.\nThe Mornington Peninsula Shire came into existence on 15 December 1994 when the state government amalgamated the previous Shires of Flinders, Hastings and Mornington.\nOn August 13, 2019, the Shire voted to declare a climate emergency in response to other similar declarations from councils around Australia.\nThe Shire abolished the 150-year-old tradition of reciting a prayer before Council meetings in December 2020. According to the Australian National Secular Lobby, the Shire was the first council or parliament to be removed from their list of government institutions that impose prayers on elected representatives\u201d.\nCouncil.\nCurrent composition.\nThe Mornington Peninsula Shire is split into eleven single-member wards. The current council was elected at the 2024 council election:\nTownships and localities.\nThe 2021 census, the shire had a population of 168,948 up from 154,999 in the 2016 census\n^ - \"Territory divided with another LGA\"&lt;br&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37568", "revid": "50268225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37568", "title": "Chinese law", "text": " \nChinese law is one of the oldest legal traditions in the world. The core of modern Chinese law is based on Germanic-style civil law, socialist law, and traditional Chinese approaches. For most of the history of China, its legal system has been based on the Confucian philosophy of social control through moral education, as well as the Legalist emphasis on codified law and criminal sanction. Following the Xinhai Revolution, the Republic of China adopted a largely Western-style legal code in the civil law tradition (specifically German and Swiss based). The establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949 brought with it a more Soviet-influenced system of socialist law. However, earlier traditions from Chinese history have retained their influence.\nChinese legal tradition.\nOrigin.\nThe word for law in classical Chinese was \"f\u01ce\" (\u6cd5). The Chinese character for \"f\u01ce\" denotes a meaning of \"fair\", \"straight\" and \"just\", derived from its water radical (\u6c35). It also carries the sense of \"standard, measurement, and model\". Derk Bodde and Clarence Morris held that the concept of \"f\u01ce\" had an association with \"y\u00ec\" (\u7fa9: \"social rightness\"). Yan Fu, in his Chinese translation of Montesquieu's \"De l'esprit des lois\" published in 1913, warned his readers about the difference between the Chinese \"f\u01ce\" and Western law: \"The word 'law' in Western languages has four different interpretations in Chinese as in \"l\u01d0\" (\u7406: \"order\"), \"l\u01d0\" (\u79ae: \"rites\", \"decorum\"), \"f\u01ce\" (\u6cd5: \"human laws\") and \"zh\u00ec\" (\u5236: \"control\").\nA term which preceded \"f\u01ce\" was \"x\u00edng\" (\u5211), which originally probably referred to decapitation. \"X\u00edng\" later evolved to be a general term for laws that related to criminal punishment. The early history \"Shang Shu\" recorded the earliest forms of the \"five penalties\": tattooing, disfigurement, castration, mutilation, and death. Once written law came into existence, the meaning of \"x\u00edng\" was extended to include not only punishments but also any state prohibitions whose violation would result in punishments. In modern times, \"x\u00edng\" denotes penal law or criminal law. An example of the classical use of \"x\u00edng\" is \"X\u00edng B\u00f9\" (\u5211\u90e8, lit. \"Department of Punishment\") for the legal or justice department in imperial China.\nTime Periods.\nThe concept of state oversight persisted throughout the imperial period, into the republican period, and can still be seen acting today.\nUnlike many other major civilizations where written law was held in honor and often attributed to divine origin, law in early China was viewed in purely secular terms, and its initial appearance was greeted with hostility by Confucian thinkers as indicative of a serious moral decline, a violation of human morality, and even a disturbance of the total cosmic order. Historically, the people's awareness and acceptance of ethical norms was shaped far more by the pervasive influence of custom and usage of property and by inculcating moral precepts than by any formally enacted system of law. Early emperors embraced the Legalist ideal as a way of exerting control over their large, growing territory and population. This process was integrated with traditional Chinese beliefs in the cosmic order. Behavior fitting within the responses set by \"f\u01ce\" was the correct behavior. \"X\u00edng\" states the potential costs to the individual of exceeding them and imposes penalties for these actions.\nThe imperial period was characterized mainly by the concept of law serving the state as a means of exerting control over the citizenry. In the late Qing dynasty there were efforts to reform the law codes by importing German codes with slight modifications. This continuous effort was amplified in the republican period resulting in the Provisional Constitution of 1912 which included the idea of equality under the law, rights for women, and broader rights for citizens in regard to the government. The onset of the communist period rolled back the development of individual rights with the primary concept of law returning to that of a tool of the state. The Cultural Revolution devastated the ranks of intellectuals and legal professionals. It took until 1982 for the idea of individual rights to reemerge as a significant influence on Chinese law.\nThe current constitution was created in 1982. Article V states that no organization or individual is above the law and Article III makes the People's Congresses and state administration responsible to the people, paving the way for later efforts to allow enforcement of individual rights. Passage of the Administrative Litigation Law of 1987 created legal recourse for individuals from arbitrary government action which was previously unavailable. Despite the deep-seated norm against legal proceedings, litigation in the Chinese courts has increased dramatically in recent years. The continuing weakness of courts, resulting from their dependence on the local government for financial support and enforcement, undermines the effectiveness of these remedies. This has also begun to change with China's initiatives to increase legal training and the professionalism of the judiciary.\nOne avenue of individual appeal from government action which is the custom of \"x\u00ecnf\u01ceng\" \u4fe1\u8bbf (or \"sh\u00e0ngf\u01ceng\" \u4e0a\u8bbf) or petitions by citizens to the individuals officials for change. The continuing wide use of \"x\u00ecnf\u01ceng\" reflects the fact that many officials are still able to avoid legal sanctions and the underlying avoidance of the legal system, as well as the personal ability of officials to personally intervene to change unjust results. Recently \"x\u00ecnf\u01ceng\" has been institutionalized to some extent with the central government mandating that every level of administration establish a \"x\u00ecnf\u01ceng\" office to handle petitions and report them up to high levels. Scholars have noted that \"x\u00ecnf\u01ceng\" today functions more as an informational collection system for the government than an effective review mechanism.\nThe Han dynasty retained the basic legal system established under the Qin but modified some of the harsher aspects in line with the Confucian philosophy of social control. The Han dynasty formally recognized four sources of law: \"l\u01dc\" (\u5f8b: \"codified laws\"), \"l\u00ecng\" (\u4ee4: \"the emperor's order\"), \"k\u0113\" (\u79d1: \"statutes inherited from previous dynasties\") and \"b\u01d0\" (\u6bd4: \"precedents\"), among which \"l\u00ecng\" has the highest binding power over the other three. Most legal professionals were not lawyers but generalists trained in philosophy and literature. The local, classically trained, Confucian gentry played a crucial role as arbiters and handled all but the most serious local disputes.\nDuring the Qing dynasty, criminal justice was based on extremely detailed \"Great Qing Legal Code\". One element of the traditional Chinese criminal justice system is the notion that criminal law has a moral purpose, one of which is to get the convicted to repent and see the error of his ways. In the traditional Chinese legal system, a person could not be convicted of a crime unless he has confessed. This often led to the use of torture, in order to extract the necessary confession. These elements still influence modern Chinese views toward law. All capital offenses were reported to the capital and required the personal approval of the emperor.\nConfucianism and Legalism.\nThe two major Chinese philosophical schools were Confucianism and Legalism. Both strongly influenced the traditional idea of law in China. Under Confucianism the state lead the people with virtue and created a sense of shame to discourage bad conduct. Under Legalism the law was publicly enacted standards of conduct backed by state coercion. The tension between these two systems came from Confucianism's reliance on tradition to make the leader the head of household of all China and Legalism's idea of a standard law that even the emperor should be bound by. The common factor is that both endorse to different degrees a paternalistic conception of the state, which knows better than its citizens and makes laws to protect them.\nBoth theories were developed during the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States period, a time that saw the most impressive proliferation of new ideas and philosophies in Chinese history. While both theories call for governmental hierarchy, they differ drastically in their views of human potential and the preferred means to achieve political order. Both have influenced and continue to influence the development of cultural, social, and legal norms in China.\nThere was no civil code separate from the criminal code, which led to the now discredited belief that traditional Chinese law had no civil law. More recent studies have demonstrated that most of the magistrates' legal work was in civil disputes, and that there was an elaborate system of civil law which used the criminal code to establish torts.\nConfucianism.\nConfucianism is the idea that human beings are fundamentally good. With this optimistic view on human potential, Confucius advocates for ruling through \"li\" \u2013 traditional customs, mores, and norms \u2013 which allow people to have a sense of shame and become humane people with good character, rather than through government regulations and penal law. The goal is that people will internalize the acceptable norms and only take proper actions. This will not only lead to a harmonious social order, but it will also provide the additional benefit of improving an individual's inner character and the overall quality of the society. In contrast, codified laws require external compliance, and people may abide by the laws without fully understanding the reason for compliance. Confucius did not advocate for the elimination of formal laws. Rather, according to Confucianism, law should be viewed as a subsidiary tool primarily to be used against determined wrongdoers who cannot be affected by moral instruction.39\nWhat lies vital to Confucius' theory is the willing participation by citizens of the society to search for commonly accepted, cooperative solutions. There must also be grounds or bases upon which commonly acceptable solutions can be arrived at. \"Li\" is commonly understood as a set of culturally and socially valued norms that provide guidance to proper behaviors that will ultimately lead to a harmonious society. These norms are not fixed or unchangeable over time but rather a reflection of what is accepted at a particular time in a particular context. When conflicts arise, the \"li\" have to be applied and interpreted to produce a just result and restore the harmony of the society. However, in the absence of any procedural safeguard afforded by codified laws, interpretation of \"li\" is subject to abuse.\nRecognizing that people in a society hold diverse interests, Confucius charges the ruler with the responsibility to unify these interests and maintain social order. This is not done by dictatorship but by setting an example. Therefore, a ruler needs not to force his people to behave properly. Instead, the ruler needs only to make himself respectful, and the people will be induced and enlightened by his superior virtues to follow his example. The ruler must know and understand the \"li\" to be able to create solutions to conflict and problems the society faces. As the people are to follow the moral standards and example set by the ruler, to a large extent, the quality of the ruler determines the quality of the political order.\nAlthough discourse in Confucianism considered law as an inferior means of control when compared to morality and ritual, law in Confucian China was in practice overwhelmingly penal.39\nThe incorporation of the essentials of Confucianist \"li\" into legal codes occurred with this Confucian conception dominating ancient Chinese law. Ch'\u00fc concludes that the gradual process of Confucianisation of law was the most significant development in the legal system of China prior to 20th century modernization. The line between ruling by moral influence and ruling by punishment was not always clearly delineated. For example, \"li\" could be enforced by moral influence and legal means. The metamorphosis of \"li\" into law depended on its widespread and unvaried acceptance by society.\nAlthough the codification of law was largely completed by the \"Tang Code\" of CE 624, throughout the centuries the Confucian foundations of the Tang Code were retained, and indeed with some aspects of it strengthened by the later dynasties. \"The Great Ming Code\", which was a model for the Qing code, covered every part of social and political life, especially family and ritual, but also foreign relations and even relations of earthly life with the cosmos.\nThe Confucian notion that morality and self-discipline was more important than legal codes caused many historians, such as Max Weber, until the mid-20th century to conclude that law was not an important part of Imperial Chinese society. This notion, however, has come under extreme criticism and is no longer the conventional wisdom among Sinologists, who have concluded that Imperial China had an elaborate system of both criminal and civil law which was comparable to anything found in Europe.\nLegalism.\nLegalism advocated the utilization of codified laws and harsh punishment to achieve social order. This is due to the legalists' belief that all human beings are born evil and self-interested. People, when left unrestrained, would engage in selfish behavior which will undoubtedly lead to social unrest. Legalists believe that the way to have cure this defect and force people to behave morally is to publicly enact clearly written laws and impose harsh punishments.\nThe legalists designed a system in which the law is run by the state because the abilities of rulers are often limited and the reliance on the ruler's ability and judgment often leads to adverse results. This ensured that the laws will be applied impartially without the interference of personal bias of the ruler or ones who are responsible for applying the laws. It also makes it irrelevant whether the ruler has superior abilities. This non-action promoted by the legalists is their understanding of the concept of \"wuwei\", which is different from the Confucians' understanding of the same concept.\nLegalism is subject to the same type of abuse seen in Confucianism. The Qin emperor implemented strict laws and harsh punishments with no nuance for level of crime. He burned books and buried alive people with different ideals. The Qin emperor instilled fear for the law into the minds of his people. His harshness led to his demise after 14 years of reigning over China.\nThe significant influence of the Legalist tradition in Chinese law has historically been overlooked. Although the Confucian ideology provided the fundamentals for the substance of traditional law, the Legalist school constructed the important framework of the \u00a0\nComparison.\nBoth Confucianism and Legalism were developed in a period of turmoil and both were aimed at the re-unification of the country, the two theories went opposite directions with one advocating for and one against the use of formal laws to achieve social order. What the two theories have in common is their concession of the ultimate authority to the ruler, who remained above and beyond the li or law. It is true that neither theory is ideal in achieving a social order. Nevertheless, both theories have had a significant impact on the cultural and legal development in China, and their influence remains visible today.\nModernization.\nThe introduction and translation of Western legal texts into Chinese is believed to have been started under the auspices of Lin Zexu in 1839. More systematic introduction of Western law together with other Western sciences started with the establishment of Tongwen Guan in 1862. The major efforts in translation of Western law that continued until the 1920s prepared the building blocks for modern Chinese legal language and Chinese law. Legal translation was very important from 1896 to 1936 during which period the Chinese absorbed and codified their version of Western laws. These efforts were assisted by the medium of the Japanese legal language and law developed in Japan during the Meiji period which involved in large part Japanese translation of European Continental laws.\nUnder pressure from European powers and increasing commercial interactions, the influence of European legal systems on China increased.118 The First Opium War ended with the 1842 Treaty of Nanjing between China and the United Kingdom.118 The first of the unequal treaties, it required the establishment of five treaty ports in Chinese cities.118 The Treaty of the Bogue introduced extraterritoriality in favor of the UK, pursuant to which UK citizens were immune from prosecution in Chinese courts and instead only UK law applied.118 The United States obtained similar privileges under the 1844 Treaty of Wanghia, as did France under the 1844 Treaty of Whampoa.118 Concessions, where foreign law applied not just to foreigners but also to Chinese, further accelerated the influence of non-Chinese legal concepts.118\nIn the early 1900s, the Qing dynasty's Imperial Recodification Commission prepared a proposed civil code which was significantly influenced by the German and Japanese legal systems.119 Jurist Shen Jiaben and Governor Zhang Zidong led late Qing legal reform efforts.122 The Qing dynasty was defeated before the code was adopted and the Republic of China rejected the proposed code, instead developing its own.119\nRepublic of China.\nThe Republic of China discarded the proposed code drafted at the end of the Qing empire and prepared its own civil code which it adopted in 1929.119 It was significantly influenced by German civil law.119\nLaw in the Republic of China (Taiwan) is mainly a civil law system. The legal structure is codified into the Six Codes: the Constitution, the Civil Code, the Code of Civil Procedures, the Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedures and in Administrative Laws.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nUnlike traditional Chinese law, modern Chinese law is based mainly on statutory law and court judgments do not have binding precedential value.119\nAfter the Communist victory in 1949, the newly established People's Republic of China (PRC) quickly abolished the ROC's legal codes and attempted to create a system of socialist law copied from the Soviet Union. With the Sino-Soviet split (1960\u20131989) and the Cultural Revolution (1966\u20131976), all legal work came under suspicion of being counter-revolutionary, and the legal system completely collapsed. A new concept of justice called judicial populism (\"sifa dazhonghua\") was established. Instead of the requirement for judges to comply with strict judicial procedures, it promoted substantive justice and problem-solving mechanisms. This legal tradition is based on a cultural view of the non-finality in justice as well as the revolutionary practice of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) that relies on people's justice.\nOver the past century China has had several constitutions. The first attempts towards implementing a constitution in China occurred during the final decade (1902\u20131912) of the Qing dynasty. Various controlling groups subsequently promulgated different constitutions between that time and the establishment of the PRC in 1949. The PRC had a provisional constitution from its inception until the enactment of its first constitution in 1954. This initial constitution was based on the constitution of the Soviet Union. It was shortly ignored, however, and became without legal force. Although it provided for the election of the National People's Congress (NPC) every four years as the highest state power, these guidelines were not adhered to. The second constitution of the PRC, modeled on the ideology of the Cultural Revolution, came into force in 1975. This constitution subjected the NPC to the CCP and removed previous constitutional protections such as equality under the law and private-property succession rights. It was also immediately disregarded through breaches of its provisions and non-adherence to guidelines regarding the NPC. The third constitution of the PRC was adopted in 1978. Although this version moved away from the ideologies of the Cultural Revolution, it did retain some remnants of it. It also retained CCP control over the state structure. However, reformists subsequently gained power, which led to the breakdown of this constitution as focus shifted to economic construction and modernization.\nWith the start of the Deng Xiaoping reforms (c.\u20091979), the idea of reconstructing a legal system to restrain abuses of official authority and developing a \"rule of law\" to replace rule by dictatorship began to gain traction. New laws were passed and foreign investors sought improvements in property rights which had not been a feature of Maoist government but there was internal conflict in China over the extent of incorporating foreign legal norms into the Chinese legal system. Chinese reformers sought to create a special arbitration body, independent of the local legal system, called the China International Economic Trade and Arbitration Commission (CIETAC). In 1982 Peng Zhen said \"It is necessary to draw on beneficial experiences \u2013 ancient or modern, Chinese or foreign \u2013 in studying the science of law...We study them in order to make the past serve the present and foreign things serve China\". Others who were more supportive of reforms like Qiao Shi still urged caution against \"just copying blindly\" and Deng Xiaoping himself said \"we must pay attention to studying and absorbing foreign experience...However, we will never succeed if we mechanically copy the experiences and models of other countries\".\nThe current[ [update]] Constitution of the PRC, enacted in 1982, reflects the model of the first PRC constitution. The Constitution provides for leadership through the working class, led in turn by the CCP. The Constitution provides that the NPC is the supreme organ of state power over a structure of other people's congresses at various levels. The NPC has power to:\nThe NPC also includes a Standing Committee that functions much as the NPC does when the NPC is not in session. Although the Standing Committee has had some powers since 1955, its law-making powers were initially provided for in the 1982 Constitution. The NPC sits at the highest level in the hierarchy of governmental structure in the PRC. This national level is followed in descending order by the provincial level (including autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the national level), the prefectural level, the county level, and the townships and towns level. Government members at the lower two levels are directly elected, and those at the higher levels are elected by the lower levels. In addition to the NPC, the provincial people's congresses possesses legislative power and can pass laws so long as they do not contravene the Constitution or higher legislation or administrative regulations.\nThe Constitution states its own supremacy. The Constitution provides for legislative, executive, judicial, and procuratorial powers causing them to all remain subject to CCP leadership. Important political decisions are made through actions which are not regulated by the Constitution. Additionally, courts need not rely on the Constitution in deciding cases, and they may not review legislation for Constitutionality.\nSince 1979, when the drive to establish a functioning legal system began, more than 300 laws and regulations, most of them in the economic area, have been promulgated. The use of mediation committees, informed groups of citizens who resolve about 90% of the PRC's civil disputes and some minor criminal cases at no cost to the parties, is one innovative device.\nIn drafting the new laws, the PRC has not copied any other legal system wholesale, and the general pattern has involved issuing laws for a specific topic or location. Often laws are drafted on a trial basis, with the law being redrafted after several years. This process of creating a legal infrastructure piecemeal has led to many situations where the laws are missing, confusing, or contradictory, and has led to judicial decisions having more precedental value than in most civil law jurisdictions. In formulating laws, the PRC has been influenced by a number of sources, including traditional Chinese views toward the role of law, the PRC's socialist background, the German-based law of the Republic of China on Taiwan, and the English-based common law used in Hong Kong.\nLegal reform became a government priority in the 1990s. The Chinese government has promoted a reform it often calls f\u01cezh\u00ec hu\u00e0 (\u6cd5\u5236\u5316:\"legalisation\"). Legalisation, has provided the r\u00e9gime with a gloss of legitimacy and has enhanced predictability. There have been major efforts in the rationalization and strengthening of the legal structure and institution building in terms of developing and improving the professionalism of the legislature, judiciary and legal profession.\nThe 1994 Administrative Procedural Law allows citizens to sue officials for abuse of authority or malfeasance. In addition, the criminal law and the criminal-procedures laws were amended to introduce significant reforms. The criminal-law amendments abolished the crime of \"counter-revolutionary\" activity. However political dissidents are sometimes charged on the grounds of subverting state security or of publishing state secrets. Criminal-procedures reforms also encouraged establishment of a more transparent, adversarial trial process. Minor crimes such as prostitution and drug use are sometimes dealt with under re-education through labor laws. The PRC constitution and laws provide for fundamental human rights, including due process, but some have argued that they are often ignored in practice. (See Human rights in the People's Republic of China.)\nAs a result of a trade war with the United States of America over violations of intellectual property rights of American corporations in the early 1990s, the People's Republic of China's trademark law has been modified and as of 1995[ [update]] offers significant protections to foreign trademark-owners.\nAfter their respective transfers of sovereignty, Hong Kong and Macau continue to practice English common law and Portuguese legal systems respectively, with their own courts of final appeal.\nDue to the growing sophistication of Chinese laws, the expansion of the rule of law, as well as an influx of foreign law firms, China has also begun to develop a legal-services market. Foreign lawyers have accompanied foreign capital and their clients to China, which has had an immense influence on the promulgation of new Chinese laws based on international norms, especially in regards to intellectual property and corporate and securities law.\nOn July 1, 1992, in order to meet growing demand, the Chinese government opened the legal-services market to foreign law-firms, allowing them to establish offices in China when the Ministry of Justice and the State Administration of Industry and Commerce (SAOIC) issued the Provisional Regulation of Establishment of Offices by Foreign Law Firms regulation.\nHowever, many regulatory barriers to entry remain to protect the domestic legal industry. Issues relating to Chinese law must be referred to Chinese law firms, and foreign lawyers are also prohibited from interpreting or practicing Chinese law or from representing their clients in court. However, in reality many foreign law firms interpret laws and manage litigation by directing the local firms they must have cooperative relationships with.\nSince the early 2000s, environmental lawsuits have been available in China.15 2014 amendments to China's Environmental Protection Law permit public interest environmental litigation, including with non-governmental organizations as proper plaintiffs.227\nIn 2005, China started implementing legal reform, which revived the Maoist-era ideals adopted during the 1950s due to the position that the law is cold and unresponsive to the needs of its citizens. This initiative favored mediation over court trials when it came to resolving conflicts among citizens and conflicts between citizens and the state. It also revived judicial populism at the expense of judicial professionalism and was marked by the return of the mass-trial model used during the 1940s.\nChina's first comprehensive antitrust law was the Anti-Monopoly Law which was passed in 2007 and became effective in 2008.89\nIn 2009, China amended its Criminal Law to set a low threshold for the prosecution of malicious cybercrimes and illegal data sales.131\nXi Jinping encourages legal professionals to selectively integrate elements of traditional legal practice into modern approaches.36\nIn 2015, the Administrative Procedure Law was revised to expand the people's right to sue the government.136\nThe primary laws regarding personal data security and privacy are the 2017 Cyber Security Law, the 2021 Data Security Law, and the 2021 Personal Information Protection Law.\nLegal rights.\nThe modern idea of legal rights was introduced to China from the West in the 19th century. Its translation as \"qu\u00e1nl\u00ec\" (\u6743\u5229) was coined by William Alexander Parsons Martin in 1864, in his translation of Henry Wheaton's \"Elements of International Law\".\nRule of law.\nOne of the most commonly used phrases in contemporary China, by legal scholars and politicians alike, is f\u01cezh\u00ec (\u6cd5\u6cbb). F\u01cezh\u00ec can be translated into English as \"rule of law\", but questions have often been asked whether Chinese leaders meant \"rule by law\", which means the instrumental use of laws by rulers to facilitate social control and to impose punishment as understood in the Legalist tradition.\nLate Qing dynasty legal reforms sought to implement Western legal principles including the rule of law and judicial independence.122\u2013123 Judicial independence further decreased under Chiang Kai-shek per the Kuomintang's policy of particization (\"danghua\") under which administrative judges were required to have \"deep comprehension\" of the KMT's principles.123\nAfter China's Reform and Opening Up, the CCP emphasized the rule of law as a basic strategy and method for state management.110 The concepts of y\u012bf\u01ce zh\u00ecgu\u00f3 (\u4f9d\u6cd5\u6cbb\u56fd: \"governing the nation according to the rule of law\") and ji\u00e0nsh\u00e8 sh\u00e8hu\u00ec zh\u01d4y\u00ec f\u01cezh\u00ec gu\u00f3ji\u0101 (\u5efa\u8bbe\u793e\u4f1a\u4e3b\u4e49\u6cd5\u5236\u56fd\u5bb6: \"building a socialist rule of law state\") have been part of the CCP's official policy since the mid-1990s. Jiang Zemin called for establishing a socialist rule of law at the Fifteenth Party Congress in 1997.110 In 1999, the NPC adopted an amendment to the Chinese Constitution, incorporating \"governing the nation according to the rule of law\" and \"building a socialist rule of law state\" into Article 5. In 2014, the CCP formally adopted a policy of constructing a \"socialist rule of law with Chinese characteristics.\"\nThe existence of the rule of law in China has been widely debated. When discussing Chinese law, it is worth noting that various expressions have been used, including \"strengthening the law,\" \"tightening up the legal system,\" \"abiding by the law in administration,\" \"rule by law,\" and the \"rule of law\". Different shades of meanings have been attached to each of these terms, but Chinese officials and scholars have employed the expressions rather loosely and sometimes interchangeably. However, the central government had originally preferred the expression, \"strengthening the law/legal system\" to \"the rule of law\". It was thought that the latter might give a controversial connotation of the instrumentality, while the former conveyed a straightforward meaning of strengthening the law and institutions. \"Strengthening the law\" meant reform of legislation and enforcement of laws.\nDespite the newly elevated role of courts in Chinese society, there still remains some consensus about defects in China's legal system in regards to progressing towards the rule of law. Scholars point to the following defects as slowing movement toward rule of law. These include:\nLawyers in China have to swear an oath of loyalty to the CCP. Lawyers who refuse to follow the party line may have their license to practice law revoked.\nXi Jinping opposes Western views of the rule of law, such as the requirement of judicial independence.113 Xi states that the two fundamental aspects of the socialist rule of law are: (1) that the political and legal organs (including courts, the police, and the procuratorate) must believe in the law and uphold the law, and (2) all political and legal officials must follow the CCP.115Xi's view of the rule of law tends to equate the rule of law with the development of legislation. In his writings on socialist rule of law, Xi has emphasized traditional Chinese concepts including people as the root of the state (\"mingben\"), \"the ideal of no lawsuit\" (\"tianxia wusong\"), \"respecting rite and stressing law\" (\"longli zhongfa\"), \"virtue first, penalty second\" (\"dezhu xingfu\"), and \"promoting virtue and being prudent in punishment\" (\"mingde shenfa\").\nXi describes the leadership of the CCP as essential to upholding the socialist rule of law.114 In his view, \"The Party leads the People to enact and enforce the laws\" and it \"must lead the legislation, guarantee the law enforcement, and become the leader in conforming the law.\"200\nAccording to academic Keyu Jin, the revised Administrative Procedures Law codified in 2021 marks a milestone in formalizing the rule of law in China.303\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37570", "revid": "51043292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37570", "title": "Head of government", "text": "Chief officer of the executive branch of a government\nIn the executive branch, the head of government is the highest or the 2nd-highest official of a sovereign state, a federated state, an autonomous region, a dependent territory, a self-governing colony, or other government who often presides over a cabinet, a group of ministers or secretaries who lead executive departments. \nIn diplomacy, \"head of government\" is differentiated from \"head of state\". \nThe authority of a head of government, such as a president, chancellor, or prime minister, and the relationship between that position and other state institutions, such as the relation between the head of state and of the legislature, varies greatly among sovereign states, depending largely on the particular system of the government that has been chosen, won, or evolved over time.\nIn most parliamentary systems, including constitutional monarchies, the head of government is the \"de facto\" political leader of the government, and is answerable to at least one chamber of the legislature. Although there is often a formal reporting relationship to a head of state, the latter usually acts as a figurehead who may take the role of chief executive on limited occasions, either when receiving constitutional advice from the head of government or under specific provisions in a constitution.\nIn presidential republics or in absolute monarchies, the head of state is also usually the head of government. The relationship between that leader and the government, however, can vary greatly, ranging from separation of powers to autocracy, according to the constitution (or other basic laws) of the particular state.\nIn semi-presidential systems, the head of government may answer to both the head of state and the legislature with the specifics provided by each country's constitution. A modern example is the present French government, which originated as the French Fifth Republic in 1958. In France, the president, the head of state, appoints the prime minister, who is the head of government. However, the president must choose someone who can act effectively as an executive, but who also enjoys the support of France's legislature, the National Assembly, to be able to pass legislation. \nIn some cases, the head of state may represent one political party but the majority in the National Assembly is of a different party. Given that the majority party has greater control over state funding and primary legislation, the president is in effect forced to choose a prime minister from the opposition party to ensure an effective, functioning legislature. In this case, known as cohabitation, the prime minister, along with the cabinet, controls domestic policy, with the president's influence largely restricted to foreign affairs.\nIn communist states, the general secretary of the Communist Party is the supreme leader, serving as \"de facto\" head of state and government. In China, the \"de jure\" head of government is the Premier. The Chinese president is legally a ceremonial office, but the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (top leader in a one-party system) has always held this office since 1993 except for the months of transition.\nIn directorial systems, the executive responsibilities of the head of government are spread among a group of people. A prominent example is the Swiss Federal Council, where each member of the council heads a department and also votes on proposals relating to all departments.\nTitles of respective heads of government.\nThe most common title for a head of government is Prime Minister. This is used as a formal title in many states, but may also be an informal generic term to refer to whichever office is considered the principal minister under an otherwise styled head of state, as \"minister\"\u2014Latin for servants or subordinates\u2014is a common title for members of a government (but many other titles are in use, e.g. chancellor and secretary of state). Formally the head of state can also be the head of government as well (ex officio or by ad hoc cumulation, such as a ruling monarch exercising all powers himself) but otherwise has formal precedence over the head of government and other ministers, whether he is their actual political superior (ruling monarch, executive president) or rather theoretical or ceremonial in character (constitutional monarch, non-executive president). Various constitutions use different titles, and even the same title can have various multiple meanings, depending on the constitutional order and political system of the state in question.\nAs political chief.\nIn addition to prime minister, titles used for the democratic model, where there is an elected legislative body checking the head of government, include the following. Some of these titles relate to governments below the national level (e.g. states or provinces).\nUnder a dominant head of state.\nIn a broader sense, a head of government can be used loosely when referring to various comparable positions under a dominant head of state (especially is the case of ancient or feudal eras, so the term \"head of government\", in this case, could be considered a contradiction in terms). In this case, the prime minister serves at the pleasure of the monarch and holds no more power than the monarch allows. Some such titles are diwan, mahamantri, pradhan, wasir or vizier.\nHowever, just because the head of state is the \"de jure\" dominant position does not mean that he/she will not always be the \"de facto\" political leader. A skilled head of government like 19th-century German statesman Otto von Bismarck, Minister President of Prussia and later Chancellor of Germany under Emperor/King Wilhelm I, serves as an example showing that possession of formal powers does not equal political influence.\nIndirectly referred as the head of state.\nIn some cases, the head of state is a figurehead whilst the head of the government leads the ruling party. In some cases a head of government may even pass on the title in hereditary fashion. Such titles include the following:\nCombined heads of state and government.\nIn some models the head of state and head of government are one and the same. These include:\nAn alternative formula is a single chief political body (e.g., presidium) which collectively leads the government and provides (e.g. by turns) the ceremonial Head of state. The only state in which this system is currently employed is Switzerland but other countries such as Uruguay have employed it in the past. This system is described as the directorial system.\n\"See Head of state for further explanation of these cases.\"\nParliamentary heads of government.\nIn parliamentary systems, government functions along the following lines:\nAll of these requirements directly impact the head of government's role. Consequently, they often play a 'day to day' role in parliament, answering questions and defending the government on the 'floor of the House', while in semi-presidential systems they may not be required to play as much of a role in the functioning of parliament.\nAppointment.\nIn many countries, the head of government is commissioned by the head of state to form a government, on the basis of the strength of party support in the lower house; in some other states, the head of government is directly elected by parliament. Many parliamentary systems require ministers to serve in parliament, while others ban ministers from sitting in parliament (they must resign on becoming ministers).\nRemoval.\nHeads of government are typically removed from power in a parliamentary system by\nFirst among equals vs dominating the cabinet.\nConstitutions differ in the range and scope of powers granted to the head of government. Some older constitutions \u2013 for example, Australia's 1900 text, and Belgium's 1830 text \u2013 do not mention their prime ministerial offices at all, the offices became a \"de facto\" political reality without a formal constitutional status. Some constitutions make a Prime Minister (first among equals) and that remains the practical reality for the Prime Minister of Belgium and the Prime Minister of Finland. Other states however, make their head of government a central and dominant figure within the cabinet system; Ireland's Taoiseach, for example, alone can decide when to seek a parliamentary dissolution, in contrast to other countries where this is a cabinet decision, with the Prime Minister just one member voting on the suggestion. In Israel, while the Government is nominally a collegiate body with a role for the Prime Minister, the Israeli Prime Minister is the dominant figure in the executive branch in practice. The Prime Minister of Sweden, under the 1974 Instrument of Government, is a constitutional office with all key executive powers either directly at his or her disposal or indirectly through the collegial Government, whose members are all appointed and dismissed at the Prime Minister's sole discretion.\nUnder the unwritten British constitution, the prime minister's role has evolved, based often on the individual's personal appeal and strength of character, as contrasted between, for example, Winston Churchill as against Clement Attlee, Margaret Thatcher as against John Major. It is alleged that the increased personalisation of leadership in a number of states has led to heads of government becoming themselves \"semi-presidential\" figures, due in part to media coverage of politics that focuses on the leader and his or her mandate, rather than on parliament; and to the increasing centralisation of power in the hands of the head of government. Such allegations have been made against three former British Prime ministers: Margaret Thatcher, Tony Blair, and Boris Johnson. They were also made against Italian prime ministers Silvio Berlusconi and Matteo Renzi, Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau and Federal Chancellor of West Germany (later all of Germany), Helmut Kohl, when in power.\nOfficial residence.\nThe head of government is often provided with an official residence, often in the same fashion as heads of state often are. The name of the residence is often used as a metonym or alternative title for 'the government' when the office is politically the highest, e.g. in the UK \"Downing Street announced today\u2026\"\nWell-known official residences of heads of government include:\nSimilarly, heads of government of federal entities below the level of the sovereign state (often without an actual head of state, at least under international law) may also be given an official residence, sometimes used as an opportunity to display aspirations of statehood:\nUsually, the residence of the heads of government is not as prestigious and grand as that of the head of state, even if the head of state only performs ceremonial duties. Even the formal representative of the head of state, such as a governor-general, may well be housed in a grander, palace-type residence. However, this is not the case when both positions are combined into one:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37571", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37571", "title": "K-T boundary", "text": ""}
{"id": "37573", "revid": "41438237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37573", "title": "Blowjob", "text": ""}
{"id": "37574", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37574", "title": "Cordelia Chase", "text": "Character in Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel\nCordelia Chase is a fictional character created by Joss Whedon for the television series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\"; she also appeared on \"Buffy's\" spin-off series, \"Angel\". Portrayed by Charisma Carpenter, the character appears as a series regular in the first three seasons of \"Buffy\", before leaving the show and becoming a series regular during the first four seasons of \"Angel\". The character made her last television appearance in 2004, appearing as a special guest star in \"Angel\"'s 100th episode. Cordelia also appears in both canonical and apocryphal \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\" material such as comic books and novels.\nCordelia is introduced in \"Welcome to the Hellmouth\" as one of Sunnydale High's popular students, attending school alongside vampire slayer Buffy Summers. Through her interactions with Buffy and her friends, she comes to accept the existence of supernatural forces and helps Buffy fight against them. In the television series \"Angel\", Cordelia joins Angel, a heroic vampire with a soul, in forming a detective agency dedicated to stopping supernatural forces and helping the helpless. After Cordelia acquires the ability to see visions of those in need, she becomes a more compassionate and heroic character. In the middle of the third season, she becomes a love interest of the protagonist Angel. In the fourth season of \"Angel\", she appears to take on a villainous role before it is revealed that she is possessed by a malevolent deity; this storyline eventually leads to her death and subsequent exit from the series. The character makes further canonical appearances in the comic books \"Buffy Season Eight\" and \"\", in a dream flashback and as a spirit guide.\nCreated as a foil for \"Buffy\"'s titular heroine, Cordelia was initially characterized as \"shallow\", \"vain\" and \"self-centered\", and was used in the series to create conflict for the other characters. The character went through changes as she gradually redeemed herself throughout the course of \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\", and has received attention in academic texts related to gender studies and social status.\nAppearances.\nTelevision.\n\"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\".\nCordelia Chase first appears in the premiere episode of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", titled \"Welcome to the Hellmouth\". Introduced as a potential friend for Sunnydale High's newest student, Buffy Summers (Sarah Michelle Gellar), Cordelia reveals her true colors by cruelly mocking Willow (Alyson Hannigan) whom Buffy befriends instead.\nIgnorant of the supernatural, Cordelia shows up regularly throughout the first season of \"Buffy\" to insult and ridicule the other characters. She plays a larger role in the episode \"Out of Mind, Out of Sight\", in which she falls victim to a social outcast who wants revenge on popular students for ignoring her so much that she turned invisible. In the season finale, Cordelia helps Buffy and her friends battle vampires, finally coming to terms with the existence of supernatural forces.\nIn season 2, Cordelia becomes a more active ally to the \"Scooby Gang\" and begins a romantic relationship with Xander Harris (Nicholas Brendon) in \"What's My Line? Part 2\". Dating someone of Xander's social status causes Cordelia's ostracism from her popular peers and she reluctantly breaks up with him. However, when Xander performs a love spell to pay her back for hurting him, Cordelia realises how much he cares about her and takes him back, rejecting her superficial friends in the process.\nIn season 3's \"Lovers Walk\", Cordelia is heartbroken to see Xander kissing Willow and ends their relationship. By the season 3 episode \"The Wish\", Cordelia slips back into her antagonistic persona from the first season, disassociating herself from the Scooby Gang altogether. In the episode \"The Prom\", she reveals that her house and her family's entire wealth has just been seized for tax fraud and both of her parents (never named or seen on-camera) are now in prison. Cordelia later attempts an unsuccessful relationship with Wesley (Alexis Denisof) and makes peace with Xander at the prom. In the season 3 finale, she rallies alongside Buffy and her friends at graduation against the demonic Mayor of Sunnydale (Harry Groener), where Cordelia slays her first vampire.\n\"Angel\".\nAfter three seasons on \"Buffy\", Cordelia left the series to move over to star in \"Angel\", a spin-off series focusing on the reformed vampire Angel (David Boreanaz). The first season sees Cordelia move to Los Angeles, in the hopes of escaping her new-found poverty by becoming an actress. After Angel saves her life in the series pilot, Cordelia helps him found the supernatural detective agency Angel Investigations, working in an administrative position.\nDuring this time, Cordelia also becomes close to half-demon co-worker Doyle (Glenn Quinn), but their budding romance is ended by his death nine episodes into the series. Before dying in the episode \"Hero\", Doyle passes his ability to see people in distress over to Cordelia when he kisses her. Cordelia initially views the visions as a curse. However, after a demon causes Cordelia's visions to overwhelm her in the season 1 finale \u2013 causing her to experience worldwide pain \u2013 she vows to help those in need after she recovers.\nIn season 2's \"Reunion\", Cordelia and the other staff at Angel Investigations are fired by Angel, who is becoming increasingly obsessed with bringing down the evil law firm Wolfram &amp; Hart. Cordelia joins Wesley and Charles Gunn (J. August Richards) in re-forming the agency on their own. Angel and Cordelia eventually reconcile in the episode \"Epiphany\". As her acting career continues to flounder, Cordelia is sucked into and made princess of a medieval hell dimension called Pylea in the episode \"Over the Rainbow\". When presented with the opportunity to pass her visions over to a champion named the Groosalugg (Mark Lutz), Cordelia refuses and returns to L.A. with her friends in the season 2 finale.\nIn season 3's \"Birthday\", Cordelia learns from the demon Skip (David Denman) that her visions are slowly killing her because human beings are not strong enough to control them. To save her life, Cordelia accepts Skip's offer to alter history so that she never met Angel in L.A., instead landing her big break as an actress. However, even in this alternate timeline, Cordelia feels compelled to help others and eventually crosses paths with Angel again, who received the visions in her place and is now insane. Unable to let her friend suffer, Cordelia has Skip return the timeline to normal, and agrees to become half-demon, with new powers, in order to harbor the visions safely.\nSeason 3 also sees Angel become a father, with Cordelia stepping in to mother Connor until the infant is kidnapped into a hell dimension in the episode \"Sleep Tight\", only to emerge as a disturbed teenager (Vincent Kartheiser) in \"The Price\". In the episode \"Waiting in the Wings\", Angel realizes he has romantic feelings for Cordelia, but is prevented from voicing them by the return of Groosalugg.\nCordelia dates Groosalugg for the remainder of season 3, but Groo notices she loves Angel instead and decides to leave. In the season 3 finale, Cordelia arranges to meet Angel to confess her feelings, but is prevented from doing so by Skip, who informs her that she has become a higher being. Cordelia accepts her duty, and leaves Earth for another dimension.\nIn season 4, Cordelia feels trapped in her position as a higher being, and so in the episode \"The House Always Wins\" she returns to Earth in an amnesiac state. In \"Spin the Bottle\", her memories are returned via a spell, along with a vision of a mysterious Beast (Vladimir Kulich). Afterward, she admits to Angel the feelings she once had for him.\nAs L.A. succumbs to the apocalypse in the episode \"Apocalypse, Nowish\", Cordelia begins to behave out-of-character; she seduces Connor, murders Lilah (Stephanie Romanov) in the episode \"Calvary\", commands the Beast in \"Salvage\", and magically battles former friend Willow to keep Angel from his soul in the episode \"Orpheus\".\nIn the episode \"Players\", the team realize that the now pregnant Cordelia is possessed, so Cordelia takes the unstable Connor on the run with her so they may give birth to their supernatural \"offspring\" Jasmine (Gina Torres). In \"Inside Out\", Jasmine is revealed to be a higher being who possessed Cordelia before she returned to Earth, manipulating events to be born in a new body of her own. Cordelia falls into a post-natal coma for season 4's remainder.\nFollowing an eleven-episode absence, Cordelia returns in season 5, in the 100th episode \"You're Welcome\". Having (apparently) awoken from her coma, Cordelia reunites with Angel Investigations, who have taken over Wolfram &amp; Hart since their defeat of Jasmine. She chastises Angel for accepting W&amp;H's \"deal with the devil\" and reminds him of his true mission and higher calling. Together, they face and defeat their old enemy Lindsey McDonald (Christian Kane) who had been impersonating Doyle in an attempt to destroy Angel. In the episode's closing moments, Cordelia reiterates to Angel that she loves him and kisses him, shortly before he receives a phone call reporting that Cordelia died that morning in the hospital. When Angel turns around, Cordelia is gone. It is later revealed that this encounter - the Powers That Be repaying their debt to Cordelia - allowed Cordelia to pass one last vision over to Angel, giving him the knowledge he needs to bring down the Circle of the Black Thorn.\n\"Buffy the Animated Series\".\nBetween 2001 and 2004, Joss Whedon and Jeph Loeb developed a 4-minute pilot episode for \"Buffy the Animated Series\", which was set during the show's first season. Had the series been picked up by a network, it would have featured Cordelia (voiced by Charisma Carpenter) in more high-school adventures. Following a 2008 leak of the pilot to YouTube, Loeb expressed some hope that the series may be resurrected in some form.\nLiterature.\nCordelia also appears in comic books and novels based on the \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\" television series. \"The Cordelia Collection, Vol. 1\" by Nancy Krulik is a novelization of the \"Buffy\" episodes \"Out of Mind, Out of Sight\", \"Some Assembly Required\" and \"Homecoming\". These episodes tell specific incidents in which Cordelia becomes targeted: by a scorned classmate, to become a zombie's bride and by hunters in a case of mistaken identity. She appears in numerous \"Angel\" novels as a member of Angel Investigations, but some feature Cordelia more prominently; in \"Not Forgotten\" she uncovers exploitation of child immigrants, while in \"Haunted\" she appears as a contestant on a supernatural-themed reality television show when she has a vision about another applicant. Cordelia appears in the majority of \"Angel\" comics, published by Dark Horse Comics during 2000\u20132002 and set between episodes of the television series. She appears less frequently in those by IDW Publishing between 2005 and 2011, mainly in stories set in and after the fifth season. Cordelia typically plays a minimal role in the Dark Horse \"Angel\" comics. However, issue seventeen was a \"Cordelia Special\", in which demonic items are stashed in Cordelia's apartment. In the \"Dark Horse Presents\" story \"Lovely dark and deep\", Cordelia lands a role as the star of a demonic movie. Cordelia appears in the IDW Publishing comic mini-series \"Angel: The Curse\", set after season 5, in flashback scenes. She subsequently reappears in the mini-series \"Angel: Old Friends\", which sees Angel battle evil clones of his friends. Cordelia claims to be the genuine article, having returned from the dead, but Angel is unconvinced and kills her; his suspicions prove correct when her body immediately disintegrates like the other clones.\n\"\", a canonical comic book continuation of the television series plotted by Joss Whedon and written by Brian Lynch, features the characters of \"Angel\" and all of Los Angeles condemned to Hell after the events of the series finale \"Not Fade Away\". Cordelia does not appear until the twelfth issue, in which she acts as a guide to Angel in his dying moments; it is revealed she serves in some capacity as a higher power now. The character departs in issue thirteen. Cordelia also appears in a dream sequence within the twentieth issue of \"Buffy\"'s canonical continuation, \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight\", titled \"After These Messages... We'll Be Right Back!\". Buffy dreams of when she was in her first year at Sunnydale High; Cordelia's physical appearance is based on the art style of Loeb and Whedon's unproduced \"Buffy\" animated series.\nConception and casting.\nCordelia was originally intended to serve as a dramatic foil to the series' main character Buffy Summers. Adapting the concept of the movie into a television series, Whedon decided to reinvent the character of Buffy. The shallow cheerleader of the 1992 \"Buffy\" film, as played by Kristy Swanson, had grown more mature and open-minded. Buffy now identified with the social outcasts, such as Willow and Xander. As a result, Cordelia Chase was created to embody the traits of that shallower Buffy. Despite portraying a shallow, valley girl stock character, actress Charisma Carpenter felt that Cordelia in early seasons was not \"one-dimensional\", nor was she \"as superficial as people thought\". At the same time, Carpenter was critical of her frequent role as the damsel in distress. \"Angel\" co-creator and executive producer David Greenwalt describes Cordelia in her \"Buffy\" years as \"a somewhat shallow, somewhat vain, somewhat self-centered but [a] lively and honest character who spoke her mind\". Indeed, even not when superhuman, she showed a lot of hardiness.\nCharisma Carpenter had originally planned to read for the role of Buffy, but was late for her audition and instead tried out for Cordelia. Carpenter, who had dressed casually for the role of Buffy\u2014who she believed \"could really be herself\"\u2014felt unprepared to read for Cordelia because she \"was definitely a character to dress for\". Although she had only fifteen minutes to prepare for the character, the producers were \"really responsive\" to Carpenter's audition, and she left feeling confident she had got the part. After Carpenter's audition, actress Sarah Michelle Gellar, who had been offered the role of Cordelia before Carpenter, was asked to come back and audition for the part of Buffy. Bianca Lawson originally won the role of Cordelia Chase, but turned it down due to other contractual obligations. Lawson would later be cast as vampire slayer Kendra in the show's second season. Carpenter, proud of her own character's growth across the two series, did not envy Gellar for winning the role of Buffy over her.\nCharacterization.\nCharacteristics and analysis.\nCordelia's representation of an assertive modern woman and her character arc in \"Buffy\" has been commented on in several academic texts, particularly in gender studies, such as \"Praising Cordelia: Aggression and Adaptation Among Adolescent Girls\", or \"\". In the latter, Dr. Lorna Jowett of the University of Northampton describes Cordelia's initial place in the series where \"At first glance, Cordelia seems to have the 'normal life' Buffy often longs for. She is a familiar character from the teen drama: popular, a cheerleader, the center of cliques (power as status). Elizabeth Rambo notes how Cordelia's status is highlighted by her nickname, \"Queen C\", and Harmony's remark to her, \"Cordy, you reign.\" Cordelia functions recognizably as the typical female victim of horror, often screaming and running away, and this makes her a perfect contrast for other female characters.\"\n\"Praising Cordelia\" argues that both Buffy and Cordelia are representations of assertive and competitive young women, who \"represent two kinds of aggressive adolescent girls\". The article focuses on the competitive relationship between the characters. Buffy's initial friendship with Cordelia is compromised once Cordelia sees the attractive, socially competent Buffy as a threat to her. Even after Cordelia joins the Scooby Gang and becomes Buffy's friend, theirs is not a friendship of \"mutual support, warmth, and intimacy\" but rather one of \"mutual antipathy\". The authors opine that Cordelia, unlike Buffy, is a \"representation of the archetypal 'feminine type'\", one who conforms to the \"pervasive stereotypes of femininity while, at the same time, dominating the other girls in the school\" and commanding the attention of the boys. Describing her character arc in \"Buffy\", Mary Alice Money views Cordelia as one of many transformed or redeemed \"Buffy\" characters, one who \"reveals a previously unexpected vulnerability that nullifies some of their less attractive traits.\" Jowett argues that Cordelia's assimilation within the main group is due largely to her relationship with main character Xander, and she is rendered sympathetic to the audience once they witness her rebuff the peer pressure from her old friends. She is further endeared to the viewer when Xander betrays her because the scenes showing her pain are shown only to the viewer. After Cordelia is cheated on by Xander with Willow she chooses not to go back to him and instead retains her autonomy.\nOthers such as Susanne Kord and Elisabeth Krimer note how Cordelia is also a subversive representation of feminine stereotypes, describing \"Although superficially, Cordelia conforms to the stereotype of the insensitive bitch\", what she actually does is \"offers her viewers the clandestine pleasures of female self-assertion\". One of Cordelia's strongest traits, her honesty, is also highlighted in \"Earshot\", where Buffy temporarily develops telepathic powers and can hear the thoughts of her friends, who avoid her to hide these thoughts. For Cordelia however, \"her thought processes and actual utterances are completely identical\" and because of this, she embodies an \"antithesis of female self-sacrifice\" in these years but also \"the opposite of the kind of hypocrisy that is typically attributed to women\". Writer Jennifer Crusie interprets this as Cordelia's \"lack of depth\" becoming \"her strength\". She does not mean to argue that Cordelia is stupid, however, pointing out \"Cordy's solipsism could easily be mistaken for stupidity, but it comes coupled with a keen intelligence and a fixity of purpose that makes her almost invincible.\" Jowett feels Cordelia's confidence is based in her wealth. Despite becoming more sympathetic as the series progressed, \"bitchiness enhances Cordelia's comic appeal\", as it offers viewers an opportunity to relish its honest truth-telling.\nDevelopment.\nIn early seasons of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", Cordelia was often used both as comic relief and occasionally for the damsel in distress plot device, which would require series' heroine Buffy to save her. Any concerns that she was simply one-dimensional were alleviated for the actress when writers developed the character through her relationships with Xander and later Wesley, which led Carpenter to become more convinced of her potential. In an article about the psychology of characters in \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", Steven C. Schlozman writes about how \"Cordelia is wealthy and, at first glance, superficial, appearing to care most about her own popularity. However, as the show progresses, we learn that her mother has myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and her father was prosecuted for income tax evasion. She is a reluctant participant, baffled at her own loyal feelings and bewildered at her attraction to the unpopular Xander.\" He goes on to describe how Cordelia, and \"all the characters of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" are particularly compelling for their depictions of important adolescent themes.\"\nDiscussing Cordelia's relationship with Xander, Carpenter says, \"A lot of Cordy's conflict, and a lot of who she is, comes out around Xander. Because she is in love with him in spite of herself, or in spite of him. I have my best moments with [Nicholas Brendon].\" However, her character's growing involvement with Buffy and her friends caused the actress some concern; \"I wasn't sure how I felt about it, because I didn't want to lose my edge. I didn't want her to be nice; I didn't want her to change because that's who she is.\" Carpenter's challenge was to find a balance between the good and bad sides of Cordelia, and she explains, \"That's why I enjoy playing her so much. She's got to be somewhat tolerable or why would they hang out with her? But I [try] not to lose her edge, her honesty.\" Carpenter claims that Cordelia's \"rough edges\" made for difficult experiences with fans, who expected her to be snobby like her character. Charisma continually pleaded to get to slay a vampire, which the writers let her do in her final \"Buffy\" appearance, \"Graduation Day, Part Two\".\nOver the course of her appearances in \"Angel\", Cordelia would develop enormously as a character. Describing this evolution, Carpenter comments, \"When I first started playing Cordelia, she wasn't nice. She has really deepened and has a stronger sense of responsibility. She's a team player, which was not the case in the beginning.\" Carpenter cherishes what playing a multi-faceted character like Cordelia meant for her as an actress, describing &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The road Cordelia has traveled, the journey she has taken up to now has been such a joy to play as an actress, because there have been so many chances to do so many different emotions. Heroic, vulnerable, just angry, possessed, funny \u2013 I get to be all those different things rolled into one. Getting this role, in hindsight... God I made a good decision, or they did. Cultural critic Jennifer Crusie points out how Cordelia was initially perfect for the transition to \"selfish, superficial Los Angeles\", which turned out to be her \"trial by fire\".\nExecutive producer David Greenwalt was very keen to acquire the character of Cordelia for the spin-off series, commenting, \"I desperately wanted her to come to \"Angel\" because Angel being dark and broody, we need a big bright smile.\" At the same time, Whedon felt her presence was sorely missed in the fourth season of \"Buffy\" where \"All of our characters got to the point where they were loving and hugging, and it was sort of like, where's Cordelia?\", leading him to introduce Spike (James Marsters) to the cast to accommodate her absence. According to Marsters, his request for a salary equal to what he was paid on \"Buffy\" caused Whedon to remove Carpenter as a regular cast member.\nKelly A. Manners describes Cordelia as a \"rich gal whose family ended up losing everything to the IRS. So in episode one of \"Angel\", Cordelia showed up in LA trying to start a career as an actress because her family was in jail, actually.\" Crusie states that in mourning for Doyle Cordelia also begins \"finding within herself a new level of humanity\".\nGreenwalt discusses how Cordelia \"is sort of forced to become a deeper character\" when she starts to receive the visions of the suffering and helpless, \"She's sort of living with one foot in the world of 'I want to be an actress' and with another foot in the world of 'I want to save and help people, and I have a deeper purpose and mission.'\" Greenwalt felt that this development allowed Cordelia to develop from a \"vainglorious high schooler to someone who's almost like a superhero\"; this also provided Carpenter with the opportunity to stretch her potential as an actress. From the tenth episode, \"Parting Gifts\", Cordelia begins to actively function as a supernatural character in the series while the introduction of Wesley also contributes some added comic relief to the series. It is from this episode Cordelia is also forced to mature as she mourns the death of Doyle, whose visions serve as a painful reminder of him. The first-season finale saw Cordelia's visions inflict all the suffering of the human world upon her, and to effectively act this, Carpenter's acting coach showed her pictures of real human pain as motivation. The scene took over eight hours to film, and Carpenter was relieved when it was over. The experience saw Cordelia further resolve to help those in need, stating \"I saw the world and there's so much pain. We have to help them.\" Carpenter explains, \"Through the suffering of the world, and through her own experiences, she discovers what's important in life.\"\nCarpenter pleaded to the producers to let her cut her hair in the second season of \"Angel\", but they were dissatisfied with the darker tone and cut which created a \"dark edge of Cordelia\" which wasn't as \"warm and effervescent as she usually is\", so for the third season they wanted her to \"go shorter and blonder\". \"Angel\"'s third season demonstrates Cordelia's development into a full-fledged heroine. The episode \"Birthday\" saw her being offered the chance to live a life where she never met Angel, but her inner desire to help others sees her sacrifice this life and her humanity to become a half-demon who can better withstand the visions she carries. In \"Billy\", Cordelia begins to train alongside Angel to become a better fighter and learns quickly. Carpenter began to train extensively with the show's stunt co-ordinators both to learn how to fight and to handle weaponry. In the episode \"Waiting in the Wings\", both Angel and Lorne remark on what a fine woman Cordelia has finally become, with Cordelia noting she is more like a superhero than she ever expected to be growing up in Sunnydale. Also in this episode, she and Angel both realize they have fallen for one another, but their love goes unconsummated. Critically, Jennifer Crusie considers Cordelia's ascension to the heavens at the end of season 3 to be the \"point that the Mutant Enemy Productions writers evidently lost their minds\". She goes on to describe how Cordelia's compliance with Skip seems entirely out of character. Jes Battis also argues that a paradox is created when \"the character who embraces her privilege (Cordelia) gets to become a higher being and exit \"Angel\", and as an overwhelmingly positive force\" where later Fred (Amy Acker), \"the character who is conflicted about her privilege\" in season 5 \"ends up being possessed by a millennia-old demon\".\n\"Angel\" season 4 played with audience's expectations of the now heroic Cordelia by revealing her to be the season's Big Bad; it was later established that Cordelia had been possessed by a manipulative deity called Jasmine. The storyline was controversial with fans, and Carpenter has admitted hating how a possessed Cordelia seduced Angel's teenage son. Carpenter has said, \"I'm in denial about that whole storyline. It was creepy.\" She tried to keep a positive attitude about the situation, though; director Terrence O'Hara commented that he thought Carpenter had \"a lot of fun\" playing a manipulative Cordelia in the episode \"Orpheus\" because she enjoyed coming up with Cordelia's new \"schizophrenic madwoman\" characterization. David Boreanaz was also unsettled by the incestuous pairing. At a 2004 convention, he admitted that the season 4 storyline \"freaked him out.\" The episode \"Inside Out\" saw the height of this inversion of Cordelia's character, where she is seen urging Connor to murder an innocent girl in order to expedite the birth of the child they conceived together. In an effort to stop Connor, the Powers That Be send the spirit of Connor's mother Darla (Julie Benz) to convince him not to go through with it. The episode sees Carpenter dressed in black, while Benz appears in heavenly white as she becomes the voice of reason and morality. Steven S. DeKnight, who wrote and directed the episode, felt this was a brilliant role-reversal for both actresses as Carpenter is accustomed to playing the benevolent Cordelia where Darla is normally seen as a sinister vampire. Much of season 4's storyline had to be adjusted due to Carpenter's real-life pregnancy; after Cordelia gives birth to Jasmine in the episode \"Inside Out\" she is left in a coma for the remainder of the fourth season. Crusie discusses what she felt were the flaws in the execution of the fourth season, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's that she betrays the man she trusts above all others and who trusts her absolutely; it's that she seduces a boy she once diapered; it's that she dresses like a drag queen and talks like a \"Dynasty\" reject. It's that she's not Cordy, and what might have been fun to watch had we been let into the secret before the Beastmaster seduced Connor becomes the extended rape and death of a much-beloved character.\nMatt Hills and Rebecca Williams also discuss the treatment of Cordelia (and Darla) in \"\"Angel\"'s Monstrous Mothers and Vampires with Soul: Investigating the Abject in 'Television Horror'\", from \"\" by Stacey Abbot. They see the send-offs of Cordelia, Fred and other characters as part of a pattern of highly gendered \"elaborated abjection\" seen in \"Angel\". They also see Cordelia's possession in season 4 as part of a recurring pattern: \"More so than other characters in [\"Buffy\"] and \"Angel\", Cordelia has suffered or been threatened with bodily invasion and rape, either symbolically or literally\" and recounts the demon impregnation in \"Expecting\", and similarly in \"Epiphany\", where she develops a gestating demon in her head and then told she must mate with the Groosalugg in \"Through the Looking Glass\". Cordelia even remarks on this, as Hills and Williams quote her as she remarks on her \"status as a violated and devalued character\"; Cordelia states, \"If you ever figure out how to get us out of here, I want you to find me a dimension where some demon doesn't want to impregnate me with his spawn!\" They liken the horror motif in these examples, and in \"Inside Out\", to what Barbara Creed called the 'monstrous womb' in her book \"The Monstrous-feminine: Film, Feminism, Psychoanalysis\". Jes Battis also comments how, in comparison with the Fred-Illyria season 5 storyline, Cordelia's storyline is not as positive as Fred's rebirth, because Fred got to \"'live on' through Illyria, whereas Cordelia is taken right out of the show and receives no interesting blue-haired reincarnation\". Continuing, they say that in fact, there is no meaningful connection between the \"real\" Cordelia and Jasmine, as the Cordelia who did those bad things is killed the moment Jasmine is, \"and the 'true' Cordy wakes up from her coma\". Further illustrating the comparisons, \"Fred/Illyria become a joined mother/daughter subjectivity, a dual being whose constituent essences are inseparable; Cordelia is never so intimately connected with her evil child and is remembered as the healthy, vibrant Cordy that everyone knew.\" Pointing out symbolic parallels in the subtexts of these gestations, Battis notes &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor \"Angel\"'s fifth season, as with \"Buffy\"'s fourth, Spike steps in to replace Cordelia as a source of comedic dialogue within the series. It is also noted by critics that, in the fifth season, \"it doesn't take long for Illyria to become a version of Cordelia, giving everyone the cold and honest truth whether they want it or not\". Concerning Cordelia's last appearance in \"Angel\"'s fifth and final season, Joss Whedon says he used the 100th episode to reinforce the \"mission statement\" of the show, as well as assess where the characters are now compared to how they began. Whedon explains this episode presents an ideal opportunity to\u2014through Cordelia, who was \"there at the beginning\"\u2014ask of Angel, \"Where are you now? Where were you when you started and where are you now and how do you feel about that?\" The return to the show's \"original concerns\" is echoed by the flashback to Doyle's first season advertisement; Sara Upstone points out aerial images of Los Angeles reappear at the same time Cordelia tells Angel \"You forgot who you are,\" bringing back the show's link to the city. Buffy Summers was originally intended to appear in the 100th episode to get Angel 'back on track', but Sarah Michelle Gellar had other obligations. Writer/director David Fury explains that since \"we couldn't get Sarah\" the episode was instead written for Cordelia. He adds, \"This turned out to be a Godsend because Charisma was fantastic.\" In the original script, Fury wrote a conversation between Wesley and Angel while driving to the hospital that set up Cordelia as a possible vegetable. The scene was never shot because \"the shock of seeing her up and around after a 9-month coma was enough. We just didn't want to tip it too soon,\" says Fury.\nReception.\nFor her role as Cordelia Chase, as she appeared in the television series \"Angel\", Charisma Carpenter has been nominated four times by the Saturn Awards. Carpenter earned back-to-back nominations in 2000 and 2001 for Best Genre TV Supporting Actress and Best Actress on Television, respectively. The actress did not receive any nominations in 2002, but again obtained two back-to-back nominations in 2003 and 2004 for Best Actress in a Television Series and Best Supporting Actress in a Television Series, respectively.\nCultural impact.\nThe character of Cordelia Chase has been credited by some for making the mean girl, queen bee trope more likeable. Gillian Bennett wrote about Cordelia Chase in \"Paste Magazine\" noting, \"The good old-fashioned high school mean girl; we all know them and may (secretly) love them. Regina George. Blair Waldorf. Girls who stomp around with their minions, shoving aside anyone in their way and harboring a\u2014usually inexplicable\u2014hatred for the female protagonist. What has made these mean girls, at sixteen, so bitter to the world and to others? The answer is almost never revealed before she is inevitably defeated by the \u201cgood girl,\u201d but Buffy the Vampire Slayer gives us a rare glimpse beneath the cold mask of the mean girl with Cordelia Chase.\"\nAngelica Jade Basti\u00e9n included Cordelia in the inspirations for the character Cheryl Blossom from the Riverdale show in the article wrote on \"Vulture\". She suggested that Cordelia is one of the most famous pop culture queen bees. In the \"Glamour\" article, Leeann Duggan wrote about the character Veronica Lodge by citing Cordelia as one of the examples of the trope which the character represents. She also put Cordelia and her counterpart Buffy Summers as one of the most prominent examples of the \"Blonde versus brunette rivalry\". CherryPicks, when talking about the term \"Girlboss\", wrote \"When we think about classic girlbosses, iconic characters come to mind: Blair Waldorf (Leighton Meester) from Gossip Girl, Cordelia Chase (Charisma Carpenter) from Buffy the Vampire Slayer, and Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia Clarke) from Game of Thrones.\".\nAlexis Gunderson wrote an article named \"Chasing Cordelia : The Rise of The Mean Girl heroine from Buffy to Pretty Little Liars\" in Paste Magazine. In the article, Alexis claimed that Charisma Carpenter's Cordelia begun the tradition of the Mean Girl heroine seen in so many TV shows quoting Caroline Forbes (Candice King) from The Vampire Diaries, Rebekah Mikaelson (Claire Holt) from The Originals, Lydia Martin (Holland Roden) and Malia Tate (Shelley Hennig) from Teen Wolf, Petra Solano (Yael Grobglas) from Jane the Virgin, Lauren Cooper (Catherine Tate) from The Catherine Tate Show. \"What defines the Cordelia Chase-style Mean Girl Heroine is her ambivalent, tempestuous alliance with the Scooby Gang at her series\u2019 core, an ambivalence heightened by the Mean Girl\u2019s certainty that she is just as good as\u2014if not better than!\u2014the allies and assumptions the protagonist arms herself with. This Mean Girl/Alpha Bitch not only could be but should be the heroine of the story being told.\" say Alexis about the character and her influence.\nThe Valnet site Collider ranked Cordelia 8th in the list of \"Best Mean Girls On Television\", citing \"Unquestionably one of television's most well-known mean girls, Buffy the Vampire Slayer's Cordelia Chase (Charisma Carpenter) is renowned for her razor-sharp humor, stinging remarks, and unshakable dedication to upholding her social position. Cordelia's meanness is a central facet of her character, and she embraces her role as Sunnydale High's resident queen bee with gusto.\" The site Comic Book Resources published an article talking about how the show Legacies took inspiration from Buffy quoting \"It is near impossible not to compare this to the Buffy Season 3 episode, \"The Wish,\" where Cordelia (Charisma Carpenter), who is equally vain as Lizzie, wishes Buffy never came to Sunnydale. Both episodes take a character on a journey to discover life would be worse, only for things to be corrected in the end.\" stating how Jenny Boyd's Lizzie Saltzman was a successor of Cordelia Chase. Vulture quote Cordelia as the predecessor to Prudence Blackwood in Chilling Adventures of Sabrina.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37575", "revid": "50651101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37575", "title": "Airport", "text": "Facility with a runway for aircraft\nAn airport is an aerodrome with extended facilities, mostly for commercial air transport. They usually consist of a landing area, which comprises an aerially accessible open space including at least one operationally active surface such as a runway for a plane to take off and to land or a helipad, and often includes adjacent utility buildings such as control towers, hangars and terminals, to maintain and monitor aircraft. Larger airports may have airport aprons, taxiway bridges, air traffic control centres, passenger facilities such as restaurants and lounges, and emergency services. In some countries, the US in particular, airports also typically have one or more fixed-base operators, serving general aviation.\nAirport operations are extremely complex, with a complicated system of aircraft support services, passenger services, and aircraft control services contained within the operation. Thus airports can be major employers, as well as important hubs for tourism and other kinds of transit. Because they are sites of operation for heavy machinery, a number of regulations and safety measures have been implemented in airports, in order to reduce hazards. Additionally, airports have major local environmental impacts, as both large sources of air pollution, noise pollution and other environmental impacts, making them sites that acutely experience the environmental effects of aviation. Airports are also vulnerable infrastructure to extreme weather, climate change caused sea level rise and other disasters.\nTerminology.\nThe terms \"aerodrome\", \"airfield\", and \"airstrip\" also refer to airports, and the terms \"heliport\", \"seaplane base\", and \"STOLport\" refer to airports dedicated exclusively to helicopters, seaplanes, and short take-off and landing aircraft.\nThe word aeroplane emerged in the 1870s, long before the Wright brothers succeeded in 1903. In colloquial use in certain environments, the terms \"airport\" and \"aerodrome\" are often interchanged. However, in general, the term \"airport\" may imply or confer a certain stature upon the aviation facility that other aerodromes may not have achieved. In some jurisdictions, \"airport\" is a legal term of art reserved exclusively for those aerodromes certified or licensed as airports by the relevant civil aviation authority after meeting specified certification criteria or regulatory requirements.\nThat is to say, all airports are aerodromes, but not all aerodromes are airports. In jurisdictions where there is no legal distinction between \"aerodrome\" and \"airport\", which term to use in the name of an aerodrome may be a commercial decision. In US technical/legal usage, \"landing area\" is used instead of \"aerodrome\", and \"airport\" means \"a landing area used regularly by aircraft for receiving or discharging passengers or cargo\".\nManagement.\nSmaller or less-developed airfields, which represent the vast majority, often have a single runway shorter than . Larger airports for airline flights generally have paved runways of or longer. Skyline Airport in Inkom, Idaho, has a runway that is only long.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], the CIA stated that there were approximately 44,000 \"airports or airfields recognizable from the air\" around the world, including 15,095 in the US, the US having the most in the world.\nAirport ownership and operation.\nMany US airports still lease part or all of their facilities to outside firms, who operate functions such as retail management and parking. All US commercial airport runways are certified by the FAA under the Code of Federal Regulations Title 14 Part 139, \"Certification of Commercial Service Airports\".\nAirport funding.\nThe Airport &amp; Airway Trust Fund (AATF) was created by the Airport and Airway Development in 1970 which finances aviation programs in the United States. Airport Improvement Program (AIP), Facilities and Equipment (F&amp;E), and Research, Engineering, and Development (RE&amp;D) are the three major accounts of Federal Aviation Administration which are financed by the AATF, as well as pays for the FAA's Operation and Maintenance (O&amp;M) account. The funding of these accounts are dependent on the taxes the airports generate of revenues. Passenger tickets, fuel, and cargo tax are the taxes that are paid by the passengers and airlines help fund these accounts.\nAirport revenue.\nAirports revenues are divided into three major parts: aeronautical revenue, non-aeronautical revenue, and non-operating revenue. Aeronautical revenue makes up 50% in 2021 (from 54% and 48% in 2019 and 2020, non-aeronautical revenue makes up 34% (40%, 39% in previous years), and non-operating revenue makes up 16% (6%, 14%) of the total revenue of airports.\nAeronautical revenue.\nAeronautical revenue are generated through airline rents and landing, passenger service, parking, and hangar fees. Landing fees are charged per aircraft for landing an airplane in the airport property. Landing fees are calculated through the landing weight and the size of the aircraft which varies but most of the airports have a fixed rate and charge extra for extra weight. Aircraft parking is also a major revenue source for airports. Aircraft are parked for a certain amount of time before or after takeoff and have to pay to park there. Every airport has its own rates of parking, for example, John F Kennedy airport in New York City charges $45 per hour for a plane of 100,000 pounds and the price increases with weight.\nNon-aeronautical revenue.\nNon-aeronautical revenue is gained through things other than aircraft operations. It includes lease revenue from compatible land-use development, non-aeronautical building leases, retail and concession sales, rental car operations, parking and in-airport advertising. Concession revenue is one big part of non-aeronautical revenue airports make through duty free, bookstores, restaurants and money exchange. Car parking is a growing source of revenue for airports, as more people use the parking facilities of the airport. O'Hare International Airport in Chicago charges $2 per hour for every car.\nPrice regulation.\nMany airports are local monopolies. To prevent them from abusing their market power, governments regulate how much airports may charge to airlines, using price-cap regulation.\nLandside and airside areas.\nAirports are divided into landside and airside zones. The landside is subject to fewer special laws and is part of the public realm, while access to the airside zone is tightly controlled; only passengers with a valid boarding pass, aircrew members with an identification document, and airport staff with a valid airside pass can access the airside. Landside facilities may include publicly accessible airport check-in desks, shops and ground transportation facilities.\nFacilities.\nThe area where the aircraft parks to load passengers and baggage is known as an \"apron\" or \"ramp\" (or incorrectly, \"the tarmac\").\nAirport security.\nAirport security normally requires baggage checks, metal screenings of individual persons, and rules against any object that could be used as a weapon. Since the September 11 attacks and the Real ID Act of 2005, airport security has dramatically increased and gotten tighter and stricter than ever before.\nProducts and services.\nMost major airports provide commercial outlets for products and services. Most of these companies, many of which are internationally known brands, are located within the departure areas. These include clothing boutiques and restaurants and in the US amounted to $4.2\u00a0billion in 2015. Prices charged for items sold at these outlets are generally higher than those outside the airport. However, some airports now regulate costs to keep them comparable to \"street prices\". This term is misleading as prices often match the manufacturers' suggested retail price (MSRP) but are almost never discounted.\nMany new airports include walkthrough duty-free stores that require air passengers to enter a retail store upon exiting security.\nApart from major fast food chains, some airport restaurants offer regional cuisine specialties for those in transit so that they may sample local food without leaving the airport.\nPremium and VIP services.\nAirports may also contain premium and VIP services. The premium and VIP services may include express check-in and dedicated check-in counters. These services are usually reserved for first and business class passengers, premium frequent flyers, and members of the airline's clubs. Premium services may sometimes be open to passengers who are members of a different airline's frequent flyer program. This can sometimes be part of a reciprocal deal, as when multiple airlines are part of the same alliance, or as a ploy to attract premium customers away from rival airlines.\nSometimes these premium services will be offered to a non-premium passenger if the airline has made a mistake in handling of the passenger, such as unreasonable delays or mishandling of checked baggage.\nAirline lounges frequently offer free or reduced cost food, as well as alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages. Lounges themselves typically have seating, showers, quiet areas, televisions, computer, Wi-Fi and Internet access, and power outlets that passengers may use for their electronic equipment. Some airline lounges employ baristas, bartenders and gourmet chefs.\nAirlines sometimes operate multiple lounges within the one airport terminal allowing ultra-premium customers, such as first class customers, additional services, which are not available to other premium customers. Multiple lounges may also prevent overcrowding of the lounge facilities.\nCargo and freight service.\nIn addition to people, airports move cargo around the clock. Cargo airlines often have their own on-site and adjacent infrastructure to transfer parcels between ground and air.\nCargo Terminal Facilities are areas where international airports export cargo has to be stored after customs clearance and prior to loading the aircraft. Similarly, import cargo that is offloaded needs to be in bond before the consignee decides to take delivery. Areas have to be kept aside for examination of export and import cargo by the airport authorities. Designated areas or sheds may be given to airlines or freight forward ring agencies.\nEvery cargo terminal has a landside and an airside. The landside is where the exporters and importers through either their agents or by themselves deliver or collect shipments while the airside is where loads are moved to or from the aircraft. In addition, cargo terminals are divided into distinct areas \u2013 export, import, and interline or transshipment.\nAccess and onward travel.\nAirports require parking lots, for passengers who may leave the cars at the airport for a long period of time. Large airports will also have car-rental firms, taxi ranks, bus stops and sometimes a train station.\nMany large airports are located near railway trunk routes for seamless connection of multimodal transport, for instance Frankfurt Airport, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, London Heathrow Airport, Tokyo Haneda Airport, Tokyo Narita Airport, Hamad International Airport, London Gatwick Airport and London Stansted Airport. It is also common to connect an airport and a city with rapid transit, light rail lines or other non-road public transport systems. Some examples of this would include the AirTrain JFK at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, Link light rail that runs from the heart of downtown Seattle to Seattle\u2013Tacoma International Airport, and the Silver Line T at Boston's Logan International Airport by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA). Such a connection lowers risk of missed flights due to traffic congestion. Large airports usually have access also through controlled-access highways ('freeways' or 'motorways') from which motor vehicles enter either the departure loop or the arrival loop.\nInternal transport.\nThe distances passengers need to move within a large airport can be substantial. It is common for airports to provide moving walkways, buses, and rail transport systems. Some airports like Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport and London Stansted Airport have a transit system that connects some of the gates to a main terminal. Airports with more than one terminal have a transit system to connect the terminals together, such as John F. Kennedy International Airport, Mexico City International Airport and London Gatwick Airport.\nAirport operations.\nAirport operations are made possible by an organized network of trained personnel, specialized equipment, and spatial data. After thousands of ground operations staff left the industry during the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been discussions on the need for systemic improvements in three primary areas:\nAir traffic control.\nAir traffic controllers on the ground help direct aircraft through a region of airspace, communicating with aircraft to coordinate their paths. Their tasks include maintaining a safe distance between aircraft, avoiding congestion, and rerouting aircraft to deal with adverse weather. Most air traffic control centers can be divided into terminal control centers, which control the small, highly used region around an airport, and area control centers, which control aircraft \"en route\" to their destinations in a larger area. Both terminal and area control centers use radio to communicate with pilots and radar to track their paths, and in terminal control centers visual observation can also be used, as most aircraft near a terminal control center are either taking off or landing. \nGround control.\nGround control is responsible for directing all ground traffic in designated \"movement areas\", except the traffic on runways. This includes planes, baggage trains, snowplows, grass cutters, fuel trucks, stair trucks, airline food trucks, conveyor belt vehicles and other vehicles. Ground Control will instruct these vehicles on which taxiways to use, which runway they will use (in the case of planes), where they will park, and when it is safe to cross runways. When a plane is ready to takeoff it will be turned over to tower control. Conversely, after a plane has landed it will depart the runway and be \"handed over\" from Tower to Ground Control.\nTower control.\nTower control is responsible for aircraft on the runway and in the controlled airspace immediately surrounding the airport. Tower controllers may use radar to locate an aircraft's position in 3D space, or they may rely on pilot position reports and visual observation. They coordinate the sequencing of aircraft in the traffic pattern and direct aircraft on how to safely join and leave the circuit. Aircraft which are only passing through the airspace must also contact tower control to be sure they remain clear of other traffic.\nTraffic pattern.\nAt all airports the use of a traffic pattern (often called a \"traffic circuit\" outside the US) is possible. They may help to assure smooth traffic flow between departing and arriving aircraft. There is no technical need within modern commercial aviation for performing this pattern, \"provided there is no queue\". And due to the so-called SLOT-times, the overall traffic planning tend to assure landing queues are avoided. If for instance an aircraft approaches runway 17 (which has a heading of approx. 170 degrees) from the north (coming from 360/0 degrees heading towards 180 degrees), the aircraft will land as fast as possible by just turning 10 degrees and follow the glidepath, without orbit the runway for visual reasons, whenever this is possible. For smaller piston engined airplanes at smaller airfields without ILS equipment, things are very different though.\nGenerally, this pattern is a circuit consisting of five \"legs\" that form a rectangle (two legs and the runway form one side, with the remaining legs forming three more sides). Each leg is named (see diagram), and ATC directs pilots on how to join and leave the circuit. Traffic patterns are flown at one specific altitude, usually above ground level (AGL). Standard traffic patterns are \"left-handed\", meaning all turns are made to the left. One of the main reason for this is that pilots sit on the left side of the airplane, and a Left-hand patterns improves their visibility of the airport and pattern. Right-handed patterns do exist, usually because of obstacles such as a mountain, or to reduce noise for local residents. The predetermined circuit helps traffic flow smoothly because all pilots know what to expect, and helps reduce the chance of a mid-air collision.\nAt controlled airports, a circuit can be in place but is not normally used. Rather, aircraft (usually only commercial with long routes) request approach clearance while they are still hours away from the airport; the destination airport can then plan a queue of arrivals, and planes will be guided into one queue per active runway for a \"straight-in\" approach. While this system keeps the airspace free and is simpler for pilots, it requires detailed knowledge of how aircraft are planning to use the airport ahead of time and is therefore only possible with large commercial airliners on pre-scheduled flights. The system has recently become so advanced that controllers can predict whether an aircraft will be delayed on landing before it even takes off; that aircraft can then be delayed on the ground, rather than wasting expensive fuel waiting in the air.\nNavigational aids.\nThere are a number of aids, both visual and electronic, though not at all airports. A visual approach slope indicator (VASI) helps pilots fly the approach for landing. Some airports are equipped with a VHF omnidirectional range (VOR) to help pilots find the direction to the airport. VORs are often accompanied by a distance measuring equipment (DME) to determine the distance to the VOR. VORs are also located off airports, where they serve to provide airways for aircraft to navigate upon. In poor weather, pilots will use an instrument landing system (ILS) to find the runway and fly the correct approach, even if they cannot see the ground. The number of instrument approaches based on the use of the Global Positioning System (GPS) is rapidly increasing and may eventually become the primary means for instrument landings.\nLarger airports sometimes offer precision approach radar (PAR), but these systems are more common at military air bases than civilian airports. The aircraft's horizontal and vertical movement is tracked via radar, and the controller tells the pilot his position relative to the approach slope. Once the pilots can see the runway lights, they may continue with a visual landing.\nTaxiway signs.\nAirport guidance signs provide direction and information to taxiing aircraft and airport vehicles. Smaller aerodromes may have few or no signs, relying instead on diagrams and charts.\nLighting.\nTaxiway lights use color codes to mark out different sections of the taxiway. Blue lights normally indicate the edge of the taxiway, and green lights are located in its center. Red lights are placed where the runway begins, and are turned off once the pilot has gained clearance from the air traffic control to take off.\nWeather observations.\nWeather observations at the airport are crucial to safe takeoffs and landings. In the United States and Canada, the vast majority of airports, large and small, will either have some form of automated airport weather station, whether an AWOS, ASOS, or AWSS, a human observer or a combination of the two. These weather observations, predominantly in the METAR format, are available over the radio, through automatic terminal information service (ATIS), via the ATC or the flight service station.\nPlanes take-off and land \"into\" the wind to achieve maximum performance. Because pilots need instantaneous information during landing, a windsock can also be kept in view of the runway. Aviation windsocks are made with lightweight material, withstand strong winds and some are lit up after dark or in foggy weather. Because visibility of windsocks is limited, often multiple glow-orange windsocks are placed on both sides of the runway.\nAirport ground crew (ground handling).\nEach airport hires its own ground crew to process flights, cargo, passengers, and baggage. When a flight arrives, ramp services navigate a baggage cart to the aircraft. Bags are then sorted and transported by baggage handlers. Ramp services handle aircraft marshaling, the process in which aircraft arrive or depart from the gate. Once passengers and/or cargo is unloaded, a cleaning crew prepares the aircraft for its next flight by loading supplies and preparing other in-flight services. Ground crew will fuel the aircraft, and other visual inspections are conducted. Efficient work allows aircraft to have fast turnaround times of as little as 25 minutes.\nMaintenance management.\nLike industrial equipment or facility management, airports require tailor-made maintenance management due to their complexity. With many tangible assets spread over a large area in different environments, these infrastructures must therefore effectively monitor these assets and store spare parts to maintain them at an optimal level of service.\nTo manage these airport assets, several solutions are competing for the market: CMMS (computerized maintenance management system) predominate, and mainly enable a company's maintenance activity to be monitored, planned, recorded and rationalized.\nSafety management.\nAviation safety is an important concern in the operation of an airport, and almost every airfield includes equipment and procedures for handling emergency situations. Airport crash tender crews are equipped for dealing with airfield accidents, crew and passenger extractions, and the hazards of highly flammable aviation fuel. The crews are also trained to deal with situations such as bomb threats, hijacking, and terrorist activities.\nHazards to aircraft include debris, nesting birds, and reduced friction levels due to environmental conditions such as ice, snow, or rain. Part of runway maintenance is airfield rubber removal which helps maintain friction levels. The fields must be kept clear of debris using cleaning equipment so that loose material does not become a projectile and enter an engine duct (see foreign object damage). In adverse weather conditions, ice and snow clearing equipment can be used to improve traction on the landing strip. For waiting aircraft, equipment is used to spray special deicing fluids on the wings.\nMany airports are built near open fields or wetlands. These tend to attract bird populations, which can pose a hazard to aircraft in the form of bird strikes. Airport crews often need to discourage birds from taking up residence.\nSome airports are located next to parks, golf courses, or other low-density uses of land. Other airports are located near densely populated urban or suburban areas.\nAn airport can have areas where collisions between aircraft on the ground tend to occur. Records are kept of any incursions where aircraft or vehicles are in an inappropriate location, allowing these \"hot spots\" to be identified. These locations then undergo special attention by transportation authorities (such as the FAA in the US) and airport administrators.\nDuring the 1980s, a phenomenon known as microburst became a growing concern due to aircraft accidents caused by microburst wind shear, such as Delta Air Lines Flight 191. Microburst radar was developed as an aid to safety during landing, giving two to five minutes' warning to aircraft in the vicinity of the field of a microburst event.\nSome airfields now have a special surface known as soft concrete at the end of the runway (stopway or blastpad) that behaves somewhat like styrofoam, bringing the plane to a relatively rapid halt as the material disintegrates. These surfaces are useful when the runway is located next to a body of water or other hazard, and prevent the planes from overrunning the end of the field.\nAirports often have on-site firefighters to respond to emergencies. These use specialized vehicles, known as airport crash tenders. Most civil aviation authorities have required levels of on-site emergency response capabilities based on an airport's traffic. At airports where civil and military operations share a common set of runways and infrastructure, emergency response is often managed by the relevant military unit as part of their base's operations.\nEnvironmental concerns and sustainability.\nAircraft noise is a major cause of noise disturbance to residents living near airports. Sleep can be affected if the airports operate night and early morning flights. Aircraft noise occurs not only from take-offs and landings but also from ground operations including maintenance and testing of aircraft. Noise can have other health effects as well. Other noises and environmental concerns are vehicle traffic causing noise and pollution on roads leading to the airport.\nThe construction of new airports or addition of runways to existing airports, is often resisted by local residents because of the effect on countryside, historical sites, and local flora and fauna. Due to the risk of collision between birds and aircraft, large airports undertake population control programs where they frighten or shoot birds.\nThe construction of airports has been known to change local weather patterns. For example, because they often flatten out large areas, they can be susceptible to fog in areas where fog rarely forms. In addition, they generally replace trees and grass with pavement, they often change drainage patterns in agricultural areas, leading to more flooding, run-off and erosion in the surrounding land. Airports are often built on low-lying coastal land, globally 269 airports are at risk of coastal flooding now. A temperature rise of 2\u00b0C \u2013 consistent with the Paris Agreement \u2013 would lead to 100 airports being below mean sea level and 364 airports at risk of flooding. If global mean temperature rise exceeds this then as many as 572 airports will be at risk by 2100, leading to major disruptions without appropriate adaptation.\nA 2019 report from the Cooperative Research Programs of the US Transportation Research Board showed all airports have a role to play in advancing greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction initiatives. Small airports have demonstrated leadership by using their less complex organizational structure to implement newer technologies and to serve as a proving ground for their feasibility. Large airports have the economic stability and staff resources necessary to grow in-house expertise and fund comprehensive new programs.\nA growing number of airports are installing solar photovoltaic arrays to offset their electricity use. The National Renewable Energy Lab has shown this can be done safely. This can also be done on the roofs of the airports and it has been found that the solar panels on these buildings work more effectively when compared to residential panels.\nThe world's first airport to be fully powered by solar energy is located at Kochi, India.\nAs a part of their sustainability efforts, more and more airports are starting to explore the consequences of more electric aircraft coming into service. Electric aircraft require much energy; operating 49 small 50-passenger short-range battery electric aircraft would demand at least 16 GWh/year, and with short turnaround times between different flights, the charging powers have to be substantial. To tackle these issues, more airports are starting to look into alternative energy production such as solar power and wind power, but also how to use airport areas for biomass production. Another solution investigated is to use energy storage to charge during the night and use to charge the aircraft during daytime.\nAirport hygiene and public health concerns.\nAirports, as major international travel hubs, have the potential to be significant transmission points for infectious diseases. A notable study conducted during the peak of the 2015\u20132016 flu season at Helsinki-Vantaa airport in Finland revealed that commonly touched surfaces in airports, especially the plastic security screening trays, are highly susceptible to contamination by respiratory viruses. These trays are touched by hundreds of passengers daily and, being made of plastic, a non-porous material, provide an environment where viruses can survive for extended periods. In comparison, bathroom surfaces in the same airport tested negative for respiratory viruses, possibly indicating a heightened awareness of hygiene in these spaces.\nHand hygiene plays a pivotal role in preventing the spread of infectious diseases in airports. Research indicates that only about 70% of individuals wash their hands after using the toilet, and of those, only 50% do so correctly. In airport settings, just one in five individuals maintain clean hands\u2014defined as washing with soap for at least 15 seconds in the preceding hour. Given the frequent touching of shared surfaces in airports, such as trays, railings, and touch panels, this poses a significant risk for disease transmission. A study from the University of Cyprus and MIT used models and simulations to demonstrate that increasing hand cleanliness from 20% to 30% in all airports could reduce the potential global impact of a disease by 24%. If cleanliness levels reached 60%, this impact could decrease by 69%. Focusing on just the top 10 most influential airports for disease spread, enhancing hand hygiene practices could still significantly reduce disease transmission rates from 45% to 37%. The findings underscore the importance of promoting hand-washing in airports as a key measure in preventing the global spread of diseases.\nMilitary air base.\nAn airbase, sometimes referred to as an \"air station\" or \"airfield\", provides basing and support of military aircraft. Some airbases, known as \"military airports\", provide facilities similar to their civilian counterparts. For example, RAF Brize Norton in the UK has a terminal that caters to passengers for the Royal Air Force's scheduled flights to the Falkland Islands. Some airbases are co-located with civilian airports, sharing the same ATC facilities, runways, taxiways and emergency services, but with separate terminals, parking areas and hangars. Bardufoss Airport, Bardufoss Air Station in Norway and Pune Airport in India are examples of this.\nAn aircraft carrier is a warship that functions as a mobile airbase. Aircraft carriers allow a naval force to project air power without having to depend on local bases for land-based aircraft. After their development in World War I, aircraft carriers replaced the battleship as the centrepiece of a modern fleet during World War II.\nAirport designation and naming.\nMost airports in the United States are designated \"private-use airports\" meaning that, whether publicly- or privately owned, the airport is not open or available for use by the public (although use of the airport may be made available by invitation of the owner or manager).\nMost airport names include the location. Many airport names honour a public figure, commonly a politician (e.g., Charles de Gaulle Airport, George Bush Intercontinental Airport, Lennart Meri Airport, O.R. Tambo International Airport, Soekarno\u2013Hatta International Airport), a monarch (e.g. Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, King Shaka International Airport), a cultural leader (e.g. Liverpool John Lennon Airport, Leonardo da Vinci-Fiumicino Airport, Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport) or a prominent figure in aviation history of the region (e.g. Sydney Kingsford Smith Airport), sometimes even famous writers (e.g. Allama Iqbal International Airport) and explorers (e.g. Venice Marco Polo Airport).\nSome airport names include the word \"International\" to indicate their ability to handle international air traffic. This includes some airports that do not have scheduled international airline services (e.g. Port Elizabeth International Airport).\nHistory and development.\nThe earliest aircraft takeoff and landing sites were grassy fields. The plane could approach at any angle that provided a favorable wind direction. A slight improvement was the dirt-only field, which eliminated the drag from grass. However, these functioned well only in dry conditions. Later, concrete surfaces would allow landings regardless of meteorological conditions.\nThe title of world's oldest airport is disputed. Toussus-le-Noble airport near Paris was established in 1907 and has been operating since. College Park Airport in Maryland, US, established in 1909 by Wilbur Wright serves only general aviation traffic.\nBeijing Nanyuan Airport in China, which was built to accommodate planes in 1904, and airships in 1907, opened in 1910. It was in operation until September 2019. Pearson Field Airport in Vancouver, Washington, United States, was built to accommodate planes in 1905 and airships in 1911, and is still in use as of February 2024.\nHamburg Airport opened in January 1911, making it the oldest commercial airport in the world which is still in operation. Bremen Airport opened in 1913 and remains in use, although it served as an American military field between 1945 and 1949. Amsterdam Airport Schiphol opened on September 16, 1916, as a military airfield, but has accepted civil aircraft only since December 17, 1920, allowing Sydney Airport\u2014which started operations in January 1920\u2014to claim to be one of the world's oldest continuously operating commercial airports. Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport in the US opened in 1920 and has been in continuous commercial service since. It serves about 35,000,000 passengers each year and continues to expand, recently opening a new 11,000-foot (3,355 m) runway. Of the airports constructed during this early period in aviation, it is one of the largest and busiest that is still currently operating. Don Mueang International Airport near Bangkok, Thailand, opened 1914, is also a contender, as well as the Rome Ciampino Airport, which opened in 1916. Increased aircraft traffic during World War I led to the construction of landing fields. Aircraft had to approach these from certain directions and this led to the development of aids for directing the approach and landing slope.\nFollowing the war, some of these military airfields added civil facilities for handling passenger traffic. One of the earliest such fields was Paris \u2013 Le Bourget Airport at Le Bourget, near Paris. The first airport to operate scheduled international commercial services was Hounslow Heath Aerodrome in August 1919, but it was closed and supplanted by Croydon Airport in March 1920. In 1922, the first permanent airport and commercial terminal solely for commercial aviation was opened at Flughafen Devau near what was then K\u00f6nigsberg, East Prussia. The airports of this era used a paved \"apron\", which permitted night flying as well as landing heavier aircraft.\nThe first lighting used on an airport was during the latter part of the 1920s; in the 1930s approach lighting came into use. These indicated the proper direction and angle of descent. The colours and flash intervals of these lights became standardized under the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). In the 1940s, the slope-line approach system was introduced. This consisted of two rows of lights that formed a funnel indicating an aircraft's position on the glideslope. Additional lights indicated incorrect altitude and direction.\nAfter World War II, airport design became more sophisticated. Passenger buildings were being grouped together in an island, with runways arranged in groups about the terminal. This arrangement permitted expansion of the facilities. But it also meant that passengers had to travel further to reach their plane.\nAn improvement in the landing field was the introduction of grooves in the concrete surface. These run perpendicular to the direction of the landing aircraft and serve to draw off excess rainwater that could build up in front of the plane's wheels.\nAirport construction boomed during the 1960s with the increase in jet aircraft traffic. Runways were extended out to . The fields were constructed out of reinforced concrete using a slip-form machine that produces a continuous slab with no disruptions along the length. The early 1960s also saw the introduction of jet bridge systems to modern airport terminals, an innovation which eliminated outdoor passenger boarding. These systems became commonplace in the United States by the 1970s.\nThe malicious use of UAVs has led to the deployment of counter unmanned air system (C-UAS) technologies such as the Aaronia AARTOS which have been installed on major international airports.\nAirports in entertainment.\nAirports have played major roles in films and television programs due to their very nature as a transport and international hub, and sometimes because of distinctive architectural features of particular airports. One such example of this is \"The Terminal\", a film about a man who becomes permanently grounded in an airport terminal and must survive only on the food and shelter provided by the airport. They are also one of the major elements in movies such as \"The V.I.P.s\", \"Speed\", \"Airplane!\", \"Airport\" (1970), \"Die Hard 2\", \"Soul Plane\", \"Jackie Brown\", \"Get Shorty\", \"Home Alone\" (1990), \"\" (1992), \"Liar Liar\", \"Passenger 57\", \"Final Destination\" (2000), \"Unaccompanied Minors\", \"Catch Me If You Can\", \"Rendition\" and \"The Langoliers\". They have also played important parts in television series like \"Lost\", \"The Amazing Race\", \"America's Next Top Model (season 10)\", \"90 Day Fianc\u00e9\", \"Air Crash Investigation\" which have significant parts of their story set within airports. In other programmes and films, airports are merely indicative of journeys, e.g. \"Good Will Hunting\".\nSeveral computer simulation games put the player in charge of an airport. These include the Airport Tycoon series, SimAirport and Airport CEO.\nAirport directories.\nEach civil aviation authority provides a source of information about airports in their country. This will contain information on airport elevation, airport lighting, runway information, communications facilities and frequencies, hours of operation, nearby NAVAIDs and contact information where prior arrangement for landing is necessary.\n Information can be found on-line in the \"En route Supplement Australia\" (ERSA) which is published by Airservices Australia, a government owned corporation charged with managing Australian ATC.\n Infraero is responsible for the airports in Brazil\n Two publications, the \"Canada Flight Supplement\" (CFS) and the \"Water Aerodrome Supplement\", published by Nav Canada under the authority of Transport Canada provides equivalent information.\n The European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) provides an Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP), aeronautical charts and NOTAM services for multiple European countries.\n Provided by the Luftfahrt-Bundesamt (Federal Office for Civil Aviation of Germany).\n \"Aviation Generale Delage\" edited by Delville and published by Breitling.\n The information is found in Pooley's Flight Guide, a publication compiled with the assistance of the United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). Pooley's also contains information on some continental European airports that are close to Great Britain. National Air Traffic Services, the UK's Air Navigation Service Provider, a public\u2013private partnership also publishes an online AIP for the UK.\n The US uses the \"Airport/Facility Directory\" (A/FD) (now officially termed the Chart Supplement) published in seven volumes. DAFIF also includes extensive airport data but has been unavailable to the public at large since 2006.\n \"Aeronautical Information Publication\" (AIP) is provided by Japan Aeronautical Information Service Center, under the authority of Japan Civil Aviation Bureau, Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of Japan.\n\"A comprehensive, consumer/business directory of commercial airports in the world (primarily for airports as businesses, rather than for pilots) is organized by the trade group Airports Council International.\"\nSee also.\nLists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37576", "revid": "9777540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37576", "title": "European Men's Handball Championship", "text": "International handball competition in Europe for men's national teams\nThe European Men's Handball Championship is the official competition for senior men's national handball teams of Europe and takes place every two years since 1994, in the even-numbered year between the World Championship. In addition to crowning the European champions, the tournament also serves as a qualifying tournament for the Olympic Games and World Championship. The most successful team is Sweden who have won five titles. Spain, however, have won most medals.\nHistory.\nIn 1946, the International Handball Federation was founded by eight European nations, and though non-European nations competed at the World Championships, the medals had always been taken by European nations. European Handball Federation is founded in 1991. At the same time (1995), the World Championship was changed from a quadrennial to a biannual event, and the European Handball Federation now began its own championship \u2013 which also acted as a regional qualifier for the World Championship.\n1990s.\nThe first championship was held in Portugal in June 1994. The host nation had not managed to qualify for any World Championship thus far, and they finished 12th and last after losing all six games, including 21\u201338 to Romania in the 11th-place play-off. Sweden became the first European champion after defeating Russia by 34\u201321 in the final, Russia's heaviest loss in their international history. Both teams had gone through the tournament without loss, but Sweden's fast breaks became the key in the final; they scored 14 of their 34 goals on fast breaks. Swedish middle back Magnus Andersson was named the event's best player and Russian left back Vasily Kudinov was top scorer with 50 goals.\nTwo years later, the championship moved to Spain, with the same format. This time, no team went through the group stage without giving up points, but Russia and Sweden were to face off once again; this time in the semi-final, and Russia got revenge with a 24\u201321 win in front of 650 spectators. In the other semi-final, the hosts beat Yugoslavia 27\u201323, before 7,500 spectators littered the arena in Sevilla to watch the hosts go down by one goal despite the efforts of Talant Dujshebaev, a Kyrgyz-born back player who had played for Russia in 1994 but who now turned out for Spain. Federal Republic of Yugoslavia participated for the first time and finished third.\nIn 1998 the Championship was held in Italy, whose appearance at the 1997 World Championship was their first at the top level of international handball. Spain went through the first six matches of the tournament unbeaten, while their opponents Sweden had won the first four games before becoming the first team to lose to hosts Italy. However, in the final, Sweden were too strong and won by 25\u201323 after having led by 15\u20139 at half-time in front of 6,100 spectators in Bolzano.\n2000s.\nTwo years later, the Championship was held in the Croatian cities of Zagreb and Rijeka. By now, the Championship had been moved back to January in the middle of the European handball season. The Championship acted as an Olympic qualifier, and hosts Croatia, who had won the 1996 Olympics, needed to finish in the top five to qualify. They lost to Spain and drew with France in the group stage, which sent them into a fifth-place play-off with neighbours Slovenia. 10,000 spectators watched as Slovenia prevailed by one goal and qualified for the Sydney Games. The two teams who had won European Championships before, Sweden and Russia, qualified for the final \u2013 Sweden had won the group stage match 28\u201325, but Russia took a six-goal lead at half-time. Sweden came back to tie the game at full-time, and two 10-minute extra periods were required before Sweden won 32\u201331 after Magnus Wislander scored the deciding goal.\nThree-time champions Sweden were the next to host the European Championship, in 2002. This was the first tournament with 16 teams, an expansion from 12 in the previous four instalments. The Swedes won their first seven matches, and had already qualified for the semi-finals when they lost 26\u201327 to Denmark, having led 17\u201311 at half time. In the other main round group, Iceland became the third Nordic team to qualify after defeating Germany in the final match, but both Denmark and Iceland were soundly beaten in the semi-finals \u2013 Denmark lost 23\u201328 to Germany, while Sweden defeated Iceland by 11 goals. Sweden thus qualified for their fourth final in five attempts, and in front of 14,300 spectators in Stockholm Globe, they came back from a one-goal deficit when Staffan Olsson equalised with five seconds to spare. Sweden had substituted their goalkeeper, and Florian Kehrmann replied with a goal in an empty net, but it was disallowed because the referees had not started play after the Swedish goal. In the extra time, Sweden held on, and could celebrate their fourth\ntitle.\nSweden's row of three successive Championships was broken in Slovenia in 2004, when Germany won despite not being touted as a medal candidate by news agency Deutsche Presse Agentur. Germany suffered an early defeat to Serbia and Montenegro, and qualified for the main round as the third and final team from their group, having drawn with France as well. However, as the favourites beat each other in Germany's main round group, Germany qualified for the semi-finals in first place from the six-team group. In the other group, Croatia, who won the other group, had not lost any of their first seven games, while Denmark also had four successive wins.\nCroatia faced hosts Slovenia in the semi-final, and the clash of the two Balkan neighbours saw heightened security measures. 7,000 spectators in the Hall Tivoli saw that the hosts became the first team to beat Croatia in this tournament despite 12 goals from Croatian right winger Mirza D\u017eomba who was reputed to be the best handball player in the world at the time. Denmark, who had reached their second successive semi-final, once again had to bow out at this stage, as they lost 20\u201322 to Germany in what was described as a \"hard-fought victory.\" Germany won the final more convincingly; a 16\u201310 lead at half time was never squandered, as Slovenia only got within three goals in the second half, and eventually lost 25\u201330.\nThe 2006 tournament was held in Switzerland, in the cities of Basel, Bern, Lucerne, St Gallen and Z\u00fcrich. France won the tournament, going through with one solitary loss \u2013 a 26\u201329 defeat to Spain in the preliminary round (where France trailed by eight goals at half-time). Defending champions Germany was also in this preliminary group, and this time taking one point through from the group stage would not be enough for Germany. Despite winning all three main round games, so did France and Spain, and those two teams qualified for the semi-finals from Group I. From the other group, Croatia qualified in first place after a 34\u201330 victory over Serbia and Montenegro in the last match. Later that evening, Denmark beat Russia and qualified for their third successive semi-final, one point behind Croatia. However, the Group II teams were both defeated by Group I teams, causing France and Spain to meet again in the final. In the third-place play-off, Croatia surprisingly lost to Denmark, while the final saw France prevail by eight goals to win their first European Championship\nNorway was the host country for the 2008 tournament. Matches were played in Bergen, Drammen, Lillehammer, Stavanger and Trondheim. Croatia, Norway, Hungary and France won their preliminary groups, but two of the teams failed to utilise their advantage; Norway drew with Poland and lost to Slovenia, and needed to beat Croatia in the final match of the group stage. Instead, Ivano Bali\u0107 scored the 23\u201322 goal with twenty seconds to spare, and only a late equaliser gave Norway third place in the group. Hungary, Spain and Germany had all gone through with two points from Group C, and Germany sealed their qualification with a two-goal win over Sweden in a match where a draw would have been enough for the Swedes. In the first semifinal Croatia played France in a game dominated by strong defense by both teams, with the Croats achieving a three-goal lead twice, only to see France come back strong. Croatia goalkeeper Mirko Alilovi\u0107 saved a shot from Nikola Karabatic with six seconds to go as Croatia won 24\u201323. Denmark came back from 7\u201312 down to beat Germany, despite the Germans equalising within the final minute, as Lars Christiansen slotted home a penalty shot with three seconds remaining. Croatia started off well in the final, scoring the first four goals, but with eight saves more from Denmark's keeper, Kasper Hvidt, Denmark won 24\u201320 and took their first major trophy.\nStatistics.\nSummary (1994\u20132024).\nSource (Table Section): \nTop scorers by tournament.\nThe record-holder for scored goals in a single Euro Championship is Sander Sagosen. He scored 65 goals for Norway at the 2020 European Men's Handball Championship that took place in Austria, Sweden and Norway.\nMost successful players.\nThe table shows the most successful players at the European Championships. Players marked with an\nasterisk (*) have the additional distinction of having been elected championship MVP.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37577", "revid": "18347523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37577", "title": "1994 European Men's Handball Championship", "text": "1994 edition of the European Men's Handball Championship\nThe 1994 European Men's Handball Championship was the inaugural edition of the tournament, held in Portugal from 3 to 12 June 1994, in the cities of Porto and Almada. Sweden won the tournament after defeating Russia in the final 34\u201321, Russia's heaviest loss in their international history, while Croatia finished third.\nPreliminary round.\n\"All times are local (UTC+1).\"\nRanking and statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37579", "revid": "30810409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37579", "title": "1996 European Men's Handball Championship", "text": "1996 edition of the European Men's Handball Championship\nThe 1996 European Men's Handball Championship was the second edition of the tournament and held in Spain from 24 May to 2 June 1996, in the cities of Ciudad Real and Seville. Russia won the tournament after defeating Spain in the final, while Yugoslavia finished third.\nPreliminary round.\n\"All times are local (UTC+2).\"\nRanking and statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "37580", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37580", "title": "1998 European Men's Handball Championship", "text": "Handball sports season in Italy\nThe 1998 European Men's Handball Championship was the third edition of the tournament and held in Italy from 29 May to 7 June 1998, in the cities of Meran and Bolzano. Sweden won the tournament after defeating Spain in the final, while Germany finished third.\nQualification.\nNote: Bold indicates champion for that year. \"Italic\" indicates host for that year.\nPreliminary round.\n\"All times are local (UTC+2).\""}
{"id": "37581", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37581", "title": "2000 European Men's Handball Championship", "text": "2000 edition of the European Men's Handball Championship\nThe 2000 European Men's Handball Championship was the fourth edition of the tournament and was held in Croatia from 21 to 30 January 2000, in the cities of Zagreb and Rijeka. Sweden won the tournament after defeating Russia in the final, while Spain finished third.\nQualification.\nNote: Bold indicates champion for that year. \"Italic\" indicates host for that year.\nVenues.\nTwo Croatian cities were selected as hosts for the 2000 Championship:\nPreliminary round.\n\"All times are local (UTC+1).\"\nRanking and statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShooting statistics.\n2003 research of Croatian kinesiologists on the efficiency of the shooting at the Championship summarized: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Almost half of all the shots performed (44.61%) were executed from the back-court players' positions (field shots). The winning teams were considerably more efficient in field shots and in 7m throws than the defeated ones - (43.20%) and (76.53%) as compared to (32.52%) and (65.76%), respectively. (...) The winning teams had more successful field shots, 6m-centre shots and wing shots, and fewer unsuccessful 6m-centre and field shots and 7m throws. Scoring efficiency from a distance and from the 6m line differentiates the successful teams (winners) from the unsuccessful (defeated) ones.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37582", "revid": "45523345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37582", "title": "2002 European Men's Handball Championship", "text": "2002 edition of the European Men's Handball Championship\nThe 2002 Men's European Handball Championship was the fifth edition of the tournament and took place from 25 January to 3 February 2002 in Sweden. Sweden won the tournament for a third time in a row, and fourth time overall.\nQualification.\nNote: Bold indicates champion for that year. \"Italic\" indicates host for that year.\nPreliminary round.\n\"All times are local (UTC+1).\"\nMain round.\nPoints gained in the preliminary round against teams that also qualified, were carried over.\nRanking and statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37583", "revid": "685195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37583", "title": "Wine (software)", "text": "Windows compatibility software\nWine is a compatibility layer to allow application software and computer games developed for Microsoft Windows to run on Unix-like operating systems. Wine is free and open-source software and is predominantly written using black-box testing reverse engineering, to avoid copyright issues.\nWine is primarily developed for Linux, macOS and FreeBSD. Developers can compile Windows applications against WineLib to help port them to Unix-like systems. No code emulation or virtualization occurs, except on Apple silicon Mac computers, where Rosetta 2 is used to translate x86 code to ARM code. \nIn a 2007 survey by desktoplinux.com of 38,500 Linux desktop users, 31.5% of respondents reported using Wine to run Windows applications. This plurality was larger than all x86 virtualization programs combined, and larger than the 27.9% who reported not running Windows applications.\nHistory.\nBob Amstadt, the initial project leader, and Eric Youngdale started the Wine project in 1993 as a way to run Windows applications on Linux. It was inspired by two Sun Microsystems products, Wabi for the Solaris operating system, and the Public Windows Interface, which was an attempt to get the Windows API fully reimplemented in the public domain as an ISO standard but rejected due to pressure from Microsoft in 1996. Wine originally targeted 16-bit applications for Windows 3.x, but as of 2010[ [update]] focuses on 32-bit and 64-bit versions which have become the standard on newer operating systems. The project originated in discussions on Usenet in comp.os.linux in June 1993. Alexandre Julliard has led the project since 1994.\nThe project has proven time-consuming and difficult for the developers, mostly because of incomplete and incorrect documentation of the Windows API. While Microsoft extensively documents most Win32 functions, some areas such as file formats and protocols have no public, complete specification available from Microsoft. Windows also includes undocumented low-level functions, undocumented behavior and obscure bugs that Wine must duplicate precisely in order to allow some applications to work properly. Consequently, the Wine team has reverse-engineered many function calls and file formats in such areas as thunking.\nThe Wine project originally released Wine under the same MIT License as the X Window System, but owing to concern about proprietary versions of Wine not contributing their changes back to the core project, work as of March 2002 has used the LGPL for its licensing.\nWine officially entered beta with version 0.9 on 25 October 2005. Version 1.0 was released on 17 June 2008, after 15 years of development. Version 1.2 was released on 16 July 2010, version 1.4 on 7 March 2012, version 1.6 on 18 July 2013, version 1.8 on 19 December 2015 and version 9.0 on 16 January 2024. Development versions are released roughly every two weeks.\nWine-staging is an independently maintained set of aggressive patches not deemed ready by WineHQ developers for merging into the Wine repository, but still considered useful by the wine-compholio fork. It mainly covers experimental functions and bug fixes. Since January 2017, patches in wine-staging begins to be actively merged into the WineHQ upstream as wine-compholio transferred the project to Alistair Leslie-Hughes, a key WineHQ developer. As of 2019[ [update]], WineHQ also provides pre-built versions of wine-staging.\nCorporate sponsorship.\nThe main corporate sponsor of Wine is CodeWeavers, which employs Julliard and many other Wine developers to work on Wine and on CrossOver, CodeWeavers' supported version of Wine. CrossOver includes some application-specific tweaks not considered suitable for the upstream version, as well as some additional proprietary components.\nCanadian software developer Corel for a time assisted the project, chiefly by employing Julliard and others to work on it. Corel had an interest in porting WordPerfect Office, its office suite, to Linux (especially Corel Linux). Corel later cancelled all Linux-related projects after Microsoft made major investments in Corel, stopping their Wine effort.\nOther corporate sponsors include Google, which hired CodeWeavers to fix Wine so Picasa ran well enough to be ported directly to Linux using the same binary as on Windows; Google later paid for improvements to Wine's support for Adobe Photoshop CS2. Wine is also a regular beneficiary of Google's Summer of Code program.\nValve works with CodeWeavers to develop Proton, a Wine-based compatibility layer for Microsoft Windows games to run on Linux-based operating systems. Proton includes several patches that upstream Wine does not accept for various reasons, such as Linux-specific implementations of Win32 functions.\nDesign.\nThe goal of Wine is to implement the Windows APIs fully or partially that are required by programs that the users of Wine wish to run on top of a Unix-like system.\nBasic architecture.\nThe programming interface of Microsoft Windows consists largely of dynamic-link libraries (DLLs). These contain a huge number of wrapper sub-routines for the system calls of the kernel, the NTOS kernel-mode program (ntoskrnl.exe). A typical Windows program calls some Windows DLLs, which in turn calls user-mode gdi/user32 libraries, which in turn uses the kernel32.dll (win32 subsystem) responsible for dealing with the kernel through system calls. The system-call layer is considered private to Microsoft programmers as documentation is not publicly available, and published interfaces all rely on subsystems running on top of the kernel. Besides these, there are a number of programming interfaces implemented as services that run as separate processes. Applications communicate with user-mode services through RPCs.\nWine implements the Windows application binary interface (ABI) entirely in user space, rather than as a kernel module. Wine mostly mirrors the hierarchy, with services normally provided by the kernel in Windows instead provided by a daemon known as the wineserver, whose task is to implement basic Windows functionality, as well as integration with the X Window System, and translation of signals into native Windows exceptions. Although wineserver implements some aspects of the Windows kernel, it is not possible to use native Windows drivers with it, due to Wine's underlying architecture.\nLibraries and applications.\nWine allows for loading both Windows DLLs and Unix shared objects for its Windows programs. Its built-in implementation of the most basic Windows DLLs, namely NTDLL, KERNEL32, GDI32, and USER32, uses the shared object method because they must use functions in the host operating system as well. Higher-level libraries, such as WineD3D, are free to use the DLL format. In many cases users can choose to load a DLL from Windows instead of the one implemented by Wine. Doing so can provide functionalities not yet implemented by Wine, but may also cause malfunctions if it relies on something else not present in Wine.\nWine tracks its state of implementation through automated unit testing done at every git commit.\nGraphics and gaming.\nWhile most office software does not make use of complex GPU-accelerated graphics APIs, computer games do. To run these games properly, Wine would have to forward the drawing instructions to the host OS, and even translate them to something the host can understand.\nDirectX is a collection of Microsoft APIs for rendering, audio and input. As of 2019, Wine 4.0 contains a DirectX 12 implementation for Vulkan API, and DirectX 11.2 for OpenGL. Direct2D support has been updated to Direct2D 1.2. Wine 4.0 also allows Wine to run Vulkan applications by handing draw commands to the host OS, or in the case of macOS, by translating them into the Metal API by MoltenVK.\nAs of \u00a02019[ [update]], Wine 4.3 uses the FAudio library (and Wine 4.13 included a fix for it) to implement the XAudio2 audio API (and more).\n Wine, since 4.0 (2019), supports game controllers through its builtin implementations of these libraries. They are built as Unix shared objects as they need to access the controller interfaces of the underlying OS, specifically through SDL.\nDirect3D.\nMuch of Wine's DirectX effort goes into building WineD3D, a translation layer from Direct3D and DirectDraw API calls into OpenGL. As of 2019, this component supports up to DirectX 11. As of 12 December 2016, Wine is good enough to run \"Overwatch\" with D3D11. Besides being used in Wine, WineD3D DLLs have also been used on Windows itself, allowing for older GPUs to run games using newer DirectX versions and for old DDraw-based games to render correctly.\nSome work is ongoing to move the Direct3D backend to Vulkan API. Direct3D 12 support in 4.0 is provided by a \"vkd3d\" subproject, and WineD3D has in 2019 been experimentally ported to use the Vulkan API. Another implementation, DXVK, translates Direct3D 8, 9, 10, and 11 calls using Vulkan as well and is a separate project.\nWine, when patched, can alternatively run Direct3D 9 API commands directly via a free and open-source Gallium3D State Tracker (aka Gallium3D GPU driver) without translation into OpenGL API calls. In this case, the Gallium3D layer allows a direct pass-through of DX9 drawing commands which results in performance improvements of up to a factor of 2. As of 2020, the project is named Gallium.Nine. It is available now as a separate standalone package and no longer needs a patched Wine version.\nUser interface.\nWine is usually invoked from the command-line interpreter: codice_1.\nwinecfg.\nThere is the utility codice_2 that starts a graphical user interface with controls for adjusting basic options. It is a GUI configuration utility included with Wine. Winecfg makes configuring Wine easier by making it unnecessary to edit the registry directly, although, if needed, this can be done with the included registry editor (similar to Windows \"regedit\").\nThird-party applications.\nSome applications require more tweaking than simply installing the application in order to work properly, such as manually configuring Wine to use certain Windows DLLs. The Wine project does not integrate such workarounds into the Wine codebase, instead preferring to focus solely on improving Wine's implementation of the Windows API. While this approach focuses Wine development on long-term compatibility, it makes it difficult for users to run applications that require workarounds. Consequently, many third-party applications have been created to ease the use of those applications that do not work \"out of the box\" within Wine itself. The Wine wiki maintains a page of current and obsolete third-party applications.\nFunctionality.\nThe developers of the Direct3D portions of Wine have continued to implement new features such as pixel shaders to increase game support. Wine can also use native DLLs directly, thus increasing functionality, but then a license for Windows is needed unless the DLLs were distributed with the application itself.\nWine also includes its own open-source implementations of several Windows programs, such as \"Notepad\", \"WordPad\", \"Control Panel\", \"Internet Explorer\", and \"Windows Explorer\".\nThe Wine Application Database (AppDB) is a community-maintained on-line database about which Windows programs works with Wine and how well they work.\nBackward compatibility.\nWine ensures good backward compatibility with legacy Windows applications, including those written for Windows 3.1x. Wine can mimic different Windows versions required for some programs, going as far back as Windows 2.0. However, Windows 1.x and Windows 2.x support was removed from Wine development version 1.3.12. If DOSBox is installed on the system (see below on MS-DOS), Wine development version 1.3.12 and later nevertheless show the \"Windows 2.0\" option for the Windows version to mimic, but Wine still will not run most Windows 2.0 programs because MS-DOS and Windows functions are not currently integrated.\nBackward compatibility in Wine is generally superior to that of Windows, as newer versions of Windows can force users to upgrade legacy Windows applications, and may break unsupported software forever as there is nobody adjusting the program for the changes in the operating system. In many cases, Wine can offer better legacy support than newer versions of Windows with \"Compatibility Mode\". Wine can run 16-bit Windows programs (Win16) on a 64-bit operating system, which uses an x86-64 (64-bit) CPU, a functionality not found in 64-bit versions of Microsoft Windows. WineVDM allows 16-bit Windows applications to run on 64-bit versions of Windows.\nWine partially supports Windows console applications, and the user can choose which backend to use to manage the console (choices include raw streams, curses, and user32). When using the raw streams or curses backends, Windows applications will run in a Unix terminal.\n64-bit applications.\nPreliminary support for 64-bit Windows applications was added to Wine 1.1.10, in December 2008. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], the support is considered stable. The two versions of Wine are built separately, and as a result only building wine64 produces an environment only capable of running x86-64 applications.\nAs of \u00a02019[ [update]], Wine has stable support for a WoW64 build, which allows both 32-bit and 64-bit Windows applications to run inside the same Wine instance. To perform such a build, one must first build the 64-bit version, and then build the 32-bit version referencing the 64-bit version. Just like Microsoft's WoW64, the 32-bit build process will add parts necessary for handling 32-bit programs to the 64-bit build. This functionality is seen from at least 2010.\nMS-DOS.\nEarly versions of Microsoft Windows run on top of MS-DOS, and Windows programs may depend on MS-DOS programs to be usable. Wine does not have good support for MS-DOS, but starting with development version 1.3.12, Wine tries running MS-DOS programs in DOSBox if DOSBox is available on the system. Due to a bug, Wine also incorrectly identifies Windows 1.x and Windows 2.x programs as MS-DOS programs, unsuccessfully attempting to run them in DOSBox.\nWinelib.\nWine provides Winelib, which allows its shared-object implementations of the Windows API to be used as actual libraries for a Unix program. This allows for Windows code to be built into native Unix executables. Since October 2010, Winelib also works on the ARM platform.\nNon-x86 architectures.\nSupport for Solaris SPARC was dropped in version 1.5.26.\nARM, Windows CE, and Windows RT.\nWine provides some support for ARM (as well as ARM64/AArch64) processors and the Windows flavors that run on it. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], Wine can run ARM/Win32 applications intended for unlocked Windows RT devices (but not Windows RT programs). Windows CE support (either x86 or ARM) is missing, but an unofficial, pre-alpha proof-of-concept version called WineCE allows for some support.\nWine for Android.\nOn 3 February 2013 at the FOSDEM talk in Brussels, Alexandre Julliard demonstrated an early demo of Wine running on Google's Android operating system.\nExperimental builds of WINE for Android (x86 and ARM) were released in late 2017. It has been routinely updated by the official developers ever since. The default builds do not implement cross-architecture emulation via QEMU, and as a result ARM versions will only run ARM applications that use the Win32 API.\nMicrosoft applications.\nWine, by default, uses specialized Windows builds of Gecko and Mono to substitute for Microsoft's Internet Explorer and .NET Framework. Wine has built-in implementations of JScript and VBScript. It is possible to download and run Microsoft's installers for those programs through winetricks or manually.\nWine is not known to have good support for most versions of Internet Explorer (IE). Of all the reasonably recent versions, Internet Explorer 8 for Windows XP is the only version that reports a usable rating on Wine's AppDB, out-of-the-box. However Google Chrome gets a gold rating (as of Wine 5.5-staging), and Microsoft's IE replacement web browser Edge, is known to be based on that browser (after switching from Microsoft's own rendering engine). Winetricks offer auto-installation for Internet Explorer 6 through 8, so these versions can be reasonably expected to work with its built-in workarounds.\nAn alternative for installing Internet Explorer directly is to use the now-defunct IEs4Linux. It is not compatible with the latest versions of Wine, and the development of IEs4Linux is inactive.\nOther versions of Wine.\nThe core Wine development aims at a correct implementation of the Windows API as a whole and has sometimes lagged in some areas of compatibility with certain applications. Direct3D, for example, remained unimplemented until 1998, although newer releases have had an increasingly complete implementation.\nCrossOver.\nCodeWeavers markets CrossOver specifically for running Microsoft Office and other major Windows applications, including some games. CodeWeavers employs Alexandre Julliard to work on Wine and contributes most of its code to the Wine project under the LGPL. CodeWeavers also released a new version called CrossOver Mac for Intel-based Apple Macintosh computers on 10 January 2007. Unlike upstream wine, CrossOver is notably able to run on the x64-only versions of macOS, using a technique known as \"wine32on64\".\nAs of 2012, CrossOver includes the functionality of both the CrossOver Games and CrossOver Pro lines therefore CrossOver Games and CrossOver Pro are no longer available as single products.\nCrossOver Games was optimized for running Windows video games. Unlike CrossOver, it didn't focus on providing the most stable version of Wine. Instead, experimental features are provided to support newer games.\nProton.\nOn 21 August 2018, Valve announced a new variation of Wine, named Proton, designed to integrate with the Linux version of the company's Steam software (including Steam installations built into their Linux-based SteamOS operating system and Steam Machine computers). Valve's goal for Proton is to enable Steam users on Linux to play games which lack a native Linux port (particularly back-catalog games), and ultimately, through integration with Steam as well as improvements to game support relative to mainline Wine, to give users \"the same simple plug-and-play experience\" that they would get if they were playing the game natively on Linux. Proton entered public beta immediately upon being announced.\nValve had already been collaborating with CodeWeavers since 2016 to develop improvements to Wine's gaming performance, some of which have been merged to the upstream Wine project. Some of the specific improvements incorporated into Proton include Vulkan-based Direct3D 9, 10, 11, and 12 implementations via vkd3d, DXVK, and D9VK multi-threaded performance improvements via esync, improved handling of fullscreen games, and better automatic game controller hardware support.\nProton is fully open-source and available via GitHub.\nWINE@Etersoft.\nThe Russian company Etersoft has been developing a proprietary version of Wine since 2006. WINE@Etersoft supports popular Russian applications (for example, by 1C Company).\nOther projects using Wine source code.\nOther projects using Wine source code include:\nReception.\nThe Wine project has received a number of technical and philosophical complaints and concerns over the years.\nSecurity.\nBecause of Wine's ability to run Windows binary code, concerns have been raised over native Windows viruses and malware affecting Unix-like operating systems as Wine can run limited malware made for Windows. A 2018 security analysis found that 5 out of 30 malware samples were able to successfully run through Wine, a relatively low rate that nevertheless posed a security risk. For this reason the developers of Wine recommend never running it as the superuser. Malware research software such as ZeroWine runs Wine on Linux in a virtual machine, to keep the malware completely isolated from the host system. An alternative to improve the security without the performance cost of using a virtual machine, is to run Wine in an LXC container, as Anbox software is doing by default with Android.\nAnother security concern is when the implemented specifications are ill-designed and allow for security compromise. Because Wine implements these specifications, it will likely also implement any security vulnerabilities they contain. One instance of this problem was the 2006 Windows Metafile vulnerability, which saw Wine implementing the vulnerable SETABORTPROC escape.\nWine vis-\u00e0-vis native Unix applications.\nA common concern about Wine is that its existence means that vendors are less likely to write native Linux, macOS, and BSD applications. As an example of this, it is worth considering IBM's 1994 operating system, OS/2 Warp. An article describes the weaknesses of OS/2 which killed it, the first one being:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;OS/2 offered excellent compatibility with DOS and Windows 3.1 applications. No, this is not an error. Many application vendors argued that by developing a DOS or Windows app, they would reach the OS/2 market in addition to DOS/Windows markets and they didn't develop native OS/2 applications.\nHowever, OS/2 had many problems with end user acceptance. Perhaps the most serious was that most computers sold already came with DOS and Windows, and many people didn't bother to evaluate OS/2 on its merits due to already having an operating system. \"Bundling\" of DOS and Windows and the chilling effect this had on the operating system market frequently came up in \"United States v. Microsoft Corporation\".\nThe Wine project itself responds to the specific complaint of \"encouraging\" the continued development for the Windows API on one of its wiki pages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For most people there remain a handful of programs locking them in to Windows. It's obvious there will never be a Microsoft Office ported to Linux, however older versions of programs like TurboTax won't be ported either. Similarly, there are tens of thousands of games and internal corporate applications which will never be ported. If you want to use Linux and rely on any legacy Windows application, something like Wine is essential... Wine makes Linux more useful and allows for millions of users to switch who couldn't otherwise. This greatly raises Linux marketshare, drawing more commercial and community developers to Linux.\nAlso, the Wine Wiki page claims that Wine can help break the chicken-and-egg problem for Linux on the desktop:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This brings us to the chicken and egg issue of Linux on the desktop. Until Linux can provide equivalents for the above applications, its market share on the desktop will stagnate. But until the market share of Linux on the desktop rises, no vendor will develop applications for Linux. How does one break this vicious circle?\nAgain, Wine can provide an answer. By letting users reuse the Windows applications they have invested time and money in, Wine dramatically lowers the barrier that prevents users from switching to Linux. This then makes it possible for Linux to take off on the desktop, which increases its market share in that segment. In turn, this makes it viable for companies to produce Linux versions of their applications, and for new products to come out just for the Linux market.\nThis reasoning could be dismissed easily if Wine was only capable of running Solitaire. However, now it can run Microsoft Office, multimedia applications such as QuickTime and Windows Media Player, and even games such as Max Payne or Unreal Tournament 3. Almost any other complex application can be made to run well given a bit of time. And each time that work is done to add one application to this list, many other applications benefit from this work and become usable too.\nHave a look at our Application Database to get an idea on what can be run under Wine.\nThe use of Wine for gaming has proved specifically controversial in the Linux community, as some feel it is preventing, or at least hindering, the further growth of native Linux gaming on the platform. One quirk however is that Wine is now able to run 16-bit and even certain 32-bit applications and games that do not launch on current 64-bit Windows versions. This use-case has led to running Wine on Windows itself via Windows Subsystem for Linux or third-party virtual machines, as well as encapsulated by means such as BoxedWine and otvdm.\nMicrosoft.\nUntil 2020, Microsoft had not made any public statements about Wine. However, the Windows Update online service blocks updates to Microsoft applications running in Wine. On 16 February 2005, Ivan Leo Puoti discovered that Microsoft had started checking the Windows Registry for the Wine configuration key and would block the Windows Update for any component. As Puoti noted: \"It's also the first time Microsoft acknowledges the existence of Wine.\"\nIn January 2020, Microsoft cited Wine as a positive consequence of being able to reimplement APIs, in its amicus curiae brief for \"Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc.\"\nIn August 2024, Microsoft donated the Mono Project, a reimplementation of the .NET Framework, to the developers of Wine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37584", "revid": "48982725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37584", "title": "List of wine-producing regions", "text": "Wines are produced in significant growing regions where vineyards are planted. Wine grapes berries mostly grow between the 30th and the 50th degrees of latitude, in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, typically in regions of Mediterranean climate. Grapes will sometimes grow beyond this range, thus minor amounts of wine are made in some rather unexpected places.\nIn 2021, the five largest producers of wine in the world were, in order, Italy, France, Spain, the United States, and China.\nCountries.\n2021 data from the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) show a total worldwide production of 27 million tonnes of wine with the top 15 producing countries accounting for over 90% of the total.\nAfrica.\nTunisia.\n\"See also: Tunisian wine\"\n\"The wine-producing enterprise for Venezuela can be found http://\".\nEurope.\nIreland.\n\"See also: Irish wine\"\nMontenegro.\n\"See also: Montenegrin wine\"\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, at the present time there are seven administrative regions (provinces) in which the wine industry has developed. Given the favorable climatic location, the law of Ukraine allocated 15 winegrowing areas (macrozones), which are the basis for growing certain varieties of grapes, and 58 natural wine regions (microzones). These are located mainly in the following areas.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, the area under vines is small, and whilst viticulture is not a major part of the rural economy, significant planting of new vines has occurred in the early 21st century. The greatest concentration of vineyards is found in the south east of England, in the counties of Hampshire, Kent, Surrey, and Sussex.\nAsia.\nChina.\nRegions producing native wines have been present since the Qin dynasty, with wines being brought to China from Persia. Some of the more famous wine-producing regions are:\nWith the import of Western wine-making technologies, especially French technology, production of wines similar to modern French wine has begun in many parts of China with the direction of experienced French wine-makers; China is now the sixth largest producer of wine in the world. The following regions produce significant quality of wine:\nIndonesia.\nIndonesia has been producing wine for over 18 years, with North Bali's vineyards producing three main grape varieties: the Belgia, the Alphonse Lavallee and the Probolinggo Biru. The main producer, Hatten Wines, has revolutionized the world of winemaking, with eight wines produced from these three varieties.\nIran.\nPrior to the Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1979, Iran was a producer of wine. While production has stopped, the vineyards continue to exist and their product has been diverted to non-alcoholic purposes.\nIsrael.\n\"Also includes wine regions in Israeli-occupied territories.\"\nSyria.\n\"See also: Syrian wine\"\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nGeographic indications for Australian wine are governed by law. The geographic indication must indicate where the \"grapes\" are grown, irrespective of where the wine itself is made. A geographic indication may be \"Australia\", \"South Eastern Australia\", a state name, zone, region or subregion if defined.\nThe zones, regions and subregions in each state are listed below:\nSouth Australia.\n\"Adelaide Super Zone includes Mount Lofty Ranges, Fleurieu and Barossa wine zones\".\nRegions, no zones defined\nNew Zealand.\nGI stands for New Zealand Geographical Indication.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37585", "revid": "4242489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37585", "title": "Museum", "text": "Institution preserving and interpreting collections or heritage\nA museum is an institution dedicated to displaying and preserving culturally or scientifically significant objects. Many museums have exhibitions of these objects on public display, and some have non-exhibited collections that are used by researchers and specialists. Museums host a much wider range of objects than a library, and they usually focus on a specific theme, such as the arts, science, natural history or local history. Museums that host exhibitions and interactive demonstrations are often tourist attractions, and many draw large numbers of visitors from outside of their host country, with the most visited museums in the world attracting millions of visitors annually.\nSince the establishment of the earliest known museum in ancient times, museums have been associated with academia and the preservation of rare items. Museums originated as private collections of interesting items, and not until much later did the emphasis on educating the public take root.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"museum\" comes from Latin, and is pluralized as \"museums\" (or rarely, \"musea\"). It is originally from the Ancient Greek \u039c\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd (\"mouseion\"), which denotes a place or temple dedicated to the muses (the patron divinities in Greek mythology of the arts), and hence was a building set apart for study and the arts, especially the Musaeum (institute) for philosophy and research at Alexandria, built under Ptolemy I Soter about 280 BC.\nPurpose.\nMuseums serve to collect, preserve, interpret, and display objects of cultural, historical, or scientific significance. Their primary functions include stewardship of heritage for future generations and facilitating education through exhibitions and programs aligned with academic curricula.\nEducational objectives remain central, with museums allocating significant resources to support formal and informal learning. The American Alliance of Museums (AAM) reports that U.S. museums contribute over 18 million instructional hours annually through guided tours, traveling exhibits, and teacher training. Economic impacts also factor into their societal role, as museums generate employment, stimulate tourism, and contribute tax revenue, with the AAM quantifying their annual GDP contribution at $50 billion.\nMuseum missions vary by institutional focus. Some prioritize education through interactive experiences. Others target specific audiences, like religious or local history organizations, while national museums aim for broad accessibility. Collections are curated according to mission statements, which dictate acquisition policies and conservation practices.\nPreservation efforts address material degradation and ethical challenges. UNESCO's 2015 Recommendation underscores the need to combat illicit trafficking and promote sustainable conservation methods, such as climate-controlled storage and digital archiving. These measures ensure the physical integrity of artifacts while adhering to provenance research standards, particularly for items acquired during colonial eras.\nChanging purpose over time.\nIn the 19th century, museums focused mainly on scientific research and organizing collections, especially natural history specimens. They aimed to classify and study objects, often gathered through exploration and colonialism. Museums were mostly for scholars but began opening to the public to educate and improve society. Institutions like the Smithsonian Institution maintain research capabilities but integrate them with missions to \"increase and diffuse knowledge\", as outlined in James Smithson's founding bequest.\nIn the early 20th century, museums focused on collecting, studying, and preserving artifacts, with an emphasis on scientific research and authenticity. Exhibits were mostly static and aimed at scholars, often prioritizing the objects themselves over the visitor experience. In the latter half of the 20th century, reduced government funding pushed museums to rely more on private support and focus on attracting visitors to generate revenue. This shift led museums to prioritize public engagement, interactive exhibits, and economic contributions over traditional research and collecting.\nIn the 21st century, museums focus on being accessible and inclusive. They use digital tools to reach wider audiences through virtual tours and online collections. Museums encourage dialogue about current social issues and aim to represent diverse communities. While preserving and displaying objects remains important, museums now also have served as spaces for discussion and social change.\nDefinitions.\nMajor professional organizations from around the world offer some definitions as to what constitutes a museum, and their purpose. Common themes in all the definitions are public good and the care, preservation, and interpretation of collections.\nThe International Council of Museums' current definition of a museum (adopted in 2022): \"A museum is a not-for-profit, permanent institution in the service of society that researches, collects, conserves, interprets and exhibits tangible and intangible heritage. Open to the public, accessible and inclusive, museums foster diversity and sustainability. They operate and communicate ethically, professionally and with the participation of communities, offering varied experiences for education, enjoyment, reflection and knowledge sharing.\"\nThe Canadian Museums Association's definition: \"A museum is a non-profit, permanent establishment, that does not exist primarily for the purpose of conducting temporary exhibitions and that is open to the public during regular hours and administered in the public interest for the purpose of conserving, preserving, studying, interpreting, assembling and exhibiting to the public for the instruction and enjoyment of the public, objects and specimens or educational and cultural value including artistic, scientific, historical and technological material.\"\nThe United Kingdom's Museums Association's definition: \"Museums enable people to explore collections for inspiration, learning and enjoyment. They are institutions that collect, safeguard and make accessible artifacts and specimens, which they hold in trust for society.\"\nWhile the American Alliance of Museums does not have such a definition, their list of accreditation criteria to participate in their Accreditation Program states a museum must: \"Be a legally organized nonprofit institution or part of a nonprofit organization or government entity; Be essentially educational in nature; Have a formally stated and approved mission; Use and interpret objects or a site for the public presentation of regularly scheduled programs and exhibits; Have a formal and appropriate program of documentation, care, and use of collections or objects; Carry out the above functions primarily at a physical facility or site; Have been open to the public for at least two years; Be open to the public at least 1,000 hours a year; Have accessioned 80 percent of its permanent collection; Have at least one paid professional staff with museum knowledge and experience; Have a full-time director to whom authority is delegated for day-to-day operations; Have the financial resources sufficient to operate effectively; Demonstrate that it meets the Core Standards for Museums; Successfully complete the Core Documents Verification Program\".\nAdditionally, there is a legal definition of museum in United States legislation authorizing the establishment of the Institute of Museum and Library Services: \"Museum means a public, tribal, or private nonprofit institution which is organized on a permanent basis for essentially educational, cultural heritage, or aesthetic purposes and which, using a professional staff: Owns or uses tangible objects, either animate or inanimate; Cares for these objects; and Exhibits them to the general public on a regular basis\" (Museum Services Act 1976).\nHistory.\nAncient.\nOne of the oldest museums known is Ennigaldi-Nanna's museum, built by Princess Ennigaldi in modern Iraq at the end of the Neo-Babylonian Empire. The site dates from c.\u2009530 BC, and contained artifacts from earlier Mesopotamian civilizations. Notably, a clay drum label\u2014written in three languages\u2014was found at the site, referencing the history and discovery of a museum item.\nAncient Greeks and Romans collected and displayed art and objects but perceived museums differently from modern-day views. In the classical period, the museums were the temples and their precincts which housed collections of votive offerings. Paintings and sculptures were displayed in gardens, forums, theaters, and bathhouses. In the ancient past there was little differentiation between libraries and museums with both occupying the building and were frequently connected to a temple or royal palace. The Museum of Alexandria, identical to the Library of Alexandria, was an inspiration during the early Renaissance period and thus originally libraries were called museums. The royal palaces and temples, such as the Roman temple of Peace, also functioned as a kind of museum outfitted with art and objects from conquered territories and gifts from ambassadors from other kingdoms allowing the ruler to display the amassed collections to guests and to visiting dignitaries.\nAlso in Alexandria from the time of Ptolemy II Philadelphus (r. 285\u2013246\u00a0BCE), was the first zoological park. At first used by Philadelphus in an attempt to domesticate African elephants for use in war, the elephants were also used for show along with a menagerie of other animals specimens including hartebeests, ostriches, zebras, leopards, giraffes, rhinoceros, and pythons.\nEarly.\nThe Capitoline Museums (Musei Capitolini), located on the Capitoline Hill in Rome, Italy, are widely considered to be the world's oldest public museum. Their origins can be traced back to 1471 when Pope Sixtus IV donated a collection of important ancient bronze sculptures to the people of Rome. This initial donation, which included iconic pieces such as the Capitoline Wolf, marked the beginning of what would become a vast repository of Roman art and artifacts. The museums were officially opened to the public in 1734 under Pope Clement XII, establishing them as the first institution where art could be enjoyed by ordinary people rather than just the owners.\nThe Capitoline Museums' significance represent a crucial moment in the development of cultural institutions. Their creation symbolized a shift in the ownership and accessibility of art, transitioning from private collections to public patrimony. The museums' collections have grown over the centuries to include ancient Roman statues, medieval and Renaissance art, jewelry, coins, and other historic artifacts.\nVatican Museums (Musei Vaticani), located in Vatican City, Rome, houses an extensive collection of art and historical artifacts amassed by the Catholic Church over centuries traces its origins with the purchase of a single marble sculpture, Laoco\u00f6n and His Sons, which was put on public display in 1506 by Pope Julius II.\nOther early museums began as the private collections of wealthy individuals, families or institutions of art and rare or curious natural objects and artifacts. These were often displayed in so-called \"wonder rooms\" or cabinets of curiosities. These collections first emerged in western Europe, then spread into other parts of the world.\nPublic access to these collections was often possible only at the whim of the owner and his staff. One way that elite men during this time period gained a higher social status in the world of elites was by becoming a collector of these curious objects and displaying them. Many of the items in these collections were new discoveries and these collectors or naturalists, since many of these people held interest in natural sciences, were eager to obtain them. By putting their collections in a museum and on display, they not only got to show their fantastic finds but also used the museum as a way to sort and \"manage the empirical explosion of materials that wider dissemination of ancient texts, increased travel, voyages of discovery, and more systematic forms of communication and exchange had produced\".\nOne of these naturalists and collectors was Ulisse Aldrovandi, whose collection policy of gathering as many objects and facts about them was \"encyclopedic\" in nature, reminiscent of that of Pliny, the Roman philosopher and naturalist. The idea was to consume and collect as much knowledge as possible, to put everything they collected and everything they knew in these displays. In time, however, museum philosophy would change and the encyclopedic nature of information that was so enjoyed by Aldrovandi and his cohorts would be dismissed as well as \"the museums that contained this knowledge\". The 18th-century scholars of the Age of Enlightenment saw their ideas of the museum as superior and based their natural history museums on \"organization and taxonomy\" rather than displaying everything in any order after the style of Aldrovandi.\nThe Ashmolean Museum, founded in 1677 from the personal collection of Elias Ashmole, was set up in the University of Oxford to be open to the public. The collection included that of Elias Ashmole which he had collected himself, including objects he had acquired from the gardeners, travellers and collectors John Tradescant the elder and his son of the same name. The collection included antique coins, books, engravings, geological specimens, and zoological specimens\u2014one of which was the stuffed body of the last dodo ever seen in Europe; but by 1755 the stuffed dodo was so moth-eaten that it was destroyed, except for its head and one claw. The museum opened on 24 May 1683, with naturalist Robert Plot as the first keeper. The first building, which became known as the Old Ashmolean, is sometimes attributed to Sir Christopher Wren or Thomas Wood.\nWhen the British Museum opened to the public in 1759, it was a concern that large crowds could damage the artifacts. Prospective visitors to the British Museum had to apply in writing for admission, and small groups were allowed into the galleries each day. The British Museum became increasingly popular during the 19th century, amongst all age groups and social classes who visited the British Museum, especially on public holidays.\nIn France, the first public museum was the Louvre in Paris, opened in 1793 during the French Revolution, which enabled for the first time free access to the former French royal collections for people of all stations and status. The fabulous art treasures collected by the French monarchy over centuries were accessible to the public three days each \"d\u00e9cade\" (the 10-day unit which had replaced the week in the French Republican Calendar). The \"Conservatoire du mus\u00e9um national des Arts\" (National Museum of Arts's Conservatory) was charged with organizing the Louvre as a national public museum and the centerpiece of a planned national museum system. As Napol\u00e9on I conquered the great cities of Europe, confiscating art objects as he went, the collections grew and the organizational task became more and more complicated. After Napoleon was defeated in 1815, many of the treasures he had amassed were gradually returned to their owners (and many were not). His plan was never fully realized, but his concept of a museum as an agent of nationalistic fervor had a profound influence throughout Europe.\nChinese and Japanese visitors to Europe were fascinated by the museums they saw there, but had cultural difficulties in grasping their purpose and finding an equivalent Chinese or Japanese term for them. Chinese visitors in the early 19th century named these museums based on what they contained, so defined them as \"bone amassing buildings\" or \"courtyards of treasures\" or \"painting pavilions\" or \"curio stores\" or \"halls of military feats\" or \"gardens of everything\". Japan first encountered Western museum institutions when it participated in Europe's World's Fairs in the 1860s. The British Museum was described by one of their delegates as a 'hakubutsukan', a 'house of extensive things' \u2013 this would eventually become accepted as the equivalent word for 'museum' in Japan and China.\nModern.\nAmerican museums eventually joined European museums as the world's leading centers for the production of new knowledge in their fields of interest. A period of intense museum building, in both an intellectual and physical sense was realized in the late 19th and early 20th centuries (this is often called \"The Museum Period\" or \"The Museum Age\"). While many American museums, both natural history museums and art museums alike, were founded with the intention of focusing on the scientific discoveries and artistic developments in North America, many moved to emulate their European counterparts in certain ways (including the development of Classical collections from ancient Egypt, Greece, Mesopotamia, and Rome). Drawing on Michel Foucault's concept of liberal government, Tony Bennett has suggested the development of more modern 19th-century museums was part of new strategies by Western governments to produce a citizenry that, rather than be directed by coercive or external forces, monitored and regulated its own conduct. To incorporate the masses in this strategy, the private space of museums that previously had been restricted and socially exclusive were made public. As such, objects and artifacts, particularly those related to high culture, became instruments for these \"new tasks of social management\". Universities became the primary centers for innovative research in the United States well before the start of World War II. Nevertheless, museums to this day contribute new knowledge to their fields and continue to build collections that are useful for both research and display.\nManagement.\nThe roles associated with the management of a museum largely depend on the size of the institution. Together, the Board and the Director establish a system of governance that is guided by policies that set standards for the institution. Documents that set these standards include an institutional or strategic plan, institutional code of ethics, bylaws, and collections policy. The American Alliance of Museums (AAM) has also formulated a series of standards and best practices that help guide the management of museums.\nVarious positions within the museum carry out the policies established by the Board and the Director. All museum employees should work together toward the museum's institutional goal. Here is a list of positions commonly found at museums:\nOther positions commonly found at museums include: building operator, public programming staff, photographer, librarian, archivist, groundskeeper, volunteer coordinator, preparator, security staff, development officer, membership officer, business officer, gift shop manager, public relations staff, and graphic designer.\nAt smaller museums, staff members often fulfill multiple roles. Some of these positions are excluded entirely or may be carried out by a contractor when necessary.\nProtection.\nThe cultural property stored in museums is threatened in many countries by natural disaster, war, terrorist attacks or other emergencies. To this end, an internationally important aspect is a strong bundling of existing resources and the networking of existing specialist competencies in order to prevent any loss or damage to cultural property or to keep damage as low as possible. International partner for museums is UNESCO and Blue Shield International in accordance with the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property from 1954 and its 2nd Protocol from 1999. For legal reasons, there are many international collaborations between museums, and the local Blue Shield organizations.\nBlue Shield has conducted extensive missions to protect museums and cultural assets in armed conflict, such as 2011 in Egypt and Libya, 2013 in Syria and 2014 in Mali and Iraq. During these operations, the looting of the collection is to be prevented in particular.\nPlanning.\nThe design of museums has evolved throughout history. However, museum planning involves planning the actual mission of the museum along with planning the space that the collection of the museum will be housed in. Intentional museum planning has its beginnings with the museum founder and librarian John Cotton Dana. Dana detailed the process of founding the Newark Museum in a series of books in the early 20th century so that other museum founders could plan their museums. Dana suggested that potential founders of museums should form a committee first, and reach out to the community for input as to what the museum should supply or do for the community. According to Dana, museums should be planned according to community's needs:\n\"The new museum\u00a0... does not build on an educational superstition. It examines its community's life first, and then straightway bends its energies to supplying some the material which that community needs, and to making that material's presence widely known, and to presenting it in such a way as to secure it for the maximum of use and the maximum efficiency of that use.\"\nThe way that museums are planned and designed vary according to what collections they house, but overall, they adhere to planning a space that is easily accessed by the public and easily displays the chosen artifacts. These elements of planning have their roots with John Cotton Dana, who was perturbed at the historical placement of museums outside of cities, and in areas that were not easily accessed by the public, in gloomy European style buildings.\nQuestions of accessibility continue to the present day. Many museums strive to make their buildings, programming, ideas, and collections more publicly accessible than in the past. Not every museum is participating in this trend, but that seems to be the trajectory of museums in the twenty-first century with its emphasis on inclusiveness. One pioneering way museums are attempting to make their collections more accessible is with open storage. Most of a museum's collection is typically locked away in a secure location to be preserved, but the result is most people never get to see the vast majority of collections. The Brooklyn Museum's Luce Center for American Art practices this open storage where the public can view items not on display, albeit with minimal interpretation. The practice of open storage is all part of an ongoing debate in the museum field of the role objects play and how accessible they should be.\nIn terms of modern museums, interpretive museums, as opposed to art museums, have missions reflecting curatorial guidance through the subject matter which now include content in the form of images, audio and visual effects, and interactive exhibits. Museum creation begins with a museum plan, created through a museum planning process. The process involves identifying the museum's vision and the resources, organization and experiences needed to realize this vision. A feasibility study, analysis of comparable facilities, and an interpretive plan are all developed as part of the museum planning process.\nSome museum experiences have very few or no artifacts and do not necessarily call themselves museums, and their mission reflects this; the Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles and the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, being notable examples where there are few artifacts, but strong, memorable stories are told or information is interpreted. In contrast, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C. uses many artifacts in their memorable exhibitions.\nMuseums are laid out in a specific way for a specific reason and each person who enters the doors of a museum will see its collection completely differently to the person behind them \u2013 this is what makes museums fascinating because they are represented differently to each individual.\nFinancial uses.\nCities have used museums as tools for economic development, especially in postindustrial regions. The Guggenheim Museum Bilbao in Spain is an example. The Basque regional government funded the museum to renew the city's old port area. The government spent about $100 million on construction, which led to protests from local residents. After opening, the museum attracted over 1.1 million visitors in 2015, with 63% coming from outside Spain. This influx of foreign visitors increased local spending and investment, which helped the city's economy and generated tax revenue that exceeded the initial investment.\nTitanic Belfast in Northern Ireland followed a similar approach. Built in the city's former shipyards, the attraction cost about the same as the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao. In its first year, Titanic Belfast welcomed over 800,000 visitors, with nearly 60% coming from outside Northern Ireland. Over ten years, the attraction generated an estimated \u00a3430 million in direct spending within the region. In the United States, cities have also invested in museums as economic drivers, such as the Taubman Museum of Art in Roanoke, Virginia, and The Broad in Los Angeles. The Broad, for example, generated $54.5 million in total business revenue and supported hundreds of jobs in its first year.\nThe use of museums as economic engines has caused debate among museum professionals and local communities. Some cities have seen protests when public funds are used for museum projects. Protests often decrease if the museum becomes successful, as in Bilbao. However, if a museum fails to attract enough visitors, criticism can continue. The Taubman Museum of Art is an example where high construction costs and lower-than-expected attendance led to financial difficulties and ongoing concerns about sustainability.\nFunding.\n Museums are facing funding shortages. Funding for museums comes from four major categories, and as of 2009 the breakdown for the United States is as follows: Government support (at all levels) 24.4%, private (charitable) giving 36.5%, earned income 27.6%, and investment income 11.5%. Government funding from the National Endowment for the Arts, the largest museum funder in the United States, decreased by 19.586 million between 2011 and 2015, adjusted for inflation. The average spent per visitor in an art museum in 2016 was $8 between admissions, store and restaurant, where the average expense per visitor was $55. Corporations, which fall into the private giving category, can be a good source of funding to make up the funding gap. The amount corporations currently give to museums accounts for just 5% of total funding. Corporate giving to the arts, however, was set to increase by 3.3% in 2017.\nExhibition design.\nMost mid-size and large museums employ exhibit design staff for graphic and environmental design projects, including exhibitions. In addition to traditional 2-D and 3-D designers and architects, these staff departments may include audio-visual specialists, software designers, audience research, evaluation specialists, writers, editors, and preparators or art handlers. These staff specialists may also be charged with supervising contract design or production services. The exhibit design process builds on the interpretive plan for an exhibit, determining the most effective, engaging and appropriate methods of communicating a message or telling a story. The process will often mirror the architectural process or schedule, moving from conceptual plan, through schematic design, design development, contract document, fabrication, and installation. Museums of all sizes may also contract the outside services of exhibit fabrication businesses.\nSome museum scholars have even begun to question whether museums truly need artifacts at all. Historian Steven Conn provocatively asks this question, suggesting that there are fewer objects in \"all\" museums now, as they have been progressively replaced by interactive technology. As educational programming has grown in museums, mass collections of objects have receded in importance. This is not necessarily a negative development; Dorothy Canfield Fisher observed that the reduction in objects has pushed museums to grow from institutions that artlessly showcased their many artifacts (in the style of early cabinets of curiosity) to instead \"thinning out\" the objects presented \"for a general view of any given subject or period, and to put the rest away in archive-storage-rooms, where they could be consulted by students, the only people who really needed to see them\". This phenomenon of disappearing objects is especially present in science museums like the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, which have a high visitorship of school-aged children who may benefit more from hands-on interactive technology than reading a label beside an artifact.\nTypes.\nThere is no definitive standard as to the set types of museums. Additionally, the museum landscape has become so varied, that it may not be sufficient to use traditional categories to comprehend fully the vast variety existing throughout the world. However, it may be useful to categorize museums in different ways under multiple perspectives. Museums can vary based on size, from large institutions, to very small institutions focusing on specific subjects, such as a specific location, a notable person, or a given period of time. Museums also can be based on the main source of funding: central or federal government, provinces, regions, universities; towns and communities; other subsidised; nonsubsidised and private.\nIt may sometimes be useful to distinguish between diachronic museums which interpret the way its subject matter has developed and evolved through time (e.g., Lower East Side Tenement Museum and Diachronic Museum of Larissa), and synchronic museums which interpret the way its subject matter existed at a certain point in time (e.g., the Anne Frank House and Colonial Williamsburg). According to University of Florida Professor Eric Kilgerman, \"While a museum in which a particular narrative unfolds within its halls is diachronic, those museums that limit their space to a single experience are called synchronic.\"\nIn her book \"Civilizing the Museum\", author Elaine Heumann Gurian proposes that there are five categories of museums based on intention and not content: object centered, narrative, client centered, community centered, and national.\nMuseums can also be categorized into major groups by the type of collections they display, to include: fine arts, applied arts, craft, archaeology, anthropology and ethnology, biography, history, cultural history, science, technology, children's museums, natural history, botanical and zoological gardens. Within these categories, many museums specialize further, e.g., museums of modern art, folk art, local history, military history, aviation history, philately, agriculture, or geology. The size of a museum's collection typically determines the museum's size, whereas its collection reflects the type of museum it is. Many museums normally display a \"permanent collection\" of important selected objects in its area of specialization, and may periodically display \"special collections\" on a temporary basis.\nMajor types.\nThe following is a list to give an idea of the major museum types. While comprehensive, it is not a definitive list. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLegal framework.\nPublic vs. private ownership.\nPrivately owned museums are organized by individuals and managed by a board and museum officers, while publicly owned museums are created and managed by federal, state, or local governments. A government can charter a museum through legislative action but the museum can still be private as it is not part of the government. The distinction regulates the ownership and legal accountability for the care of the collections.\nNon-profit vs. for-profit.\nNonprofit means that an organization is classified as a charitable, educational, scientific, or religious corporation and is exempt from paying most taxes and the money the organization earns is invested in the organization itself. Money made by a private, for-profit museum is paid to the museum's owners or shareholders.\nThe nonprofit museum has a fiduciary responsibility in regards to the public, in essence the museum holds its collections and administers it for the benefit of the public. Collections of for-profit museums are legally corporate assets the museum administers for the benefit of the owners or shareholders.\nManagement by trusts vs. corporations.\nA trust is a legal instrument where trustees manage the trust's assets for the benefit of the museum following the specific wishes of the donor. This provides tax benefits for the donor, and also allows the donor to have control over how assets are distributed.\nCorporations are legal entities and may acquire property in a way similar to how an individual can own property. Museums under incorporation are usually organized by a community or group of individuals. While a board of director's loyalty is to the corporation, a board of trustee's loyalty has to be loyal to the intention of the trust.\nCurrent challenges.\nDecolonization.\nA global movement for the decolonization of museums has been gaining momentum since the late 20th century. Proponents of this movement argue that \"museums are a box of things\" and do not represent complete stories; instead they show biased narratives based on ideologies, in which certain stories are intentionally disregarded. Through this, people are encouraging others to consider this missing perspective, when looking at museum collections, as every object viewed in such environments was placed by an individual to represent a certain viewpoint, be it historical or cultural.\nThe 2018 \"report on the restitution of African cultural heritage\" is a prominent example regarding the decolonization of museums and other collections in France and the claims of African countries to regain artifacts illegally taken from their original cultural settings.\nSince 1868, several monolithic human figures known as Moai have been removed from Easter Island and put in display in major Western museums such as the National Museum of Natural History, the British Museum, the Louvre and the Royal Museums of Art and History. Several demands have been made by Easter Island residents for the return of the Moai. The figures are seen as ancestors and family or the soul by the Rapa Nui and hold deep cultural value to their people. Other examples include the Gweagal Shield, thought to be a very significant shield taken from Botany Bay in April 1770 or the Parthenon marble sculptures, which were taken from Greece by Lord Elgin in 1805. Successive Greek governments have unsuccessfully petitioned for the return of the Parthenon marbles. Another example among many others is the so-called Montezuma's headdress in the Museum of Ethnology, Vienna, which is a source of dispute between Austria and Mexico.\nAs well as an argument for the decolonization of museums, there is also the push by some to represent, in both exhibitions and new museums, the marginalized communities within a culture or society. One example of this is the Black Miner's Museum in Nottingham, England.\nRepatriation of human remains.\nIn the United States, the repatriation of human remains from museum collections is shaped by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), enacted in 1990. This law requires museums and federal agencies to identify, inventory, and return Native American human remains and associated funerary objects to lineal descendants, tribes, and Native Hawaiian organizations. Recent updates to NAGPRA have introduced stricter timelines and require museums to obtain consent from descendant communities before displaying or researching human remains and cultural items. Many museums have responded by covering displays and increasing consultation with affiliated tribes while reviewing collections for compliance. Despite these efforts, challenges remain, including incomplete inventories, limited resources, and difficulties in establishing cultural affiliation for some remains.\nIn Europe, repatriation of human remains also reflects changing ethical standards and public attitudes, but the process is shaped by a patchwork of national laws, institutional policies, and international agreements. In the United Kingdom, the Human Tissue Act 2004 allows national museums to return human remains under certain conditions, and several institutions have repatriated remains to Indigenous communities, including those in Australia. In Germany and France, museums follow guidelines that encourage transparency, consultation, and case-by-case assessment of repatriation requests, especially for remains acquired in colonial contexts. Some institutions emphasize the scientific value of retaining remains, while others prioritize engagement with source communities and cultural restitution. The process remains complex, involving legal, political, and ethical considerations, but there is growing pressure from the public and governments for museums to address colonial legacies and return human remains to descendant communities.\nLabor issues and unionization.\nUnion membership among museum workers has grown, with over 15,000 museum employees now represented by unions at more than 50 art museums in the United States. The unionization wave has included institutions such as the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Whitney Museum, and the Guggenheim Museum, among others. These efforts reflect a broader movement to address labor issues and promote fair treatment across the museum field. In 2019 the workers in multiple museums voted to form unions with more protesting to press for a fair contract and against unfair labor practices. During that year over 3,000 cultural workers anonymously started to share their salaries online through a pay transparency spreadsheet.\nIn the United States, labor unrest within the arts and cultural sector go back at least nearly a century to 1933 when a New York-based collective of artists eventually known as the Artist's Union used collective bargaining for state relief for unemployed artists.\nIn 1971 administrative staff at New York's Museum of Modern Art formed the organization \"Professional and Staff Association of the Museum of Modern Art\" (PASTA), the first union of professional employees, as opposed to maintenance and service people, at a privately\u2010financed museum. The contract negotiated would provide a wage increase, protection against termination without cause, and direct access to trustees and policy-making processes at the museum. While there was some interest from workers at other museums at the time, for the next fifty years there was little change in museums adding union representation of their professional employees.\nUnionization Process at Museums\nMuseum workers typically begin by discussing shared concerns and organizing informally. They may then partner with established unions or form independent units. The process involves seeking recognition from museum management, which may require a formal election. Once recognized, the union negotiates a collective bargaining agreement covering wages, benefits, and working conditions.\nRecent union campaigns have often sought \"wall-to-wall\" representation, which includes workers from multiple departments under a single contract. This approach contrasts with earlier models that organized workers by occupation.\nUnion actions.\nStrikes and picketing\nMuseum workers have engaged in strikes and picketing to address disputes over wages and working conditions. At the Seattle Art Museum, security guards went on strike for 11 days in December 2024, which led to their first contract and wage increases. At the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art (MASS MoCA), unionized staff held a three-week strike in March 2024, resulting in a new contract with higher minimum wages, increased base pay, and improved overtime and holiday pay. In the United Kingdom, security guards at the Natural History Museum, Science Museum, and Victoria &amp; Albert Museum organized a coordinated strike and picketing in December 2024, seeking higher pay, sick leave from the first day of employment, and additional annual leave.\nProtests and public demonstrations\nMuseum unions have also used public demonstrations to draw attention to layoffs and contract disputes. In February 2025, Brooklyn Museum workers from UAW Local 2110 and Local 1502 of District Council 37 rallied outside the museum to protest the planned termination of 47 employees. The unions argued that management did not consult them before announcing layoffs and that the plan violated union contracts. The demonstration included speeches from local politicians and support from workers at other museums, with union leaders calling for alternative solutions, such as furloughs, instead of staff reductions.\nUnion formation\nUnion formation at museums has seen both successes and challenges. The Marciano Art Foundation, a museum established by co-founders of Guess clothing, Maurice Marciano and Paul Marciano closed indefinitely in November 2019 after workers attempted to unionize. The Marciano Foundation released a statement a month later that the closure was permanent. In the country of Georgia 40 employees were fired May 2022 as part of a restructuring. The newly formed union, the Georgian Trade Union of Science, Education, and Culture Workers said in a statement they said the employees were fired illegally and the reorganization was \"carried out by the employer in an untransparent and maladministered manner\" and that the organization will \"definitely fight to the end to protect the rights of employees.\" Fired senior curator Maia Pataridze said the new management mentioned her social media posts criticizing the government. Among those fired was union chair, Nikoloz Tsikaridze, a senior researcher and archaeologist who associated the discharging of himself and other museum staff was for forming a union, and said that Thea Tsulukiani, the Georgia Minister of Culture had \"punished\" them. MASS MoCA workers formed their union in April 2021 and secured a contract after a prolonged strike in 2024. Security guards at the Seattle Art Museum formed an independent union in 2021 and achieved a contract following their strike in 2024. However, union efforts often face resistance from management, and disputes over layoffs and contract terms continue to present challenges for museum unions. In 2025 Science Museum of Minnesota workers formed a wall-to-wall union in 2023 and ratified their first contract.\nSustainability and climate change.\nIncreasingly museums have responded to the ongoing climate crisis through enacting sustainable museum practices, and exhibitions highlighting the issues surrounding climate change and the Anthropocene.\nA study found that climate control for museum collections contributes significantly to museum's carbon footprint, and in some cases can contribute up to 70% of its energy consumption.\nDigital culture.\nAs digital culture has increased in society, museums have needed to respond to these changes in the facilities that they offer online.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37586", "revid": "46597050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37586", "title": "U-boot (cocktail)", "text": "Beer cocktail made by dropping a shot of vodka into a glass of beer\nA U-boot is a beer cocktail that is made by placing a shot of vodka into a glass of beer, typically a lager. It is popular in Germany, Poland, North Macedonia, and Flanders. In Germany, the liquor korn is sometimes used instead, while in Flanders and the Netherlands, \"jonge jenever\" is preferred.\nIt is called a U-boot (German abbreviation of \"Unterseeboot\", \"submarine\") because the shot glass of vodka sinks to the bottom of the glass of beer. The shot glass then \"surfaces\" when the cocktail is drunk.\nPreparation.\nPlace a shot glass on upside down glass and fill it with vodka. Place a pint glass over the two glasses so it sits against the shot glass and flip them over. Fill the pint glass with lager and as the drink is consumed the vodka will leak into drink.\nOther names and variations.\nIn Flanders and the Netherlands, it is called a \"Duikboot\", literally translated \"Submarine\". It is seen as a variant on the \"kopstoot\" (lit. \"headbutt\") in the Netherlands. The \"kopstoot\" is a shot of jenever followed by a beer as a chaser.\nIn North Macedonia it is called \"\u041f\u043e\u0434\u043c\u043e\u0440\u043d\u0438\u0446\u0430\" - \"Podmornica\", literally translated \"Submarine\". It uses tequila which is dropped into a big pint.\nIn southern Germany, U-boot is usually served as a combination of Fanta and cognac instead of beer and vodka.\nIn Mexico, it is called \"Submarino\", Spanish for \"Submarine\". Instead of vodka, it uses tequila, and the shot glass must be left inverted inside the beer glass.\nIn Russia, it is most often called \"\u0413\u043b\u0443\u0431\u0438\u043d\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0431\u043e\u043c\u0431\u0430\", Russian for \"Depth charge\". Usually any cocktail, mixing vodka and beer called in Russia \"\u0401\u0440\u0448\", (Yorsh) literally meaning a wire brush. It is also rarely called \"\u0412\u043e\u0434\u043e\u043b\u0430\u0437\" - \"Vodolaz\", literally translated as \"Diver\".\nIn Sorbia, vodka and orange juice is used.\nIn Brazil, it is called \"Submarino\", Portuguese for \"Submarine\". In the south, where it is more easily found, it is common practice to use steinh\u00e4ger instead of vodka.\nIn Sweden, it is called \"Ub\u00e5t\", Swedish for \"Submarine\". J\u00e4germeister is used instead of vodka.\nIn Greece, it is called \"\u03c5\u03c0\u03bf\u03b2\u03c1\u03cd\u03c7\u03b9\u03bf\", Greek for \"Submarine\". Served as a shot glass of Jack Daniels sink into the bottom of a short glass of beer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37587", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37587", "title": "Padthaway, South Australia", "text": "Town in Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPadthaway ( ) is a small town in the Australian state of South Australia located in the state's south-east within the Limestone Coast region about south east of the state capital of Adelaide and about south-east of the municipal seat of Bordertown. The name is derived from the Potawurutj, the Aboriginal name word for \"cover\" or \"bury\". Padthaway is in the Tatiara District Council, the state electorate of MacKillop and the federal Division of Barker.\nThe 2016 Australian census which was conducted in August 2016 reports that Padthaway had a population of 418 people.\nHistory.\nPadthaway was the name of the original pastoral station which was established on Bodaruwitj Aboriginal lands in this area in 1847 by a successful Scottish businessman, Robert Lawson. In 1882 the Padthaway Estate Homestead was built by Eliza and Robert Lawson. The historic Padthaway Estate complex is listed on the South Australian Heritage Register.\nIn 1952 Padthaway became the centre of a soldier settlement scheme. The first vineyards were planted here in 1964 and quickly transformed marginal grazing land into a top wine-producing region. White wines, especially, from the region are regular winners of major awards. These wines may be purchased at the local cellar door sales and at wine retailers around Australia. Agriculture is also strong in Padthaway with onion, olives and seeds being grown along with sheep and cattle which are reared for sale.\nPadthaway has a cluster of businesses located in the heart of town including a deli, general store, two rural service centres, an auto and engineering centre, a caravan park, and a park with a playground in the main street, Memorial Drive.\nOther public amenities include netball and tennis courts, football oval, town hall, sports complex, medical clinic, playground, skate park and rotunda. The toilets are right near the playground. In 2010 a new medical clinic was built.\nThe Padthaway Conservation Park which is situated on a former coastal dune is located about north-east of the town centre. The conservation park has stands of yellow gum, ribbon gum, brown stringybark, manna gums, many acacias and banksias. It is also home to a variety of animals including koalas, birds, rabbits, kangaroos and many insects. Sometimes the rare fire orchid may be viewed in flower.\nWine region.\nPadthaway is also the name of a wine region surrounding the town. It is home to several large commercial vineyards. The oldest vineyard was established in 1964 by Seppelts, with Lindeman's, Hardys and Wynns also establishing vineyards in the 1960s. The wine region is long and wide with over of vineyards. There are only a few cellar doors operating in the region.\nSports.\nRecords for lawn bowls being played in Padthaway go back to 1963. Lawn bowls is played in Padthaway on Saturday during the summer time. Padthaway bowling club plays in the Upper South East association.\nThe last A grade cricket premiership Padthaway won was in 1993. Padthaway has had a B grade side most years since. Padthaway came fifth in the competition in 2010\u20132011. In 2011 there was only one competition, an A grade side.\nNetball has been played in Padthaway since the mid-late 1960s. In 2011 the Padthaway Netball Club, also called the Lions, has more than seven different teams for netball.\nThe Padthaway Football Club which commenced in 1967 is known as the \"Lions\" and is the main club of the town, competing in the Kowree-Naracoorte-Tatiara Football League. The football club won an A grade premiership grand final in 1993 against Bordertown.\nThe Padthaway Tennis Club dates back to 1962 and 1972 when the club laid new concrete courts. The Padthaway Tennis club won many premierships between the mid-1970s and into the late 1980s. Tennis is currently played as a social competition on Wednesday nights for a six-eight-week season in the summer before Christmas.\nThe Padthaway golf course is carved out of scrubland. This tight course is a challenge even for the most professional of golfers. The Padthaway golf club was opened in 1988 and has 9 holes with scrapes.\nThe community.\nApex is a community group which operates in Padthaway composed of men between the ages of 18 and 45 who work together to promote social justice and raise awareness of charity causes by fundraising in interesting and creative ways.\nPadthaway has an active Women in Agricultural Business group. WAB is a statewide network with branches throughout SA. It is an organisation for women interested in rural, agricultural and business issues. It provides the opportunity for self-development and friendship.\nSchools.\nThe school was built in 1935 and had its 75-year anniversary in 2010. The event was attended by many past, current and future students and staff and a time capsule was buried on the day. In 2011 Padthaway Primary School had 52 students and 12 staff members. Padthaway Primary School caters for years Reception-7 and also has a Child Parent Centre (CPC). At Padthaway Primary School the Student Representative Council (SRC) organises many fundraising activities for students to participate in.\nPadthaway Primary School is a school with many activities for students such as the Come out, SAPSASA, Youth Environmental Forum, pancake day, Student Young Leaders Day and school camp. SAPSASA events include football, netball, cricket, tennis, cross country, athletics running events, swimming, diving, golf, hockey and skiing.\nClimate.\nPadthaway has a warm-summer mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: Csb), with very warm, dry summers (with high diurnal temperature variation) and cool, relatively wet winters. Average maxima range from in January to in July and average minima fluctuate between in January and in July. Mean average annual rainfall is , spread between 140.9 precipitation days. Annually, the town only experiences 41.5 clear days, whilst having 110.6 cloudy days. Extreme temperatures have ranged from on 23 June 2019 to on 20 December 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37588", "revid": "127415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37588", "title": "Offa's Dyke", "text": "Ancient earthwork in the United Kingdom\nOffa's Dyke () is a large linear earthwork that roughly follows the border between England and Wales. The structure is named after Offa, the Anglo-Saxon king of Mercia from 757 to 796, who is traditionally believed to have ordered its construction, although modern archaeological evidence shows far earlier origins and its original purpose is debated.\nIt delineated the border between Anglian Mercia and the Welsh kingdoms (such as Powys) by the time of its completion, but when begun (carbon-dated to 430AD) it separated the Brytons of the Decangi, Cornovi and Dobunni from the Western Ordovices, Demetae and Silures.\nThe earthwork, which was up to wide (including its flanking ditch) and high, traversed low ground, hills and rivers. Today, it is protected as a scheduled monument. Some of its route is followed by the Offa's Dyke Path, a long-distance footpath that runs between Liverpool Bay in the north and the Severn Estuary in the south.\nAlthough the dyke has conventionally been dated to the Early Middle Ages of Anglo-Saxon England, research in recent decades\u2014using techniques such as radioactive carbon dating\u2014has challenged the conventional historiography and theories about the earthwork and showed that construction was started in the early 5th century, during the sub-Roman period.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe generally accepted theory of the earthwork attributes most of its construction to Offa, king of Mercia from 757 to 796. The structure did not represent a mutually agreed boundary between the Mercians and the Kingdom of Powys. It had a ditch on the Welsh (western) side, with the displaced soil piled into a bank on the Mercian (eastern) side. This suggests that Mercians constructed it as a defensive earthwork, or to demonstrate the power and intent of their kingdom.\nThroughout its entire length, the dyke provides an uninterrupted view from Mercia into Wales. Where the earthwork encounters hills or high ground, it passes to the west of them.\nAlthough historians often overlook Offa's reign because of limitations in source material, he ranks as one of the greatest Anglo-Saxon rulers \u2013 as evidenced in his ability to raise the workforce and resources required to construct the dyke. Those requirements were immense \u2013 when Michael Wood approached motorway contractors in the late 1970s regarding potential costs in present terms they \"threw up their hands in dismay... impossible, they said.\" The construction of the earthwork probably involved a \"corv\u00e9e\" system requiring vassals to build certain lengths of the earthwork for Offa in addition to performing their normal services to their king. The Tribal Hidage, a primary document, shows the distribution of land within 8th-century Britain; it shows that peoples were located within specified territories for administration.\nEarly scholarship.\nThe first historians and archaeologists to examine the dyke compared their conclusions with the late 9th-century writer Asser, who wrote, \"there was in Mercia in fairly recent time a certain vigorous king called Offa, who terrified all the neighbouring kings and provinces around him, and who had a great dyke built between Wales and Mercia from sea to sea\". In 1955, Cyril Fox published the first major survey of the dyke. He concurred with Asser that the earthwork ran 'from sea to sea', theorising that the dyke ran from the River Dee estuary in the north to the River Wye in the south: approximately . Although Fox observed that Offa's Dyke was not a continuous linear structure, he concluded that earthworks were raised in only those areas where natural barriers did not already exist.\nHistorian Frank Stenton accepts Fox's conclusions. He wrote the introduction to Fox's account of the dyke. Although Fox's work has now been revised to some extent, it still remains a vital record of some stretches of Offa's Dyke that still existed between 1926 and 1928, when his three field surveys took place, but have since been destroyed.\nLater research.\nIn 1978, Dr. Frank Noble challenged some of Fox's conclusions, stirring up new academic interest in Offa's Dyke. His thesis entitled \"Offa's Dyke Reviewed\" (1978) raises several questions concerning the accepted historiography of Offa's Dyke. Noble postulates that the gaps in the Dyke were not the incorporation of natural features as defensive barriers, but instead the gaps were a \"ridden boundary\", perhaps incorporating palisades, that left no archaeological trace. Noble also helped establish the Offa's Dyke Association, which maintains the Offa's Dyke Path. This long-distance footpath mostly follows the route of the dyke and is a designated British National Trail.\nJohn Davies writes of Fox's study: \"In the planning of it, there was a degree of consultation with the kings of Powys and Gwent. On the Long Mountain near Trelystan, the dyke veers to the east, leaving the fertile slopes in the hands of the Welsh; near Rhiwabon, it was designed to ensure that Cadell ap Brochwel retained possession of the Fortress of Penygadden.\" And for Gwent, Offa had the dyke built \"on the eastern crest of the gorge, clearly with the intention of recognizing that the River Wye and its traffic belonged to the kingdom of Gwent\".\nOngoing research and archaeology on Offa's Dyke has been undertaken for many years by the Extra-Mural Department of the University of Manchester. Interviews with Dr. David Hill, broadcast in episode 1 of \"In Search of the Dark Ages\" (aired in 1979), show support for Noble's idea. Most recently, Hill and Margaret Worthington have undertaken considerable research on the dyke. Their work, though far from finished, has demonstrated that there is little evidence for the dyke stretching from sea to sea. Rather, they claim that it is a shorter structure stretching from Rushock Hill north of the Herefordshire Plain to Llanfynydd, near Mold, Flintshire, some 64 miles (103\u00a0km). According to Hill and Worthington, dykes in the far north and south may have different dates, and though they may be connected with Offa's Dyke, there is as yet no compelling evidence behind this.\nContrary evidence.\n\"Ofer\" means \"border\" or \"edge\" in Old English, giving rise to the possibility of alternative derivations for some border features associated with Offa. Roman historian Eutropius in his book \"Historiae Romanae Breviarium\", written around 369, mentions the Wall of Severus, a structure built by Septimius Severus, who was Roman Emperor between 193 and 211:\n\"Novissimum bellum in Britannia habuit, utque receptas provincias omni securitate muniret, vallum per CXXXIII passuum milia a mari ad mare deduxit. Decessit Eboraci admodum senex, imperii anno sexto decimo, mense tertio.\" https://\nHe had his most recent war in Britain, and to fortify the conquered provinces with all security, he built a wall for 133 miles from sea to sea. He died at York, a reasonably old man, in the sixteenth year and third month of his reign.\nThis source is conventionally thought to be referring, in error, to either Hadrian's Wall, , or the Antonine Wall, , which were both shorter and built in the 2nd century. Recently, some writers have suggested that Eutropius may have been referring to the earthwork later called Offa's Dyke. Most archaeologists reject this theory.\nBede also mentions the barrier built by Septimus Severus, but Bede says that the rampart was made of earth and timber, a description which would closer match Offa's Dyke than Hadrian's Wall, though it would describe the Antonine Wall:\nAfter many great and severe battles, (Severus) thought fit to divide that part of the island, which he had recovered, from the other unconquered nations, not with a wall, as some imagine, but with a rampart. For a wall is made of stones, but a rampart, with which camps are fortified to repel the assaults of enemies, is made of sods, cut out of the earth, and raised high above the ground, like a wall, having in front of it the trench whence the sods were taken, with strong stakes of wood fixed above it. Thus Severus drew a great trench and strong rampart, fortified with several towers, from sea to sea. http://\nHowever, the solution to the problem lies a few chapters later in Bede's account. In Book One Chapter Twelve of Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History\", he writes that the Romans \"built a strong wall of stone directly from sea to sea in a straight line between the towns that had been built as strong-points, where Severus had built his earthwork ... straight from east to west\". The strong wall of stone cannot refer to the Antonine Wall or Offa's Dyke, so it clearly refers to Hadrian's Wall, especially as Offa's Dyke runs from north to south. Also, as Severus's earthwork is described as being in the same location as Hadrian's Wall, it cannot be Offa's Dyke either, so the earth rampart with a great trench that Bede refers to must be the Vallum, the adjoining earthen barrier immediately south of Hadrian's Wall. Bede inadvertently attributes the Vallum to Septimius Severus, saying that it predated the wall. In fact the Vallum was the work of Hadrian and slightly post-dated the wall.\nEvidence has also been found that challenges the accepted date of the construction of Offa's Dyke. In December 1999, Shropshire County Council archaeologists uncovered the remains of a hearth or fire on the original ground surface beneath Wat's Dyke near Oswestry. Carbon dating analysis of the burnt charcoal and burnt clay \"in situ\" showed it was covered by earth around 446. Archaeologists concluded that this part of Wat's Dyke, so long thought of as Anglo-Saxon and a mid-8th-century contemporary of Offa's Dyke, was built 300 years earlier in the post-Roman period.\nIn 2014, excavations by the Clwyd-Powys Archaeological Trust focused on nine samples of the dyke near Chirk. Radiocarbon dating of redeposited turf resulted in a series of dates. In one section, these ranged from 430 to 652 and in another section from 887 to 1019: confirming that the bank is clearly post-Roman and that at least some rebuilding work took place after Offa's reign. It has been suggested that Offa's Dyke may have been a long-term project by several Mercian kings. Further excavations on the dyke at Chirk Castle found well-preserved remains of the ditch under later parkland; radiocarbon samples were recovered, but the results have not yet been made public.\nCurrent.\nThe England\u2013Wales border still mostly passes within a few miles of the course of Offa's Dyke through the Welsh Marches. The dyke has a cultural significance, symbolising the separation between England and Wales, similar to Hadrian's Wall between England and Scotland in the Scottish Marches. George Borrow, in his \"Wild Wales\" (1862), drawn from folklore, claimed that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[It] was customary for the English to cut off the ears of every Welshman who was found to the east of the dyke, and for the Welsh to hang every Englishman whom they found to the west of it.A section of the dyke which overlooks Tintern Abbey and includes the Devil's Pulpit near Chepstow is now managed by English Heritage. All sections of Offa's Dyke that survive as visible earthworks, or as infilled but undeveloped ditch, are designated as a scheduled monument. However, some parts of the dyke may also remain buried under later development. Some sections are also defined as Sites of Special Scientific Interest, including stretches within the Lower Wye Valley SSSI and the Highbury Wood National Nature Reserve. Parts are located within the Wye Valley and Shropshire Hills Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Most of the line of Offa's Dyke is designated as a public right of way, including those sections which form part of the Offa's Dyke Path.\nIn August 2013, a section of dyke, between Chirk and Llangollen, was destroyed by a local landowner. The destruction of the dyke to build a stable was said to be like \"driving a road through Stonehenge\", but the perpetrator escaped punishment.\nThe Offa's Dyke Centre is a purpose-built information centre in the town of Knighton, on Offa's Dyke on the border between England (Shropshire) and Wales (Powys). Some of the best remains of the earthworks can be seen within a two-minute walk from the centre. The Offa's Dyke Path (Welsh: \"Llwybr Clawdd Offa\") is a long-distance footpath close to the England\u2013Wales border. Although large sections are close to the dyke, the path is longer and in some places passes at some distance from the earthworks. Opened in 1971, the path is one of Britain's longest national trails, stretching for from the Severn estuary at Sedbury, near Chepstow, to Prestatyn on the north Wales coast.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37589", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37589", "title": "Dorset", "text": "County of England\nDorset ( ; archaically: Dorsetshire , ) is a ceremonial county in South West England. It is bordered by Somerset to the north-west, Wiltshire to the north and the north-east, Hampshire to the east, the Isle of Wight across the Solent to the south-east, the English Channel to the south, and Devon to the west. The largest settlement is Bournemouth.\nThe county has an area of and had an estimated population of 798,914 in 2024. A conurbation on the south-east coast contains the towns of Bournemouth, Christchurch, and Poole. The remainder of the county is largely rural, and its principal towns are the seaside resort of Weymouth in the south and Dorchester in the south-centre. For local government purposes Dorset comprises two unitary authority areas: Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole and Dorset. The county did not historically include Bournemouth and Christchurch, which were part of Hampshire.\nDorset has a varied landscape of chalk downs, steep limestone ridges, and low-lying clay valleys. The majority of its coastline is part of the Jurassic Coast World Heritage Site due to its geological and palaeontologic significance, and features notable landforms such as Lulworth Cove, the Isle of Portland, Chesil Beach and Durdle Door. The north of the county contains part of Cranborne Chase, a chalk downland. The highest point in Dorset is Lewesdon Hill (), in the south-west.\nThere is evidence of Neolithic, Celtic, and Roman settlement in Dorset, and during the Early Middle Ages the region was settled by the Saxons; the county developed in the 7th century. The first recorded Viking raid on the British Isles occurred in Dorset in 789 AD, and the Black Death entered England at Melcombe Regis in 1348. The county has seen much civil unrest: in the English Civil War an uprising of Clubmen vigilantes was crushed by Oliver Cromwell's forces in a pitched battle near Shaftesbury; the doomed Monmouth Rebellion began at Lyme Regis; and the Tolpuddle Martyrs, a group of Dorset farm labourers, were instrumental in the formation of the trade union movement. During the Second World War, Dorset was heavily involved in the preparations for the invasion of Normandy, and the large harbours of Portland and Poole were two of the main embarkation points. Agriculture was historically the major industry of Dorset, but is now in decline in favour of tourism.\nToponymy.\nDorset derives its name from the county town of Dorchester. The Romans established the settlement in the 1st century and named it Durnovaria which was a Latinised version of a Common Brittonic word possibly meaning \"place with fist-sized pebbles\". The Saxons named the town \"Dornwaraceaster\" (the suffix being the Old English name for a \"Roman town\"; cf. Exeter and Gloucester) and \"Dorns\u00e6te\" came into use as the name for the inhabitants of the area from \"Dorn\" (a reduced form of \"Dornwaraceaster\") and the Old English word (meaning \"people\"). The same ending can also be seen in the neighbouring Somerset. It is first mentioned in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" in AD\u00a0845 and in the 10th century the county's archaic name, \"Dorseteschyre\" (Dorsetshire), was first recorded.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first human visitors to Dorset were Mesolithic hunters, from around 8000\u00a0BC. The first permanent Neolithic settlers appeared around 3000\u00a0BC and were responsible for the creation of the Dorset Cursus, a monument for ritual or ceremonial purposes. From 2800\u00a0BC onwards Bronze Age farmers cleared Dorset's woodlands for agricultural use and Dorset's high chalk hills provided a location for numerous round barrows. During the Iron Age, the British tribe known as the Durotriges established a series of hill forts across the county\u2014most notably Maiden Castle which is one of the largest in Europe.\nThe Romans arrived in Dorset during their conquest of Britain in AD\u00a043. Maiden Castle was captured by the Legio II Augusta under the command of Vespasian, and the Roman settlement of Durnovaria was established nearby. Bokerley Dyke, a large defensive ditch built by the county's post-Roman inhabitants near the border with modern-day Hampshire, delayed the advance of the Saxons into Dorset for almost 150 years. It appears to have been re-fortified during this period, with the former Roman Road at Ackling Dyke also being blocked by the Britons, apparently to prevent the West Saxon advance into Dorset.\nHowever, by the end of the 7th century Dorset had fallen under Saxon control and been incorporated into the Kingdom of Wessex. The precise details of this West Saxon conquest and how it took place are not clear, but it appears to have substantially taken place by the start of the reign of Caedwalla in 685. The Saxons established a diocese at Sherborne (later to develop into the Diocese of Salisbury) and Dorset was made a shire\u2014an administrative district of Wessex and predecessor to the English county system\u2014with borders that have changed little since. In 789 the first recorded Viking attack on the British Isles took place in Dorset on the Portland coast, and they continued to raid into the county for the next two centuries.\nAfter the Norman Conquest in 1066, feudal rule was established in Dorset and the bulk of the land was divided between the Crown and ecclesiastical institutions. The Normans consolidated their control over the area by constructing castles at Corfe, Wareham and Dorchester in the early part of the 12th century. Over the next 200 years Dorset's population grew substantially and additional land was enclosed for farming to provide the extra food required. The wool trade, the quarrying of Purbeck Marble and the busy ports of Weymouth, Melcombe Regis, Lyme Regis and Bridport brought prosperity to the county. However, Dorset was devastated by the bubonic plague in 1348 which arrived in Melcombe Regis on a ship from Gascony. The disease, more commonly known as the Black Death, created an epidemic that spread rapidly and wiped out a third of the population of the country. Dorset came under the political influence of a number of different nobles during the Middle Ages. During the Wars of the Roses, for instance, Dorset came into the area influenced by Humphrey Stafford, earl of Devon (originally of Hooke, Dorset) whose wider influence stretched from Cornwall to Wiltshire. After 1485, one of the most influential Dorset figures was Henry VII's chamberlain Giles Daubeney.\nModern history.\nThe dissolution of the monasteries (1536\u20131541) met little resistance in Dorset and many of the county's abbeys, including Shaftesbury, Cerne and Milton, were sold to private owners. In 1642, at the commencement of the English Civil War, the Royalists took control of the entire county apart from Poole and Lyme Regis. However, within three years their gains had been almost entirely reversed by the Parliamentarians. An uprising of Clubmen\u2014vigilantes weary of the depredations of the war\u2014took place in Dorset in 1645. Some 2,000 of these rebels offered battle to Lord Fairfax's Parliamentary army at Hambledon Hill but they were easily routed. Sherborne Castle was taken by Fairfax that same year and in 1646 Corfe Castle, the last remaining Royalist stronghold in Dorset, was captured after an act of betrayal: both were subsequently slighted. The Duke of Monmouth's unsuccessful attempt to overthrow James II began when he landed at Lyme Regis in 1685. A series of trials known as the Bloody Assizes took place to punish the rebels. Over a five-day period in Dorchester, Judge Jeffreys presided over 312 cases: 74 of the accused were executed, 175 were sentenced to penal transportation, and nine were publicly whipped. In 1686, at Charborough Park, a meeting took place to plot the downfall of James II of England. This meeting was effectively the start of the Glorious Revolution.\nDuring the 18th century, much smuggling took place along the Dorset coast; its coves, caves and sandy beaches provided opportunities for gangs such as the Hawkhursts to stealthily bring smuggled goods ashore. Poole became Dorset's busiest port and established prosperous trade links with the fisheries of Newfoundland which supported cloth, rope and net manufacturing industries in the surrounding towns and villages. However, the Industrial Revolution largely bypassed Dorset which lacked coal resources and as a consequence the county remained predominantly agricultural. Farming has always been central to the economy of Dorset and the county became the birthplace of the modern trade union movement when, in 1834, six farm labourers formed a union to protest against falling wages. The labourers, who are now known as the Tolpuddle Martyrs, were subsequently arrested for administering \"unlawful oaths\" and sentenced to transportation but they were pardoned following massive protests by the working classes.\nThe Dorsetshire Regiment were the first British unit to face a gas attack during the First World War (1914\u20131918) and they sustained particularly heavy losses at the Battle of the Somme. In total some 4,500 Dorset servicemen died in the war and of the county's towns and villages, only one, Langton Herring, known as a Thankful Village, had no residents killed. During the Second World War (1939\u20131945) Dorset was heavily involved in the preparations for the invasion of Normandy: beach landing exercises were carried out at Studland and Weymouth and the village of Tyneham was requisitioned for army training. Tens of thousands of troops departed Weymouth, Portland and Poole harbours during the D-Day Normandy landings and gliders from RAF Tarrant Rushton dropped troops near Caen to begin Operation Tonga.\nDorset experienced an increase in holiday-makers after the war. First popularised as a tourist destination by George III's frequent visits to Weymouth, the county's coastline, seaside resorts and its sparsely populated rural areas attract millions of visitors each year. With farming declining across the country, tourism has edged ahead as the primary revenue-earning sector.\nSettlements.\nDorset is largely rural with many small villages, few large towns and no cities. The only major urban area is the South East Dorset conurbation, which is situated at the south-eastern end of the county and is atypical of the county as a whole. It consists of the seaside resort of Bournemouth, the historic port and borough of Poole, the towns of Christchurch and Ferndown plus many surrounding villages. Bournemouth, the most populous town in the conurbation, was established in the Georgian era when sea bathing became popular. Poole, the second largest settlement (once the largest town in the county), adjoins Bournemouth to the west and contains the suburb of Sandbanks which has some of the highest land values by area in the world.\nThe other two major settlements in the county are Dorchester, which has been the county town since at least 1305, and Weymouth, a major seaside resort since the 18th century. Blandford Forum, Sherborne, Gillingham, Shaftesbury and Sturminster Newton are historic market towns which serve the farms and villages of the Blackmore Vale in north Dorset. Beaminster and Bridport are situated in the west of the county; Verwood and the historic Saxon market towns of Wareham and Wimborne Minster are located to the east. Lyme Regis and Swanage are small coastal towns popular with tourists. Under construction on the western edge of Dorchester is the experimental new town of Poundbury commissioned and co-designed by Charles III when he was Prince of Wales. The suburb, which is expected to be fully completed by 2025, was designed to integrate residential and retail buildings and counter the growth of dormitory towns and car-oriented development.\nPhysical geography.\nDorset covers an area of and contains considerable variety in its underlying geology, which is partly responsible for the diversity of landscape. A large percentage (66%) of the county comprises either chalk, clay or mixed sand and gravels. The remainder is less straightforward and includes Portland and Purbeck stone, other limestones, calcareous clays and shales.&lt;ref name=\"Draper 136/137\"&gt; Draper (pp. 136\u2013137)&lt;/ref&gt; Portland and Purbeck stone are of national importance as a building material and for restoring some of Britain's most famous landmarks. Almost every type of rock known from the Early Jurassic to the Eocene epochs can be found in the county.\nDorset has a number of limestone ridges which are mostly covered in either arable fields or calcareous grassland supporting sheep. These limestone areas include a wide band of Cretaceous chalk which crosses the county as a range of hills from north-east to south-west, incorporating Cranborne Chase and the Dorset Downs, and a narrow band running from south-west to south-east, incorporating the Purbeck Hills. Between the chalk hills are large, wide vales and wide flood plains. These vales are dotted with small villages, farms and coppices, and include the Blackmore Vale (Stour valley) and the Frome valley. The Blackmore Vale is composed of older Jurassic deposits, largely clays interspersed with limestones, and has traditionally been a centre for dairy agriculture. South-east Dorset, including the lower Frome valley and around Poole and Bournemouth, comprises younger Eocene deposits, mainly sands and clays of poor agricultural quality. The soils created from these deposits support a heathland habitat which sustains all six native British reptile species. Most of the Dorset heathland has Site of Special Scientific Interest status, with three areas designated as internationally important Ramsar sites. In the far west of the county and along the coast there are frequent changes in rock strata, which appear in a less obviously sequential way compared to the landscapes of the chalk and the heath. In the west this results in a hilly landscape of diverse character that resembles that of neighbouring county Devon. Marshwood Vale, a valley of Lower Lias clay at the western tip of the county, lies to the south of the two highest points in Dorset: Lewesdon Hill at and Pilsdon Pen at .\nA former river valley flooded by rising sea levels 6,000 years ago, Poole Harbour is one of the largest natural harbours in the world.\nThe harbour is very shallow in places and contains a number of islands, notably Brownsea Island, the birthplace of the Scouting movement and one of the few remaining sanctuaries for indigenous red squirrels in England. The harbour, and the chalk and limestone hills of the Isle of Purbeck to the south, lie atop Western Europe's largest onshore oil field. The field, operated by Perenco from Wytch Farm, has the world's oldest continuously pumping well at Kimmeridge which has been producing oil since the early 1960s.\nDorset's diverse geography ensures it has an assortment of rivers, although a moderate annual rainfall coupled with rolling hills, means most are typically lowland in nature. Much of the county drains into three rivers, the Frome, Piddle and Stour which all flow to the sea in a south-easterly direction. The Frome and Piddle are chalk streams but the Stour, which rises in Wiltshire to the north, has its origins in clay soil. The River Avon, which flows mainly through Wiltshire and Hampshire, enters Dorset towards the end of its journey at Christchurch Harbour. The rivers Axe and Yeo, which principally drain the counties of Devon and Somerset respectively, have their sources in the north-west of the county. In the south-west, a number of small rivers run into the sea along the Dorset coastline; most notable of these are the Char, Brit, Bride and Wey.\nMost of Dorset's coastline is part of the Jurassic Coast, a World Heritage Site, which stretches for between Studland and Exmouth in Devon. This coast documents the entire Mesozoic era, from Triassic to Cretaceous, and is noted for its geological landforms. The Dorset section has yielded important fossils, including Jurassic trees and the first complete Ichthyosaur, discovered near Lyme Regis in 1811 by Mary Anning. The county features some notable coastal landforms, including examples of a cove (Lulworth Cove), a natural arch (Durdle Door) and chalk stacks (Old Harry Rocks). Jutting out into the English Channel at roughly the midpoint of the Dorset coastline is the Isle of Portland, a limestone island that is connected to the mainland by Chesil Beach, a long shingle barrier beach protecting The Fleet, Britain's largest tidal lagoon.\nThe county has one of the highest proportions of conservation areas in England, and two Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs) cover 53% of the administrative county. It has two heritage coasts totalling , and Sites of Special Scientific Interest covering . The South West Coast Path, a National Trail, begins at South Haven Point at the entrance to Poole Harbour. There are also substantial areas of green belt surrounding the South East Dorset conurbation, filling in the area between this and the Cranborne Chase and West Wiltshire Downs AONB.\nClimate.\nDorset's climate of warm summers and mild winters is partly due to its position on Britain's south coast. The third most southerly county in the UK, Dorset is less affected by the more intense Atlantic winds than Cornwall and Devon. Dorset, along with the entire South West England, has higher winter temperatures, average , than the rest of the United Kingdom. However, Dorset maintains higher summer temperatures than Devon and Cornwall, with average highs of . Excluding hills such as the Dorset Downs, the average annual temperature of the county is .\nThe south coast counties of Dorset, Hampshire, West Sussex, East Sussex and Kent enjoy more sunshine than anywhere else in the United Kingdom, receiving 1,541\u20131,885 hours a year. Average annual rainfall varies across the county\u2014southern and eastern coastal areas receive per year; the Dorset Downs receive between per year; less than much of Devon and Cornwall to the west but more than counties to the east.\nDemography.\nFor the overwhelming majority of Dorset\u2019s history, the population of the ceremonial county was ethnically homogeneous, with the population being of White British ethnicity. In the 2021 census, the ceremonial county of Dorset had a usual resident population of 779,775. The ceremonial county of Dorset is divided between two unitary authorities: Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole Council, which, in the 2021 census, had a usual resident population of 400,195, and Dorset Council, which, in the 2021 census, had a usual resident population of 379,580. In the 2021 census, the ethnic composition of the ceremonial county of Dorset comprised: 94.1% White; 2.3% Asian; 0.7% Black; 2.0% Mixed; and 0.9% Other.\n \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 census, the religious composition of the ceremonial county of Dorset comprised: 49.1% Christian; 41.2% no religion; 1.1% Muslim; 0.5% Buddhist; 0.5% Hindu; 0.3 Jewish; 0.0% Sikh; 0.7% Other religion; and 6.7% Not stated.\nDorset's population has a high proportion of older people and a lower than average proportion of young people: According to 2013 mid-year estimates, 23.6% are over 65 years of age, higher than the England and Wales average of 17.4%, and 18.6% are less than 17 years old, lower than the England and Wales average of 21.3%. The working age population (females and males between 16 and 64) is lower than England and Wales average, 60% compared to 64%. Data collected between 2010 and 2012 shows that average life expectancy at birth in the county is 85.3 years for females and 81.2 years for males. This compares favourably with the averages for England and Wales of 82.9 and 79.1 years respectively.\nMore than 33% of the county's population possess a level 4 qualification or above, such as a Higher National Diploma, Degree or a Higher Degree; while nearly 6.3% have no qualifications at all. Almost 43.7% are employed in a professional or technical capacity (Standard Occupational Classification 2010, groups 1\u20133), just over 10.3% are administrators or secretaries (group 4), around 12.8% have a skilled trade (group 5), over 18% are employed at a low-level in the care, leisure, sales or customer relations sector (groups 6 and 7) and 14.8% are operatives or in elementary occupations (groups 8 and 9).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nLocal government.\nLocal government in Dorset consists of two unitary authorities (UA): Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole (BCP) Council, which governs the major conurbation comprising the three towns; and Dorset Council which serves the more rural remainder of the county. For the BCP council, voters choose 76 councillors from 33 wards, with ten wards returning three candidates apiece and 23 wards, two. Dorset elects 82 councillors representing six three-councillor wards, 18 two-councillor wards and 28 single-councillor wards \u2013 52 wards in total. In both authorities, elections for the entire council occur every four years.\nThe two authorities came into existence on 1 April 2019, when Bournemouth and Poole merged with Christchurch, one of six second-tier districts previously governed by Dorset County Council, leaving the other five districts \u2013 Weymouth and Portland, West Dorset, North Dorset, Purbeck and East Dorset \u2013 to form a second UA.\nDorset County Council was first formed in 1888 by an act of government to govern the newly created administrative county of Dorset which had been based largely on the historic county borders. Dorset became a two-tier non-metropolitan county after a reorganisation of local government in 1974 and its border was extended eastwards to incorporate the former Hampshire towns of Bournemouth and Christchurch. Following a review by the Local Government Commission for England, Bournemouth and Poole each became administratively independent single-tier unitary authorities in 1997.\nNational representation.\nFor representation in Parliament Dorset is divided into eight Parliamentary constituencies\u2014five county constituencies and three borough constituencies. At the 2017 general election, the Conservative Party was dominant, taking all eight seats. The borough constituencies of Bournemouth East, Bournemouth West and Poole were traditionally Conservative safe seats and were all represented by Conservative members of parliament until the 2024 United Kingdom general election when they were all gained by Labour. The county constituencies of North Dorset and Christchurch are also represented by Conservative MPs. Between 1997 and 2019, West Dorset was represented by Conservative MP Oliver Letwin who was the Minister of State at the Cabinet Office in David Cameron's government. The seat was won by Edward Morello in the 2024.\nThe marginal seat of South Dorset is represented by Lloyd Hatton, who gained the seat from Conservative representative, Richard Drax, in 2024. The Mid Dorset and North Poole constituency has been represented by the Liberal Democrat MP, Vikki Slade since 2024.\nIn the 2024 general election, the Conservatives held two constituencies in Dorset, while the Liberal Democrats gained two and Labour gained four.\nEconomy and industry.\nIn 2003 the gross value added (GVA) for the non-metropolitan county was \u00a34,673\u00a0million, with an additional \u00a34,705\u00a0million for Poole and Bournemouth. The primary sector produced 2.03% of GVA, the secondary sector produced 22.44% and 75.53% came from the tertiary sector. The average GVA for the 16 regions of South West England was \u00a34,693\u00a0million.\nThe principal industry in Dorset was once agriculture. It has not, however, been the largest employer since the mid 19th century as mechanisation substantially reduced the number of workers required. Agriculture has become less profitable and the industry has declined further. Within the administrative county between 1995 and 2003, GVA for primary industry (largely agriculture, fishing and quarrying) declined from \u00a3229\u00a0million to \u00a3188\u00a0million\u20147.1% to 4.0%. In 2007, of the county was in agricultural use, up from in 1989, although this was due to an increase in permanent grass, and land set aside. By contrast, in the same period, arable land decreased from . Excluding fowl, sheep are the most common animal stock in the county; between 1989 and 2006 their numbers fell from 252,189 to 193,500. Cattle and pig farming has declined similarly; during the same period the number of cattle fell from 240,413 to 170,700, and pigs from 169,636 to 72,700.\nIn 2009 there were 2,340 armed forces personnel stationed in Dorset including the Royal Armoured Corps at Bovington, Royal Signals at Blandford and the Royal Marines at Poole. The military presence has had a mixed effect on the local economy, bringing additional employment for civilians, but on occasion having a negative impact on the tourist trade, particularly when popular areas are closed for military manoeuvres.\nOther major employers in the county include: BAE Systems, Sunseeker International, J.P. Morgan, Cobham plc and Bournemouth University. Dorset's three ports, Poole, Weymouth and Portland, and the smaller harbours of Christchurch, Swanage, Lyme Regis, Wareham and West Bay generate a substantial amount of international trade and tourism. Around 230 fishing vessels that predominantly catch crab and lobster are based in Dorset's ports. When the waters around Weymouth and Portland were chosen for the sailing events in the 2012 Summer Olympic Games, the area underwent an increased investment in infrastructure and a growth in the marine leisure sector. It is expected that this will continue to have a positive effect on local businesses and tourism.\nTourism has grown in Dorset since the late 18th century and is now the predominant industry. It is estimated that 37,500 people work in Dorset's tourism sector. Some 3.2\u00a0million British and 326,000 foreign tourists visited the county in 2008, staying a total of 15.1 million nights. In addition there were 14.6\u00a0million day visitors. The combined spending of both groups was \u00a31,458\u00a0million. Towns received 56% of Dorset's day trippers, 27% went to the coast and 17% to the countryside. A survey carried out in 1997 concluded that the primary reason tourists were drawn to Dorset was the attractiveness of the county's coast and countryside. Numbers of domestic and foreign tourists have fluctuated in recent years due to various factors including security and economic downturn, a trend reflected throughout the UK.\nManufacturing industry in Dorset provided 10.3% of employment in 2008. This was slightly above the average for Great Britain but below that of the South West region which was at 10.7% for that period. The sector is the county's fourth largest employer, but a predicted decline suggests there will be 10,200 fewer jobs in manufacturing by 2026.\nCulture.\nAs a largely rural county, Dorset has fewer major cultural institutions than larger or more densely populated areas. Major venues for concerts and theatre include the Lighthouse arts centre in Poole; the Bournemouth International Centre, Pavilion Theatre and O2 Academy in Bournemouth; and the Pavilion theatre in Weymouth. The Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra, founded in 1893, is based in Poole.\nDorset has more than 30 general and specialist museums. The Dorset County Museum (now the Dorset Museum) in Dorchester was founded in 1846 and contains an extensive collection of exhibits covering the county's history and environment. The Tank Museum at Bovington contains more than 300 tanks and armoured vehicles from 30 nations. The museum is the largest in Dorset and its collection has been designated of national importance. Other museums which reflect the cultural heritage of the county include The Keep Military Museum in Dorchester, the Russell-Cotes Museum in Bournemouth, the Charmouth Heritage Coast Centre, Poole Museum, Portland Museum and Wareham Town Museum.\nDorset contains 190 conservation areas, more than 1,500 scheduled monuments, over 30 registered parks and gardens and 12,850 listed buildings. Grade I listed buildings include: Portland Castle, a coastal fort commissioned by Henry VIII; a castle with more than a 1,000 years of history at Corfe; a Roman ruin described by Historic England as the \"only Roman town house visible in Britain\"; Athelhampton, a Tudor manor house; Forde Abbey, a stately home and former Cistercian monastery; Christchurch Priory, the longest church in England; and St Edwold's church, one of the smallest.\nDorset hosts a number of annual festivals, fairs and events including the Great Dorset Steam Fair near Blandford, one of the largest events of its kind in Europe, and the Bournemouth Air Festival, a free air show that attracted 1.3\u00a0million visitors in 2009. The Spirit of the Seas is a maritime festival held in Weymouth and Portland. Launched in 2008, the festival features sporting activities, cultural events and local entertainers. The Dorset County Show, which was first held in 1841, is a celebration of Dorset's agriculture. The two-day event exhibits local produce and livestock and attracts some 55,000 people. Inside Out Dorset is an outdoor arts festival that takes place every two years in rural and urban locations across Dorset. In addition to the smaller folk festivals held in towns such as Christchurch and Wimborne, Dorset holds several larger musical events such as Camp Bestival, End of the Road and the Larmer Tree Festival.\nDorset's only professional football club is AFC Bournemouth, which plays in the Premier League\u2014the highest division in the English football league system. Non-League semi-professional teams in the county include Southern Premier Division teams Dorchester Town F.C., Poole Town F.C. and Weymouth F.C. Dorset County Cricket Club competes in the Minor Counties Cricket Championship and is based at Dean Park Cricket Ground in Bournemouth. Poole Stadium hosts regular greyhound racing and is the home to top-flight speedway team Poole Pirates. The county's coastline, on the English Channel, is noted for its watersports (particularly sailing, gig racing, windsurfing, power boating and kayaking) which take advantage of the sheltered waters in the bays of Weymouth and Poole, and the harbours of Poole and Portland. Dorset hosted the sailing events at the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2012 Summer Paralympics at the Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy. The venue was completed in May 2009 and was used by international sailing teams in preparation for the Games. In motorsport, Dorset hosts the Extreme E Jurassic X Prix at Bovington Camp.\nDorset is famed in literature for being the native county of author and poet Thomas Hardy, and many of the places he describes in his novels in the fictional Wessex are in Dorset, which he renamed South Wessex. For example, Dorchester is renamed to Casterbridge in \"The Mayor of Casterbridge\" (1886). The National Trust owns Thomas Hardy's Cottage, in Higher Bockhampton, east of Dorchester; and Max Gate, his former house in Dorchester. Several other writers have called Dorset home, including Douglas Adams, who wrote much of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" while he lived in Stalbridge; John le Carr\u00e9, author of espionage novels, born in Poole; Tom Sharpe of \"Wilt\" fame lived in Bridport; John Fowles (\"The French Lieutenant's Woman\") lived in Lyme Regis before he died in 2005; T.F. Powys lived in Chaldon Herring for over 20 years and used it as inspiration for the fictitious village of Folly Down in his novel \"Mr. Weston's Good Wine\"; John Cowper Powys, his elder brother, also set a number of his works in Dorset, such as the novels \"Maiden Castle\" and \"Weymouth Sands\". Children's author Enid Blyton drew inspiration for many of her works from Dorset. The 19th-century poet William Barnes was born in Bagber and wrote many poems in his native Dorset dialect. Originating from the ancient Norse and Saxon languages, the dialect was prevalent across the Blackmore Vale but has fallen into disuse.\nDorset's flag, which is known as the Dorset Cross or St Wite's Cross, was adopted in 2008 following a public competition organised by Dorset County Council. The winning design, which features a white cross with a red border on a golden background, attracted 54% of the vote. All three colours are used in Dorset County Council's coat of arms and the red and white was used in recognition of the English flag. The golden colour represents Dorset's sandy beaches and the Dorset landmarks of Golden Cap and Gold Hill. It is also a reference to the Wessex Dragon, a symbol of the Saxon Kingdom which Dorset once belonged to, and the gold wreath featured on the badge of the Dorset Regiment.\nTransport.\nDorset is connected to London by two main line railways. The West of England line runs through the north of the county at Gillingham and Sherborne. Running west from London Waterloo to Exeter St Davids in Devon, it provides a service for those who live in the western districts of Dorset. The South West Main Line runs through the south via Bournemouth, Poole, and Dorchester to its terminus at Weymouth. Additionally, the Heart of Wessex Line runs north from Weymouth to Bristol and the Swanage Railway, a heritage steam and diesel railway, runs the between Norden and Swanage.\nDorset is one of few English counties not well served by canals, and has no motorways. The A303, A35 and A31 trunk roads run through the county. The A303, which connects the West Country to London via the M3, clips the north-west of the county. The A35 crosses the county in a west\u2013east direction from Honiton in Devon, via Bridport, Dorchester, Poole, Bournemouth and Christchurch, to Southampton in Hampshire. The A31 connects to the A35 at Bere Regis, and passes east through Wimborne and Ferndown to Hampshire, where it later becomes the M27. Other main roads in the county include the A338, A354, A37 and A350. The A338 heads north from Bournemouth to Ringwood (Hampshire) and on to Salisbury (Wiltshire) and beyond. The A354 also connects to Salisbury after travelling north-east from Weymouth in the south of the county. The A37 travels north-west from Dorchester to Yeovil in Somerset. The A350 also leads north, from Poole through Blandford and Shaftesbury, to Warminster in Wiltshire.\nA passenger seaport and an international airport are situated in the county. Brittany Ferries operates out of Poole Harbour, providing access to Guernsey as well as to Cherbourg and St Malo in France. Poole and Portland harbours are capable of taking cruise liners. Bournemouth Airport, on the edge of Hurn village north of Bournemouth, has scheduled and charter flights.\nMorebus and Damory provide a county-wide bus network with frequent services linking major towns, including Bournemouth, Poole and Wimborne, and a varied service in further rural locations. First Group operate buses in the Weymouth and Bridport area, including a regular route along the A35 from Weymouth to Axminster, which helps to compensate for the missing rail link west of Dorchester; and the Jurassic Coaster service, which runs along the county's coastline. Yellow Buses provided bus services within Bournemouth and outlying areas until they ceased operating in 2022.\nReligious sites.\nUnlike all of its neighbouring counties, Dorset does not have a cathedral. Over 95% of the county falls within the Church of England Diocese of Salisbury. A small section to the west comes under the Diocese of Bath and Wells and to the east Christchurch and much of Bournemouth\u2014both historically part of Hampshire\u2014belong to the Diocese of Winchester. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Plymouth incorporates most of Dorset with the exception of Christchurch and a portion of Bournemouth which belongs to the Diocese of Portsmouth. Few purpose-built places of worship exist in Dorset for faiths other than Christianity. In 2008 a Hindu temple was constructed in Blandford Forum for the Gurkhas based at the town's military camp. Bournemouth, which contains a higher proportion of Jewish residents than the national average, has three synagogues and an Islamic Centre and a mosque for Muslims.\nChristianity was introduced to Dorset by the Romans. A 4th century Roman mosaic discovered near Hinton St Mary contains what is generally accepted to be an image of Christ. Christianity became firmly established in the county during the Saxon period although there are few surviving Saxon churches; the most complete is St. Martin's in Wareham which has features from the early 11th century. Mediaeval churches are more prevalent in Dorset; most are 15th century and are of a Perpendicular style. Sherborne Abbey, one of the county's largest, is noted for its broad fan vaulting added during an extensive 15th century rebuild. Founded in AD\u00a0705 by Aldhelm, the Abbey contained the chair of the Bishop of Sherborne and was granted cathedral status until 1075 when the diocese was transferred to Old Sarum. Wimborne Minster features a chained library and a 14th-century astronomical clock; Christchurch Priory is renowned for its miraculous beam which, according to legend, was installed by Christ; and the 15th century roof spanning the nave at St John the Baptist Church in Bere Regis is described by architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner as the \"finest timber roof of Dorset\". Saint Wite's shrine is located in the north transept of St Candida and Holy Cross at Whitchurch Canonicorum. It is the only church in the country, besides Westminster Abbey, to have a shrine that contains the relics of a saint. \nMonastic foundations were once abundant in Dorset, but all ceased to exist at the Dissolution of the monasteries. The Reformation and the political and religious turmoil that ensued largely checked the building of new churches until the turn of the 18th century. Notable examples of Early Georgian churches include the Bastard brothers' Church of St. Peter and St. Paul in Blandford Forum, and St George's Church on the Isle of Portland, which has a steeple and tower inspired by the works of Christopher Wren. From the late 18th century onwards, churches in Dorset tended towards a Gothic Revival style. A notable exception to this trend, however, is the Church of St Mary in East Lulworth\u2014the first freestanding Roman Catholic church built in England after the Reformation. George III gave permission to erect the building on the condition that it resembled a garden mausoleum rather than a church. It was completed in 1789. Bournemouth, founded in 1810, has a wealth of 19th-century churches including St Peter's and St Stephen's. St Dunstan's (formerly St Osmund's) in Poole is one of a small number of 20th-century churches in Dorset. The final major work of Edward Schroeder Prior, it is one of the last examples of the Neo Byzantine style. The Church of St Nicholas and St Magnus in Moreton is noted for its elaborate engraved glass windows designed by Laurence Whistler. Severely damaged by a stray German bomb in 1940, the church subsequently underwent extensive renovation and Whistler had replaced every window by 1984.\nEducation.\nResponsibility for state schools in Dorset is divided between two local education authorities: Dorset Council, which covers the majority of the county, and Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole (BCP) Council. Most of the Dorset Council area operates a two-tier comprehensive system whereby pupils attend a primary school before completing their education at secondary school but Corfe Mullen, Dorchester, Ferndown and West Moors maintain a three-tier system (first, middle and high school). Bournemouth operates a two-tier system; Poole operates two and three-tier systems. BCP is one of the few local authorities in England to maintain selective education, containing four single-sex grammar schools which select pupils on the basis of an eleven-plus examination. Some of the county's schools are academies\u2014self-governing state schools which have become independent of their local education authority and are maintained directly by the Department for Education. In 2017, the Progress 8 score for schools in the Dorset Council area was ranked below average, and 39.6% of pupils gained at least Grade 5 or above in English and maths GCSEs matching the national average of 39.6%. Poole recorded an above average Progress 8 score and 54% of pupils achieved Grade 5 or above in English and maths GCSEs. Bournemouth was ranked as average and 47.8% of pupils achieved Grade 5 or above in English and maths GCSEs.\nDorset contains a range of privately funded independent schools. Many are boarding schools which also take day pupils, such as the co-educational Canford School which is built around a 19th-century Grade I listed manor house; and Sherborne School, a boys' school founded in the 16th century.\nFour of the county's five largest towns contain a further education college: Weymouth College, Kingston Maurward College in Dorchester and Bournemouth and Poole College which is one of the largest in the UK. Dorset has two higher education establishments situated in the heart of the county's south east conurbation. Bournemouth University has facilities across Bournemouth and Poole and over 17,000 students. Previously named Bournemouth Polytechnic, it was granted university status as a result of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992. The Arts University Bournemouth is situated between the border of Poole and Bournemouth. It became a higher education institute in 2001 and was given degree-awarding powers in 2008. It was granted full university status in 2012.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37591", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37591", "title": "Cabernet Sauvignon", "text": "Red-wine variety of grape\nCabernet Sauvignon () is one of the world's most widely recognized red wine grape varieties. It is grown in nearly every major wine producing country among a diverse spectrum of climates from Australia and British Columbia, Canada to Lebanon's Beqaa Valley. \nThis grape variety appeared in France in the 17th century as a result of natural crossbreeding. Its popularity is often attributed to its ease of cultivation\u2014the grapes have thick skins and the vines are hardy and naturally low yielding, budding late to avoid frost and resistant to viticulture hazards.\nThe classic profile of Cabernet Sauvignon tends to be full-bodied wines with high tannins and noticeable acidity that contributes to the wine's aging potential. In cool areas, it has flavors of blackcurrant and green pepper; in warmer places, it may taste like black cherry and olive; in very hot climates, it can have a jammy flavor.\nHistory and origins.\nFor many years, the origin of Cabernet Sauvignon was not clearly understood, and many myths and conjectures surrounded it. Until recently, the grape was rumoured to have ancient origins, perhaps even being the \"Biturica\" grape used to make ancient Roman wine and referenced by Pliny the Elder. This belief was widely held in the 18th century, when the grape was also known as \"Petite Vidure\" or \"Bidure\", apparently a corruption of \"Biturica\". There was also a belief that \"Vidure\" was a reference to the hardwood (French \"vigne dure\") of the vine, with a possible relationship to Carm\u00e9n\u00e8re which was once known as \"Grand Vidure\". Another theory was that the grapevine originated in the Rioja region of Spain.\nWhile the period when the name \"Cabernet Sauvignon\" became more prevalent over \"Petite Vidure\" is not certain, records indicate that the grape was a popular Bordeaux planting in the 18th century M\u00e9doc region. The first estates known to have actively grown the variety (and the likely source of Cabernet vines for other estates) were Ch\u00e2teau Mouton and Ch\u00e2teau d'Armailhac in Pauillac.\nThe grape's true origins were discovered in 1996 with the use of DNA typing at the UC Davis Department of Viticulture and Enology by a team led by Carole Meredith. The DNA evidence determined that Cabernet Sauvignon was the offspring of Cabernet franc and Sauvignon blanc and was most likely a chance crossing that occurred in the 17th century. Before this discovery, this origin had been suspected from the similarity of the grapes' names and the fact that Cabernet Sauvignon shares similar aromas with both grapes\u2014such as the blackcurrant and pencil box aromas of Cabernet franc and the grassiness of Sauvignon blanc. In 2016, scientists at the UC Davis announced they had sequenced a draft of the whole genome of the Cabernet Sauvignon grape, the first genome of a commercial wine-producing grape to be sequenced.\nOffspring and White Cabernet.\nWhile not as prolific in mutating as Pinot noir, nor as widely used in the production of offspring, Cabernet Sauvignon has been linked to other grape varieties. In 1961, a cross of Cabernet Sauvignon and Grenache produced the French wine grape Marselan. Cygne blanc is a white-berried seedling of Cabernet Sauvignon that was discovered in 1989 growing in a garden in Swan Valley, Western Australia. Cabernet blanc is a crossing of Cabernet Sauvignon and an unknown hybrid grape variety that was discovered in Switzerland in the late 20th century.\nIn 1977 a vine producing 'bronze' grapes was found in the vineyards of Cleggett Wines in Australia. They propagated this mutant, registered it under the name of Malian, and sold pale red wines under that name. In 1991 one of the Bronze Cabernet vines started producing white grapes. Cleggett registered this \"White Cabernet\" under the name of Shalistin. Compared to its Cabernet parent, Malian appears to lack anthocyanins in the subepidermal cells but retains them in the epidermis, whereas Shalistin has no anthocyanins in either layer. The team that went on to discover the VvMYBA1 and VvMYBA2 genes that control grape colour have suggested that a gene involved in anthocyanin production has been deleted in the subepidermis of Malian, and then subepidermal cells invaded the epidermis to produce Shalistin.\nDuring a series of trials between 1924 and 1930, the pollen of Cabernet Sauvignon was used to fertilize Glera vines (the white wine grape used to make the sparkling wine Prosecco) to create the red Italian wine grape Incrocio Manzoni 2.15.\nIn 1972, the Australian agency CSIRO crossed Cabernet Sauvignon grapes with the Spanish Sumoll variety to create three new varieties: Cienna, Tyrian and Rubienne.\nIn 1983, Cabernet Sauvignon was crossed with the white German wine grape Bronner to create the white wine grape Souvignier gris.\nViticulture.\nWhile Cabernet Sauvignon can grow in a variety of climates, its suitability as a varietal wine or as a blend component is strongly influenced by the warmth of the climate. The vine is one of the last major grape varieties to bud and ripen (typically 1\u20132 weeks after Merlot and Cabernet franc), and the climate of the growing season affects how early the grapes will be harvested. Many wine regions in California give the vine an abundance of sunshine with few problems in ripening fully, which increases the likelihood of producing varietal Cabernet wines. In regions like Bordeaux, under the threat of inclement harvest season weather, Cabernet Sauvignon is often harvested a little earlier than ideal and blended with other grapes to fill in the gaps. In some regions, the climate will be more important than the soil. In regions that are too cool, there is a potential for more herbaceous and green bell pepper flavours from less than ideally ripened grapes. In regions where the grape is exposed to excess warmth and over-ripening, there is a propensity for the wine to develop flavours of cooked or stewed blackcurrants.\nThe Cabernet grape variety has thrived in a variety of vineyard soil types, making the consideration of soil less of a concern, particularly for New World winemakers. In Bordeaux, the soil aspect of \"terroir\" was historically an important consideration in determining which of the major Bordeaux grape varieties were planted. While Merlot seemed to thrive in clay- and limestone-based soils (such as those of the Right Bank regions of the Gironde estuary), Cabernet Sauvignon seemed to perform better in the gravel-based soil of the M\u00e9doc region on the Left Bank. The gravel soils offered the benefit of being well drained while absorbing and radiating heat to the vines, aiding ripening. Clay- and limestone-based soils are often cooler, allowing less heat to reach the vines, and delaying ripening. In regions where the climate is warmer, there is more emphasis on soil that is less fertile, which promotes less vigour in the vine, which can keep yields low. In the Napa Valley wine regions of Oakville and Rutherford, the soil is more alluvial and dusty. Rutherford Cabernet Sauvignon has been often quoted as giving a sense of \"terroir\" with a taste of \"Rutherford dust\". In the South Australian wine region of Coonawarra, Cabernet Sauvignon has produced vastly different results from grape vines planted in the region's terra rosa soil\u00a0\u2013 so much so that the red soil is considered the \"boundary\" of the wine region, with some controversy from wine growers with Cabernet Sauvignon, planted on red soil.\nIn addition to ripeness levels, the harvest yields can also have a strong influence on the resulting quality and flavours of Cabernet Sauvignon wine. The vine itself is prone to vigorous yields, particularly when planted on the vigorous SO4 rootstock. Excessive yields can result in less concentrated and flavorful wine with flavours more on the green or herbaceous side. In the 1970s, a particular clone of Cabernet Sauvignon that was engineered to be virus free was noted for its very high yields-causing many quality-conscious producers to replant their vineyards in the late 20th century with different clonal varieties. To reduce yields, producers can plant the vines on less vigorous rootstock and also practice green harvesting with aggressive pruning of grape clusters soon after \"veraison\".\nIn general, Cabernet Sauvignon has good resistance to most grape diseases, powdery mildew being the most noted exception. It is, however, susceptible to the vine diseases \"Eutypella scoparia\" and excoriose.\nThe \"green bell pepper\" flavor.\nA couple of noted Cabernet Sauvignon flavours are intimately tied to viticultural and climate influences. The herbaceous or green bell pepper flavour is most widely recognised, caused by pyrazines, which are more prevalent in under-ripened grapes. Pyrazine compounds are present in all Cabernet Sauvignon grapes and are gradually destroyed by sunlight as the grape continues to ripen. To the human palate, this compound is detectable in wines with pyrazine levels as low as 2 nanograms (ng) per litre. At the time of \"veraison\", when the grapes first start to ripen fully, there is the equivalent pyrazine level of 30\u00a0ng/L. In cooler climates, getting Cabernet Sauvignon grapes to ripen fully to the point where pyrazine is not detected is difficult. The green bell pepper flavour is not considered a wine fault, but it may not be desirable to all consumers' tastes. The California wine region of Monterey was noted in the late 20th century for its very vegetal Cabernet Sauvignon with pronounced green pepper flavour, earning the nickname \"Monterey veggies\". In addition to its cool climate, Monterey is also prone to being very windy, which can shut down the grape vines and further inhibit ripeness.\nTwo other well-known Cabernet Sauvignon flavours are mint and eucalyptus. Mint flavours are often associated with wine regions that are warm enough to have low pyrazine levels but are still generally cool, such as Australia's Coonawarra region and some areas of Washington State. Some believe that soil could also contribute to the minty notes since the flavour also appears in some wines from the Pauillac region but not from the similar climate of Margaux. Resinous Eucalyptus flavours tend to appear in regions that are habitats for the eucalyptus tree, such as California's Napa and Sonoma valleys and parts of Australia, but there has been no evidence to conclusively prove a direct link between proximity of eucalyptus trees and the presence of that flavour in the wine.\nWinemaking.\nIn many aspects, Cabernet Sauvignon can reflect the desires and personality of the winemaker while still presenting familiar flavours that express the typical character of the variety. The most pronounced effects are from the use of oak during production. Typically the first winemaking decision is whether or not to produce a varietal or blended wine. The \"Bordeaux blend\" of Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Cabernet franc, with potentially some Malbec, Petit Verdot or Carm\u00e9n\u00e8re, is the classic example of blended Cabernet Sauvignon, emulated in the United States with wines produced under the \"Meritage\" designation. But Cabernet Sauvignon can be blended with a variety of grapes such as Shiraz, Tempranillo and Sangiovese. The decision to blend is then followed by the decision of when to do the blending\u2014before, during or after fermentation. Due to the different fermentation styles of the grapes, many producers will ferment and age each grape variety separately and blend the wine shortly before bottling.\nThe Cabernet Sauvignon grape itself is very small, with a thick skin, creating a high 1:12 ratio of seed (pip) to fruit (pulp). From these elements, the high proportions of phenols and tannins can have a stark influence on the structure and flavour of the wine\u2014especially if the must is subjected to long periods of maceration (skin contact) before fermentation. In Bordeaux, the maceration period was traditionally three weeks, which gave the winemaking staff enough time to close down the estate after harvest to take a hunting holiday. These long maceration periods result in very tannic and flavorful wines that require years of ageing. Wine producers wishing to make a wine more approachable within a couple of years will drastically reduce the maceration time to as little as a few days. Following maceration, the Cabernet must be fermented at high temperatures of up to 30 \u00b0C (86 \u00b0F). The fermentation temperature will play a role in the result, with deeper colours and more flavour components being extracted at higher temperatures while more fruit flavours are maintained at a lower temperature. In Australia, there has been experimentation with carbonic maceration to make softer, fruity Cabernet Sauvignon wines.\nThe tannic nature of Cabernet Sauvignon is an important winemaking consideration. As the must is exposed to prolonged maceration periods, more tannins are extracted from the skin and will be present in the resulting wine. If winemakers choose not to shorten the period of maceration in favour of maximizing colour and flavour concentrations, there are some methods that they can use to soften tannin levels. A common method is oak ageing, which exposes the wine to gradual levels of oxidation that can mellow the harsh grape tannins as well as introduce softer \"wood tannins\". The choice of fining agents can also reduce tannins with gelatin and egg whites being positively-charged proteins that are naturally attracted to the negatively charged tannin molecules. These fining agents will bond with some of the tannins and be removed from the wine during filtration. One additional method is micro-oxygenation, which mimics some of the gradual aeration that occurs with barrel ageing, with the limited exposure to oxygen aiding in the polymerization of the tannins into larger molecules, which are perceived on the palate as being softer.\nAffinity for oak.\nOne of the most noted traits of Cabernet Sauvignon is its affinity for oak, either during fermentation or in barrel aging. In addition to having a softening effect on the grape's naturally high tannins, the unique wood flavours of vanilla and baking spice complement the natural grape flavours of blackcurrant and tobacco. The particular success of Cabernet-based Bordeaux blends in the 225 litres (59 gallons) \"barrique\" significantly influenced that barrel size one of the most popular worldwide. In winemaking, the decision for the degree of oak influence (as well as which type of oak) will strongly impact the resulting wine. American oak, particularly from new barrels, imparts more robust oak flavours less subtle than those imparted by French oak. Even within the American oak family, the location of the oak source also plays a role, with oak from the state of Oregon having a more pronounced influence on Cabernet Sauvignon than oak from Missouri, Pennsylvania and Virginia. Winemakers often use a variety of oak barrels from different locations and of different ages and blend the wine as if they are blending different grape varieties.\nWinemakers can also control the influence of oak by using alternatives to the standard \"barrique\" barrels. Larger barrels have a smaller wood-to-wine ratio and, therefore, less pronounced oak flavours. Winemakers in Italy and Portugal sometimes use barrels made from other wood types such as chestnut and redwood. Another method that winemakers consider is \"tea bagging\" with oak chips or adding oak planks to the wines while fermenting or ageing it in stainless steel tanks. While these methods are less costly than oak barrels, they create more pronounced oak flavours, which tend not to mellow or integrate with the rest of the wine's components, nor do they provide the gradual oxidation benefit of barrel ageing.\nWine regions.\nBordeaux.\nThe Bordeaux wine region is intimately connected with Cabernet Sauvignon, even though wine is rarely made without the blended component of other grape varieties. It is the likely place of origin of the vine, and producers across the globe have invested heavily in trying to reproduce the structure and complexity of Bordeaux wines. While the \"Bordeaux blend\" of Cabernet Sauvignon, Cabernet Franc and Merlot created the earliest examples of acclaimed Cabernet Sauvignon wine, Cabernet Sauvignon was first blended in Bordeaux with Syrah (from the Northern Rhone), a pairing that is widely seen in Australia and some \"vin de pays\" wines from the Languedoc.\nThe decision to first start blending Cabernet Sauvignon was partly derived from financial necessity. The sometimes temperamental and unpredictable climate of Bordeaux during the \"Little Ice Age\" did not guarantee a successful harvest every year; producers had to insure themselves against the risk of losing an entire vintage by planting a variety of grapes. Over time it was discovered that the unique characteristics of each grape variety could complement each other and enhance the quality of the wine. Cabernet Sauvignon added structure, acidity, tannins and aging potential as a base or backbone of the wine. By itself, particularly when harvested at less than ideal ripeness, it can lack a sense of fruit or \"fleshiness\" on the palate which can be compensated by adding the rounder flavours of Merlot. Cabernet franc can add more aromas to the bouquet and more fruitiness. In the lighter soils of the Margaux region, Cabernet-based wines can lack colour, which can be achieved by blending in Petit Verdot. Malbec, used today mostly in Fronsac, can add other fruit and floral aromas.\nDNA evidence has shown Cabernet Sauvignon is the result of crossing two other Bordeaux grape varieties\u2014 Cabernet franc and Sauvignon blanc\u2014 which has led grapevine historians, or \"ampelographers\", to believe that the grape originated in Bordeaux. Early records indicate that the grape was widespread in the M\u00e9doc region during the 18th century. The loose berry clusters and thick skins of the grape provided an excellent resistance to rot in the sometimes wet maritime climate of Bordeaux. The grape continued to grow in popularity until the \"Powdery mildew\" epidemic of 1852 exposed Cabernet Sauvignon's sensitivity to that grape disease. With vineyards severely ravaged or lost, many Bordeaux wine growers turned to Merlot, increasing its plantings to where it soon became the most widely planted grape in Bordeaux. As the region's winemakers started to understand better the area's \"terroir\" and how the different grape varieties performed in other regions, Cabernet Sauvignon increased in plantings all along the Left Bank region of the Gironde river in the M\u00e9doc as well as Graves region, where it became the dominant variety in the wine blends. In the Right bank regions of Saint-\u00c9milion and Pomerol, Cabernet is a distant third in plantings behind Merlot &amp; Cabernet franc.\nIn the wine regions of the Left Bank, the Cabernet influence of the wine has shown unique characteristics in the different regions. In Saint-Est\u00e8phe and Pessac-L\u00e9ognan, the grape develops more mineral flavours. Aromas of violets are a characteristic of Margaux. Pauillac is noted by a strong lead pencil scent and Saint-Julien by cedar and cigar boxes. The Cabernet wines of the Moulis are characterized by their soft tannins and rich fruit flavours while the southern Graves region is characterized by strong blackcurrant flavours, though in less intense wines overall. The percentage of Cabernet Sauvignon used in the blend will depend on \"terroir\" and the winemakers' styles as well as the vintage. The First Growth estates of Ch\u00e2teau Mouton Rothschild and Ch\u00e2teau Latour are noted for regularly producing wines with some of the highest percentages of Cabernet\u2014 often around 75%.\nA common factor affecting Bordeaux wines' flavours is Cabernet Sauvignon's harvest yields. Throughout Bordeaux, there is a legal maximum permitted yield of 50 hectoliters (hl) per hectare (ha). With the aid of global warming and vigorous rootstocks, many Bordeaux vineyards can easily surpass 60 hl/ha, with some estates taking advantage of the legal loophole of \"plafond limite de classement\" (\"ceiling limit classification\") that permits higher yields during \"exceptional\" years. This has had an adverse effect on the quality of production from some producers who regularly use grapes harvested at excessive yields. In recent years there has been more of an emphasis on keeping yields low, particularly for an estate's \"Grand vin\".\nOther French regions.\nThe Bordeaux wine region accounts for more than 60% of the Cabernet Sauvignon grown in France. Outside of Bordeaux, Cabernet Sauvignon is found in varying quantities throughout Le Midi and in the Loire Valley. Cabernet Sauvignon wines are generally lighter and less structured, drinkable much earlier than Bordeaux wine. In the southwest French \"appellation d'origine contr\u00f4l\u00e9e\" (AOCs) of Bergerac and Buzet it is used to make ros\u00e9 wine. In some regions, it is used to add flavour and structure to Carignan while it is blended with N\u00e9grette in Gaillac and Fronton as well as Tannat in Madiran. In Provence, the grape had some presence in the region in the mid-19th century, when viticulturist Jules Guyot recommended it as a blending partner with Syrah. In recent years, several Midi wine estates, such as Mas de Daumas Gassac have received international acclaim for their Cabernet Sauvignon blended in H\u00e9rault, with Rh\u00f4ne grapes like Syrah. It is often made as a single varietal in the \"vin de pays\" of the Languedoc. The influence of Australian flying winemakers has been considerable in how Cabernet Sauvignon is treated by some Languedoc wine estates, with some producers making wines that can seem like they are from the New World. Overall, the grape has not exerted its dominance of the region, generally considered less ideally situated to the dry climate than Syrah. The Languedoc producers, who give serious consideration to Cabernet Sauvignon, generally rely on irrigation to compensate for the climate.\nItaly.\nCabernet Sauvignon has a long history in Italian wines, being first introduced to the Piedmont region in 1820. In the mid-1970s, the grape earned notoriety and controversy as a component in the so-called \"Super Tuscan\" wines of Tuscany. Today the grape is permitted in several \"Denominazioni di origine controllata\" (DOCs) and is used in many \"Indicazione Geografica Tipica\" (IGT) wines that are made outside DOC perimeters in certain regions. For most of its history, the grape has been viewed with suspicion as a \"foreign influence\" that distracts from the native grape varieties. After decades of experimentation, the general view of Cabernet Sauvignon has improved as more winemakers find ways to complement their native grape varieties with Cabernet as a blending component.\nIn Piedmont, the grape was sometimes used as an \"illegal\" blending partner with Nebbiolo for DOC classified Barolo with the intention of adding colour and more fruit flavours. In the DOCs of Langhe and Monferrato, Cabernet is a permitted blending grape with Nebbiolo as well as Barbera. Wines composed of all three grape varieties are often subjected to considerable oak treatment to add a sense of sweet spiciness to compensate for the high tannins of Cabernet Sauvignon and Nebbiolo, the high acidity of Barbera. There are varietal styles of Cabernet Sauvignon produced in Piedmont, with qualities varying depending on the location. In other regions of northern Italy, such as Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna and Friuli-Venezia Giulia, the grape is often blended with Merlot to produce Bordeaux style blends. In the Veneto region, Cabernet Sauvignon is sometimes blended with the main grapes of Valpolicella-Corvina, Molinara and Rondinella. In southern Italy, the grape is mostly used as a blending component with local varieties-such as Carignan in Sardinia, Nero d'Avola in Sicily, Aglianico in Campania and Gaglioppo in Calabria.\nCabernet Sauvignon has had a controversial history in Tuscan wine, particularly for its role in the arrival of \"Super Tuscan\" in the mid-1970s. The origin of Super Tuscans is rooted in the restrictive DOC practices of the Chianti zone before the 1990s. During this time, Chianti could be composed of no more than 70% Sangiovese and had to include at least 10% of one of the local white wine grapes. Many Tuscan wine producers thought they could produce better quality wine if they were not hindered by the DOC regulations, particularly if they had the freedom to use Cabernet Sauvignon in the blend and were not required to use white grape varieties. The marchese Piero Antinori was one of the first to create a \"Chianti-style\" wine that ignored the DOC regulations, releasing a 1971 Sangiovese-Cabernet Sauvignon blend known as \"Tignanello\" in 1978. Other producers followed suit, and soon the prices for these Super Tuscans were consistently beating the prices of some of the most well-known Chianti. Other Tuscan wine regions followed suit, blending Cabernet Sauvignon with Sangiovese and even making varietal versions of the grape. Gradually the DOC system caught on and began allowing more regions to use the grape in their DOC-designated wines. Cabernet Sauvignon in Tuscany is characterized by ripe black cherry flavours that can give a perception of sweetness as well as strong notes of blackcurrant. The wines typically reach an alcohol level around 14% but can still maintain notable acidity levels. Cabernet Sauvignon can dominate the blend when blended with Sangiovese in significant quantities, with most Tuscan producers aiming to find a particular balance that suits their desired style.\nOther Old World producers.\nThe introduction of Cabernet Sauvignon to Spain occurred in the Rioja region when the Marqu\u00e9s de Riscal planted cuttings from Bordeaux in the nineteenth century. It was not until the 1960s, however, before cultivation took off. By 2015, it was the sixth most widely planted red wine grape in Spain. Today it is permitted in about half of the Spanish DOPs (\"Denominaci\u00f3n de Origen Protegida\"). The grape is most prominent in the Catalan wine region of Pened\u00e8s, where its use was revived by the estates of Bodegas Torres and Jean Le\u00f3n. There the grape is often blended with Tempranillo. It is also primarily a blending grape in the Ribera del Duero, but producers in Navarra have found some international acclaim for their varietal wines.\nIn the United Kingdom, English wine producers have experimented with growing the variety in plastic tunnels which can create a greenhouse effect and protect the grapes from the less-than-ideal climate of the wine region. While the grape is permitted to be planted in some German wine regions (such as the Mosel), the vineyard sites best suited for ripening Cabernet are generally already occupied with Riesling; many producers are ill-inclined to uproot the popular German variety in favour of Cabernet Sauvignon. In the 1980s, inexpensive Bulgarian Cabernet Sauvignon was highly touted for its value and helped to establish that country's wine industry and garner it more international presence in the wine market. The grape performs a similar function for many countries in Central Europe, including Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovenia, and Eastern Europe, including Moldova, Romania, Georgia, Turkey, Bulgaria and Ukraine. It can be found in the eastern Mediterranean wine regions of Cyprus, Greece, Israel and Lebanon.\nCalifornia.\nIn California, Cabernet Sauvignon has developed its characteristic style and reputation, which is recognizable in the world's market. Production and plantings of the grape in California are similar in quantity to those of Bordeaux. The 1976 Judgment of Paris wine tasting event helped to catapult Californian Cabernet Sauvignons onto the international stage when Stag's Leap Wine Cellars' 1973 Stags Leap District Cabernet Sauvignon beat out classified Bordeaux estates like Ch\u00e2teau Mouton Rothschild, Ch\u00e2teau Montrose, Ch\u00e2teau Haut-Brion and Ch\u00e2teau L\u00e9oville-Las Cases in a blind tasting conducted by French wine experts. In the 1980s, a new epidemic of phylloxera hit California, devastating many vineyards, which needed replanting. There was some speculation that ravaged Cabernet vineyards would be replanted with other varietals (such as those emerging from the Rhone Rangers movement), but in fact, California plantings of Cabernet Sauvignon doubled between 1988 and 1998; many wine regions\u2014 such as Napa Valley north of Yountville and Sonoma's Alexander Valley\u2014 were almost entirely dominated by the grape variety. It also started to gain a foothold in Dry Creek Valley, Sonoma Mountain and Mendocino County. Cabernet from Sonoma County has shown a tendency to feature anise and black olive notes while Napa County Cabernets are characterized by their strong black fruit flavours.\nIn California, the main stylistic difference in Cabernet Sauvignon is between hillside/mountain vineyards and those on flatter terrains like valley floors or some areas of the Central Valley. In Napa, the hillside vineyards of Diamond Mountain District, Howell Mountain, Mt. Veeder, Spring Mountain District have thinner, less fertile soils, which produce smaller berries with more intense flavours, reminiscent of Bordeaux wines that require years of ageing to mature. The yields are also much lower, typically in the range of 1\u20132 tons per acre in contrast to the 4\u20138 tons that can be produced in the more fertile valley floors. Wines produced from mountainside vineyards tend to be characterized by deep inky colours and strong berry aromas. Throughout California, many wine regions have the potential to grow Cabernet Sauvignon to full ripeness and produce fruity, full-bodied wines with alcohol levels regularly above the Bordeaux average of 12\u201313%\u2014often in excess of 14%.\nThe use of oak in California Cabernet has a long history, with many producers favouring the use of new oak barrels heavily composed of American oak. After the early 1980s' unsuccessful trend to create more \"food friendly\" wines with less ripeness and less oak influence, winemakers' focus shifted back to oak influence. Still, producers were more inclined to limit and lighten the use of oak barrels, with many turning to French oak or a combination of new and older oak barrels.\nWashington State.\nAccording to the Washington State Wine Commission, Cabernet Sauvignon is the most widely planted red grape variety in Washington state. It is generally found in the warmer sites of the Columbia Valley. The vines are choice plantings for growers due to their hardy vine stalks and resistance to the cold winter frost that is commonplace in Eastern Washington. Washington Cabernet Sauvignon is characterized by its fruitiness and easy drinking styles that are not overly tannic. Recent Washington American Viticultural Areas (AVAs) that have seen some success with their Cabernet Sauvignons include Red Mountain, Walla Walla Valley and parts of the Yakima Valley AVA near the Tri-Cities region.\nElsewhere in the United States.\nIn Oregon, there are small quantities of Cabernet Sauvignon planted in the warmer southern regions of the Umpqua and Rogue Valleys.\nIt has also started to develop a presence in the Arizona, New York, Ohio, Texas and Virginia wine industries, particularly in the Texas Hill Country and North Fork of Long Island AVAs. Cabernet Sauvignon is made in varietal and blended styles throughout the United States. Under the American system, varietal Cabernet Sauvignon can include up to 25% other grapes.\nSouth America.\nCabernet Sauvignon is grown in nearly every South American country, including Chile, Bolivia, Brazil, Peru and Uruguay. In Chile, the wines were historically limited by the excessively high yields commonplace throughout the country. As producers began to concentrate on limiting yields, regional differences that distinguished Chilean Cabernets began to emerge. For vineyard plantings along flat river valleys, the region's climate is the most important consideration; as plantings move to higher elevations and along hillsides, soil type is a more significant concern. The wines of the Aconcagua region are noted for their ripe fruit but closed, tight structure that needs some time in the bottle to develop. In the Maipo Valley, Cabernet Sauvignon wines are characterized by their pervasive blackcurrant fruit and an earthy, dusty note. In warmer regions, such as the Colchagua Province and around Curic\u00f3, the grapes ripen more fully; they produce wines with rich fruit flavours that can be perceived as sweet due to the ripeness of the fruit. The acidity levels of these wines will be lower, and the tannins will also be softer, making the wines more approachable at a younger age.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, Cabernet Sauvignon lags behind Malbec as the country's main red grape, but its numbers are growing. The varietal versions often have lighter fruit flavours and are meant to be consumed young. Premium examples are often blended with Malbec and produce full, tannic wines with leather and tobacco notes. In recent years, there have been increased plantings of Cabernet Sauvignon in the Uco Valley of the Mendoza Province; the wines coming from vineyards planted at higher altitudes garner some international attention.\nAustralia.\nIn the 1970s, the Coonawarra region first brought international attention to Australian Cabernet Sauvignons with intense fruit flavours and subtle minty notes. The Margaret River region soon followed with tightly structured wines with pronounced black fruit notes. In the 1980s, Australia followed California's contemporary trend in producing lighter, more \"food friendly\" wines with alcohol levels around 11-12% percent; by the early 1990s, the styles changed again to focus on balance and riper fruit flavours. Today Cabernet Sauvignon is the second most widely planted red wine grape in Australia, following Shiraz, with which it is often blended. It can be found in several wine regions, with many large producers using grapes from several states. Notable regional differences characterize Australian Cabernet Sauvignon: in addition to the wine styles of Coonawarra and Margaret River, the Barossa Valley produces big, full-bodied wines while the nearby, cooler Clare Valley produces wines with more concentrated fruit, and wines of the Victorian wine region of the Yarra Valley are noted for their balance in acidity, tannins and fruit flavours.\nOther New World producers.\nSince the end of apartheid, the South African wine industry has been working to reestablish itself in the world's wine markets, with many regions actively promoting their Cabernet Sauvignon. Today it is the most widely planted red wine grape in South Africa. It is produced in varietal and blended styles; some producers favour a Bordeaux blend, while others follow the Australian example of blending with Syrah. Early examples of South African Cabernet Sauvignon were produced by grapes planted in vineyard locations that were cooler than ideal, creating very herbaceous wines with the distinctive \"green bell pepper\" notes. In the mid-1990s, there was more emphasis on harvesting at fuller ripeness, and new clones were introduced that produced riper, sweeter fruit. As the vines age and better vineyards locations are identified, regional styles are starting to emerge among South African Cabernet Sauvignons: the Stellenbosch region is noted for heavy, full-bodied wines while Constantia's wines are characterized by their herbal and minty flavours.\nIn New Zealand, the climate has been a challenge in finding wine regions suitable for producing Cabernet Sauvignon. Most of the industry focus has centred on the North Island. The Hawkes Bay region was the first to make a significant effort in producing Cabernet Sauvignon, but the region's cool climate, coupled with the high yields and fertile alluvial soils, produced wines that were still marked with aggressive green and vegetal flavours. Added focus on canopy management, which gives the grapes more sunlight to ripen by removing excess foliage, and low vigour rootstock and pruning combine to achieve lower yields and have started to produce better results. The grape is sometimes blended with Merlot to help compensate for climate and \"terroir\". Other regions in New Zealand have sprung up with a renewed focus on producing distinctive New Zealand Cabernet Sauvignon: The Gimblett Road and Havelock North regions of Hawkes Bay, with their warm gravel soils, have started to achieve notice as well as Waiheke Island near Auckland. Overall the grape lags far behind Pinot noir in New Zealand's red wine grape plantings.\nCanada produces cabernet sauvignon varietals and \"Bordeaux blends\", and some of its cabernet sauvignon is used to create ice wine.\nChina.\nThe first vintage produced by Emma Gao at Silver Heights Winery in Ningxia was praised by Chinese and international winemakers, and two of her red wines are among the best-known produced in China. They are a Cabernet Sauvignon 'Emma's Reserve' and a Bordeaux blend 'The Summit'.\nPopularity and criticism.\nIn the past century, Cabernet Sauvignon has enjoyed a swell of popularity as one of the noble grapes in the world of wine. Built partially on its historical success in Bordeaux and New World wine regions like California and Australia, planting the grape is considered a solid choice in any wine region that is warm enough to cultivate it. Among consumers, Cabernet has become a familiar wine which has aided in its accessibility and appeals even from obscure wine regions and producers. In the 1980s, the Bulgarian wine industry was largely driven and introduced to the international wine market by the success of its Cabernet Sauvignon wines. The widespread popularity of Bordeaux has contributed to criticism of the grape variety for its role as a \"colonizer\" grape, being planted in new and emerging wine regions at the expense of focus on the unique local grape varieties. Some regions, such as Portugal, with its abundance of native grape varieties, have largely ignored Cabernet Sauvignon as it seeks to rejuvenate its wine industry beyond Port production.\nWine styles.\nThe grapes' ripeness strongly influences Cabernet Sauvignon's style at harvest. When more on the unripe side, the grapes are high in pyrazines and will exhibit pronounced green bell peppers and vegetal flavours. When harvested overripe, the wines can taste jammy and may have aromas of stewed blackcurrants. Some winemakers choose to harvest their grapes at different ripeness levels in order to incorporate these different elements and potentially add some layer of complexity to the wine. When Cabernet Sauvignon is young, the wines typically exhibit strong fruit flavours of black cherries and plum. The aroma of blackcurrants is one of the most distinctive and characteristic elements of Cabernet Sauvignon that is present in virtually every style of wine across the globe. Styles from various regions and producers may also have eucalyptus, mint and tobacco aromas. As the wines age, they can sometimes develop aromas associated with cedar, cigar boxes and pencil shavings. New World examples generally have more pronounced fruity notes, while Old World wines can be more austere with heightened earthy notes.\nAbility to age.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, Cabernet Sauvignon's reputation was built on its ability to age and develop in the bottle. In addition to softening some of their austere tannins, as Cabernet wines age, new flavours and aromas can emerge and add to the wines' complexity. Historically this was a trait characterized by Bordeaux, with some premium examples in favourable vintages having the potential to last for over a century, but producers across the globe have developed styles that could age and develop for several decades. Even with the ability to age, some Cabernet Sauvignon wines can still be approachable a few years after the vintage. In Bordeaux, the tannins of the wines tend to soften after ten years and can typically last for at least another, decade-sometimes longer, depending on the producer and vintage. Some Spanish and Italian Cabernet Sauvignons will need similar time as Bordeaux to develop, but most examples are typically made to be drunk earlier.\nWhile New World Cabernets are considered drinkable earlier than Bordeaux, premium producers such as the Californian cult wines will produce wines that need time to age and could potentially develop for two to three decades. Overall, the majority of Californian Cabernets are meant to be approachable after only a couple of years in the bottle but can still have the potential to improve further over time. Similarly, many premium Australian cabernets will also need at least ten years to develop though many are approachable after two to five years. New Zealand wines are typically meant to be consumed young and will often maintain their green herbal flavours even with extended bottle ageing. South American Cabernets have very pronounced fruit flavours when they are young, and the best-made examples will keep some of those flavours as they age. South African wines tend to favour more Old World styles and typically require six to eight years of ageing before developing further flavours.\nPairing with food.\nCabernet Sauvignon is a very bold and assertive wine that has the potential to overwhelm light and delicate dishes. The wine's high tannin content, oak influences, and high alcohol levels associated with many regional styles play important roles in influencing how well the wine matches different foods. When Cabernet Sauvignon is young, all those elements are at their peak, but as the wine ages, it mellows; possibilities for different food pairings open up. In most circumstances, matching the weight (alcohol level and body) of the wine to the heaviness of the food is an important consideration. Cabernet Sauvignons with high alcohol levels do not pair well with spicy foods due to hotness levels of the capsaicins present in spices like chili peppers being enhanced by the alcohol with the heat accentuating the bitterness of the tannins. Milder spices, such as black pepper, pair better due to their ability to minimize the perception of tannins\u2014such as in the classic pairings of Cabernet Sauvignon with \"steak au poivre\" and pepper-crusted ahi tuna.\nFats and proteins reduce the perception of tannins on the palate. When Cabernet Sauvignon is paired with steak or dishes with a heavy butter cream sauce, the tannins are neutralized, allowing the fruits of the wine to be more noticeable. In contrast, starches such as pastas and rice will have little effect on tannins. The bitterness of the tannins can also be counterbalanced by the use of bitter foods, such as radicchio and endive, or with cooking methods that involve charring like grilling. As the wine ages and the tannins lessen, more subtle and less bitter dishes will pair better with Cabernet Sauvignon. The oak influences of the wine can be matched with cooking methods that have similar influences on the food\u2014such as grilling, smoking and plank roasting. Dishes that include oak-influenced flavours and aromas typically found in Cabernet Sauvignon\u2014such as dill weed, brown sugar, nutmeg and vanilla\u2014can also pair well.\nThe different styles of Cabernet Sauvignon from other regions can also influence how well the wine matches up with certain foods. Old World wines like Bordeaux have earthier influences and will pair better with mushrooms. Wines from cooler climates that have noticeable vegetal notes can be balanced with vegetables and greens. New World wines, with bolder fruit flavours that may even be perceived as sweet, will pair well with bolder dishes that have lots of different flavour influences. While Cabernet Sauvignon has the potential to pair well with bitter dark chocolate, it will not pair well with sweeter styles such as milk chocolate. The wine can typically pair well with a variety of cheeses, such as Cheddar, mozzarella and Brie, but full-flavoured or blue cheeses will typically compete too much with the flavours of Cabernet Sauvignon to be a complementary pairing.\nHealth benefits.\nIn late 2006, the \"Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology\" published the result of studies conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai that showed the beneficial relationship of resveratrol, a compound found in all red wine, in reducing the risk factors associated with Alzheimer's disease. The study showed that resveratrol found in Cabernet Sauvignon could reduce levels of amyloid beta peptides, which attack brain cells and are part of the etiology of Alzheimer's. Resveratrol has also been shown to promote the clearance of amyloid-beta peptides. It has also been shown that non-alcoholic extracts of Cabernet Sauvignon protect hypertensive rats during ischaemia and reperfusion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37592", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37592", "title": "Grey matter", "text": "Areas of neuronal cell bodies in the brain\nGrey matter (gray matter in American English) is a major component of the central nervous system, consisting of neuronal cell bodies, neuropil (dendrites and unmyelinated axons), glial cells (astrocytes and oligodendrocytes), synapses, and capillaries. Grey matter is distinguished from white matter in that it contains numerous cell bodies and relatively few myelinated axons, while white matter contains relatively few cell bodies and is composed chiefly of long-range myelinated axons. The colour difference arises mainly from the whiteness of myelin. In living tissue, grey matter actually has a very light grey colour with yellowish or pinkish hues, which come from capillary blood vessels and neuronal cell bodies.\nStructure.\nGrey matter refers to unmyelinated neurons and other cells of the central nervous system. It is present in the brain, brainstem and cerebellum, and present throughout the spinal cord.\nGrey matter is distributed at the surface of the cerebral hemispheres (cerebral cortex) and of the cerebellum (cerebellar cortex), as well as in the depths of the cerebrum (the thalamus; hypothalamus; subthalamus, basal ganglia \u2013 putamen, globus pallidus and nucleus accumbens; as well as the septal nuclei), cerebellum (deep cerebellar nuclei \u2013 the dentate nuclei, globose nucleus, emboliform nucleus, and fastigial nucleus), and brainstem (the substantia nigra, red nucleus, olivary nuclei, and cranial nerve nuclei).\nGrey matter in the spinal cord is known as the grey column which travels down the spinal cord distributed in three grey columns that are presented in an \"H\" shape. The forward-facing column is the anterior grey column, the rear-facing one is the posterior grey column and the interlinking one is the lateral grey column. The grey matter on the left and right side is connected by the grey commissure. The grey matter in the spinal cord consists of interneurons, as well as the cell bodies of projection neurons.\nGrey matter undergoes development and growth throughout childhood and adolescence. Recent studies using cross-sectional neuroimaging have shown that by around the age of 8 the volume of grey matter begins to decrease. However, the density of grey matter appears to increase as a child develops into early adulthood. Males tend to exhibit grey matter of increased volume but lower density than that of females.\nFunction.\nGrey matter contains most of the brain's neuronal cell bodies. The grey matter includes regions of the brain involved in muscle control, and sensory perception such as seeing and hearing, memory, emotions, speech, decision-making, and self-control.\nThe grey matter in the spinal cord is split into three grey columns:\nThe grey matter of the spinal cord can be divided into different layers, called Rexed laminae. These describe, in general, the purpose of the cells within the grey matter of the spinal cord at a particular location.\nClinical significance.\nHigh alcohol consumption has been correlated with significant reductions in grey matter volume. Short-term cannabis use (30 days) is not correlated with changes in white or grey matter. However, several cross-sectional studies have shown that repeated long-term cannabis use is associated with smaller grey matter volumes in the hippocampus, amygdala, medial temporal cortex, and prefrontal cortex, with increased grey matter volume in the cerebellum. Long-term cannabis use is also associated with alterations in white matter integrity in an age-dependent manner, with heavy cannabis use during adolescence and early adulthood associated with the greatest amount of change.\nMeditation has been shown to change grey matter structure.\nHabitual playing of action video games has been reported to promote a reduction of grey matter in the hippocampus while 3D platformer games have been reported to increase grey matter in the hippocampus.\nWomen and men with equivalent IQ scores have differing proportions of grey to white matter in cortical brain regions associated with intelligence.\nPregnancy renders substantial changes in brain structure, primarily reductions in grey matter volume in regions subserving social cognition. Grey matter reductions endure for at least 2 years post-pregnancy. The profile of brain changes is comparable to that taking place during adolescence, a hormonally similar transitional period of life.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nIn the current edition of the official Latin nomenclature, \"Terminologia Anatomica\", \"substantia grisea\" is used for English \"grey matter\". The adjective \"grisea\" for \"grey\" is however not attested in classical Latin. The adjective \"grisea\" is derived from the French word for grey, \"gris\". Alternative designations like \"substantia cana\" and \"substantia cinerea\" are being used alternatively. The adjective \"cana\", attested in classical Latin, can mean \"grey\", or \"greyish white\". The classical Latin \"cinerea\" means \"ash-coloured\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37594", "revid": "7457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37594", "title": "Alfa Romeo Models", "text": ""}
{"id": "37595", "revid": "7609619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37595", "title": "Weasel", "text": "Mammal of the mustelid family\nWeasels are mammals of the genus Mustela of the family Mustelidae. The genus \"Mustela\" includes the least weasels, polecats, stoats, ferrets, and European mink. Members of this genus are small, active predators, with long and slender bodies and short legs. The family Mustelidae, or mustelids (which also includes badgers, otters, and wolverines), is often referred to as the \"weasel family\". In Great Britain, the term \"weasel\" usually refers to the smallest species, the least weasel (\"M.\u00a0nivalis\"), the smallest carnivoran species.\nLeast weasels vary in length from , females being smaller than the males, and usually have red or brown upper coats and white bellies; some populations of some species moult to a wholly white coat in winter. They have long, slender bodies, which enable them to follow their prey into burrows. Their tails may be from long.\nWeasels feed on small mammals and have from time to time been considered vermin because some species took poultry from farms or rabbits from commercial warrens. They do, on the other hand, eat large numbers of rodents. Their range spans Europe, North America, much of Asia, and small areas in North Africa.\nTerminology.\nThe English word \"weasel\" was originally applied to one species of the genus, the European form of the least weasel (\"Mustela nivalis\"). This usage is retained in British English, where the name is also extended to cover several other small species of the genus. However, in technical discourse and in American usage, the term \"weasel\" can refer to any member of the genus, the genus as a whole, and even to members of the related genus \"Neogale\". Of the 16 extant species currently classified in the genus \"Mustela\", 10 have \"weasel\" in their common names. Among those that do not are the three species of ermine, the polecats, the ferret, and the European mink.\nThe American mink and the extinct sea mink were commonly included in this genus as \"Mustela vison\" and \"Mustela macrodon\", respectively, but in 1999 they were moved to the genus \"Neovison\". In 2021, both \"Neovison\" species, along with the long-tailed weasel (\"Mustela frenata\"), Amazon weasel (\"Mustela africana\") and Colombian weasel (\"Mustela felipei\") were moved to the genus \"Neogale\", as the clade containing these five species was found to be fully distinct from \"Mustela\".\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus name \"Mustela\" comes from the Latin word for weasel combining the words \"mus\" meaning \"mouse\" and \"telum\" meaning \"javelin\" for its long body.\nSpecies.\nThe following information is according to the Integrated Taxonomic Information System and MammalDiversity.\n1 Europe and Northern Asia division excludes China.\nCultural meanings.\nWeasels have been assigned a variety of cultural meanings.\nIn Greek culture, a weasel near one's house is a sign of bad luck, even evil, \"especially if there is in the household a girl about to be married\", since the animal (based on its Greek etymology) was thought to be an unhappy bride who was transformed into a weasel and consequently delights in destroying wedding dresses. In Macedonia, however, weasels are generally seen as an omen of good fortune.\nIn early-modern Mecklenburg, Germany, amulets from weasels were deemed to have strong magic; the period between 15 August and 8 September was specifically designated for the killing of weasels.\nIn Montagne Noire (France), Ruthenia, and the early medieval culture of the Wends, weasels were not meant to be killed.\nAccording to Daniel Defoe also, meeting a weasel is a bad omen. In English-speaking areas, weasel can be an insult, noun or verb, for someone regarded as sneaky, conniving or untrustworthy. Similarly, \"weasel words\" is a critical term for words or phrasing that are vague, misleading or equivocal.\nJapanese superstitions.\nIn Japan, were seen as \"y\u014dkai\" (causing strange occurrences). According to the encyclopedia \"Wakan Sansai Zue\" from the Edo period, a pack of weasels would cause conflagrations, and the cry of a weasel was considered a harbinger of misfortune. In the Niigata Prefecture, the sound of a pack of weasels making a rustle resembled six people hulling rice, so was called the \"weasel's six-person mortar\", and it was an omen for one's home to decline or flourish. It is said that when people chase after this sound, the sound stops.\nThey are also said to shapeshift like the fox (\"kitsune\") or \"tanuki\", and the \"ny\u016bd\u014d-b\u014dzu\" told about in legends in the T\u014dhoku region and the Ch\u016bbu region are considered weasels in disguise, and they are also said to shapeshift into \"\u014dny\u016bd\u014d\" and little monks.\nIn the collection of depictions \"Gazu Hyakki Yagy\u014d\" by Sekien Toriyama, they were depicted under the title \u9f2c, but they were read not as \"\"itachi\", but rather as \"ten\"\", and \"ten\" were considered to be weasels that have reached one hundred years of age and became y\u014dkai that possessed supernatural powers. Another theory is that when weasels reach several hundred years of age, they become \"mujina\" (Japanese badgers).\nIn Japanese, weasels are called and in the T\u014dhoku Region and Shinshu, it was believed that there were families that were able to use a certain practice to freely use \"kudagitsune\" as \"iizuna-tsukai\" or \"kitsune-mochi\". It is said that Mount Iizuna, from the Nagano Prefecture, got its name due to how the gods gave people mastery of this technique from there.\nAccording to the folklorist Mut\u014d Tetsuj\u014d, \"They are called \"izuna\" in the Senboku District, Akita Prefecture, and there are also the ichiko (itako) that use them.\" Also, in the Kitaakita District, they are called\" m\u014dsuke\" (\u731b\u52a9), and they are feared as \"y\u014dkai\" even more than foxes (\"kitsune\").\nIn the Ainu language, ermines are called \"upas-\u010dironnup\" or \"s\u00e1\u010diri\", but since least weasels are also called \"s\u00e1\u010diri\", Mashio Chiri surmised that the honorary title \"poy-s\u00e1\u010diri-kamuy\" (where \"poy\" means \"small\") refers to least weasels.\n\"Kamaitachi\".\n\"Kamaitachi\" is a phenomenon wherein one who is idle is suddenly injured as if his or her skin were cut by a scythe. In the past, this was thought to be \"the deed of an invisible \"y\u014dkai\" weasel\". An alternate theory, asserts that \"kamaitachi\" is derived from , so were not originally related to weasels at all.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37597", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37597", "title": "Gulo", "text": "Genus of carnivores\nGulo is a genus of carnivoran mammals in the family Mustelidae. It contains one extant species, the wolverine (\"G. gulo\"), as well as several extinct ones. Fossil evidence suggests that this genus appeared in North America and later spread to Eurasia during the Pliocene. Diagnostic traits include a strongly reduced P2, a robust P4 with three roots, and upper molars smaller than in other gulonines. Overall, the teeth are adapted for hypercarnivory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
