{"id": "30058", "revid": "43066271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30058", "title": "Trojan War", "text": "Legendary war in Greek mythology\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Trojan War was a legendary conflict in Greek mythology that took place around the twelfth or thirteenth century BC. The war was waged by the Achaeans (Greeks) against the city of Troy after Paris of Troy took Helen from her husband Menelaus, king of Sparta. The war is one of the most important events in Greek mythology, and it has been narrated through many works of Greek literature, most notably Homer's \"Iliad\". The core of the \"Iliad\" (Books II \u2013 XXIII) describes a period of four days and two nights in the tenth year of the decade-long siege of Troy; the \"Odyssey\" describes the journey home of Odysseus, one of the war's heroes. Other parts of the war are described in a cycle of epic poems, which have survived through fragments. Episodes from the war provided material for Greek tragedy and other works of Greek literature, and for Roman poets including Virgil and Ovid.\nThe ancient Greeks believed that Troy was located near the Dardanelles and that the Trojan War was a historical event of the twelfth or thirteenth century BC. By the mid-nineteenth century AD, both the war and the city were widely seen as non-historical, but in 1868, the German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann met Frank Calvert, who convinced Schliemann that Troy was at what is now Hisarl\u0131k in modern-day Turkey. On the basis of excavations conducted by Schliemann and others, this claim is now accepted by most scholars.\nThe historicity of the Trojan War remains an open question. Many scholars believe that there is a historical core to the tale, though this may simply mean that the Homeric stories are a fusion of various tales of sieges and expeditions by Mycenaean Greeks during the Bronze Age. Those who believe that the stories of the Trojan War are derived from a specific historical conflict usually date it to the twelfth or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;, often preferring the dates given by Eratosthenes, 1194\u20131184 BC, which roughly correspond to archaeological evidence of a catastrophic burning of Troy VII, and the Late Bronze Age collapse.\nSources.\nThe events of the Trojan War are found in many works of Greek literature and depicted in numerous works of Greek art. There is no single, authoritative text which tells the entire events of the war. Instead, the story is assembled from a variety of sources, some of which report contradictory versions of the events. The most important literary sources are the two epic poems traditionally credited to Homer, the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\", composed sometime between the ninth and sixth centuries BC. Each poem narrates only a part of the war. The \"Iliad\" covers a short period in the last year of the siege of Troy, while the \"Odyssey\" concerns Odysseus's return to his home island of Ithaca following the sack of Troy and contains several flashbacks to particular episodes in the war.\nOther parts of the Trojan War were told in the poems of the Epic Cycle, also known as the Cyclic Epics: the \"Cypria\", \"Aethiopis\", \"Little Iliad\", \"Iliou Persis\", \"Nostoi\", and \"Telegony\". Though these poems survive only in fragments, their content is known from a summary included in Proclus's \"Chrestomathy\". The authorship of the Cyclic Epics is uncertain. It is generally thought that the poems were written down in the seventh and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;, after the composition of the Homeric poems, though it is widely believed that they were based on earlier traditions.\nBoth the Homeric epics and the Epic Cycle originated from oral tradition. Even after the composition of the \"Iliad\", \"Odyssey\", and the Cyclic Epics, the myths of the Trojan War were passed on orally in many genres of poetry and through non-poetic storytelling. Events and details of the story that are only found in later authors may have been passed on through oral tradition and could be as old as the Homeric poems. Visual art, such as vase painting, was another medium in which myths of the Trojan War circulated.\nIn later ages playwrights, historians, and other intellectuals would create works inspired by the Trojan War. The three great tragedians of Athens: Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, wrote a number of dramas that portray episodes from the Trojan War. Among Roman writers the most important is the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; poet Virgil; in Book 2 of his \"Aeneid\", Aeneas narrates the sack of Troy.\nLegend.\nTraditionally, the Trojan War arose from a sequence of events beginning with a quarrel between the goddesses Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite caused by Eris. Eris, the goddess of discord, was not invited to the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, and so arrived bearing a gift: a golden apple, inscribed \"for the fairest\". Each of the goddesses claimed to be the \"fairest\", and the rightful owner of the apple. They submitted the judgment to a shepherd they encountered tending his flock. Each of the goddesses promised the young man a boon in return for his favour: power, wisdom, or love. The youth\u2014in fact Paris, a Trojan prince who had been raised in the countryside\u2014chose love, and awarded the apple to Aphrodite. As his reward, Aphrodite caused Helen, the Queen of Sparta, and most beautiful of all women, to fall in love with him. The judgement earned Paris the ire of both Hera and Athena, and when Helen left her family to be with him, her former husband Menelaus, the Spartan king, called upon all the kings and princes of Greece to wage war upon Troy.\nMenelaus's brother Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, led an expedition of Achaean troops to Troy and besieged the city for ten years because of Paris's insult. After the deaths of many heroes, including the Achaeans Achilles and Ajax, and the Trojans Hector and Paris, the city fell to the ruse of the Trojan Horse. The Achaeans slaughtered the Trojans, except for some of the women and children whom they kept or sold as slaves and desecrated the temples, thus earning the gods' wrath. Few of the Achaeans returned safely to their homes and many founded colonies in distant shores. The Romans later traced their origin to Aeneas, Aphrodite's son and one of the Trojans, who was said to have led the surviving Trojans to Italy.\nThe following summary of the Trojan War follows the order of events as given in Proclus's summary, along with the \"Iliad\", \"Odyssey\", and \"Aeneid\", supplemented with details drawn from other authors.\nOrigins of the war.\nPlan of Zeus.\nAccording to Greek mythology, Zeus had become king of the gods by overthrowing his father Cronus; Cronus in turn had overthrown his father Uranus. Zeus was not faithful to his wife and sister Hera, and had many relationships from which many children were born. Since Zeus believed that there were too many people populating the earth, he envisioned Momus or Themis, who was to use the Trojan War as a means to depopulate the Earth, especially of his demigod descendants.\nThese can be supported by Hesiod's account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now all the gods were divided through strife; for at that very time Zeus who thunders on high was meditating marvelous deeds, even to mingle storm and tempest over the boundless earth, and already he was hastening to make an utter end of the race of mortal men, declaring that he would destroy the lives of the demi-gods, that the children of the gods should not mate with wretched mortals, seeing their fate with their own eyes; but that the blessed gods henceforth even as aforetime should have their living and their habitations apart from men. But on those who were born of immortals and of mankind verily Zeus laid toil and sorrow upon sorrow.\nJudgement of Paris.\nZeus came to learn from either Themis or Prometheus, after Heracles had released him from the Caucasus, that, like his father Cronus, he would be overthrown by one of his sons. Another prophecy stated that a son of the sea-nymph Thetis, with whom Zeus fell in love after gazing upon her in the oceans off the Greek coast, would become greater than his father. For one or both of these reasons, either upon Zeus's orders or because she wished to please Hera, who had raised her, Thetis was betrothed to an elderly human king, Peleus, son of Aeacus.\nAll of the gods were invited to Peleus and Thetis's wedding and brought many gifts, except Eris (the goddess of discord), who was stopped at the door by Hermes, on Zeus's order. Insulted, she threw from the door a gift of her own: a golden apple () on which was inscribed the word (\"To the fairest\"). The apple was claimed by Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite. They quarrelled bitterly over it, and none of the other gods would venture an opinion favouring one, for fear of earning the enmity of the other two. Eventually, Zeus ordered Hermes to lead the three goddesses to Paris, a prince of Troy, who, unaware of his ancestry, was being raised as a shepherd on Mount Ida, because of a prophecy that he would be the downfall of Troy. After bathing in the spring of Ida, the goddesses appeared to him naked, either for the sake of winning or at Paris's request. Paris was unable to decide among them, so the goddesses resorted to bribes. Athena offered Paris wisdom, skill in battle, and the abilities of the greatest warriors; Hera offered him political power and control of all of Asia; and Aphrodite offered him the love of the most beautiful woman in the world, Helen of Sparta. Paris awarded the apple to Aphrodite, and, after several adventures, returned to Troy, where he was recognised by his royal family.\nPeleus and Thetis bore a son, whom they named Achilles. It was foretold that he would either die of old age after an uneventful life, or die young in a battlefield and gain immortality through poetry. Furthermore, when Achilles was nine years old, Calchas had prophesied that Troy could not again fall without his help. A number of sources credit Thetis with attempting to make Achilles immortal when he was an infant. Some of these state that she held him over fire every night to burn away his mortal parts and rubbed him with ambrosia during the day, but Peleus discovered her actions and stopped her.\nAccording to some versions of this story, Thetis had already killed several sons in this manner, and Peleus's action therefore saved his son's life. Other sources state that Thetis bathed Achilles in the Styx, the river that runs to the underworld, making him invulnerable wherever he was touched by the water. Because she had held him by the heel, it was not entirely immersed during the bathing and thus the heel remained mortal and vulnerable to injury (hence the expression \"Achilles' heel\" for an isolated weakness). He grew up to be the greatest of all mortal warriors. After Calchas's prophecy, Thetis hid Achilles in Skyros at the court of King Lycomedes, where he was disguised as a girl. At a crucial point in the war, she assists her son by providing weapons divinely forged by Hephaestus (see below).\nElopement of Paris and Helen.\nThe most beautiful woman in the world was Helen, one of the daughters of Tyndareus, King of Sparta. Her mother was Leda, who had been either raped or seduced by Zeus in the form of a swan. Accounts differ over which of Leda's four children, two pairs of twins, were fathered by Zeus and which by Tyndareus. However, Helen is usually credited as Zeus's daughter, and sometimes Nemesis is credited as her mother. Helen had scores of suitors, and her father was unwilling to choose one for fear the others would retaliate violently.\nFinally, one of the suitors, Odysseus of Ithaca, proposed a plan to solve the dilemma. In exchange for Tyndareus's support of his own suit towards Penelope, he suggested that Tyndareus require all of Helen's suitors to promise that they would defend the marriage of Helen, regardless of whom he chose. The suitors duly swore the required oath on the severed pieces of a horse, although not without a certain amount of grumbling.\nTyndareus chose Menelaus. Menelaus was a political choice on her father's part. He had wealth and power. He had humbly not petitioned for her himself, but instead sent his brother Agamemnon on his behalf. He had promised Aphrodite a hecatomb, a sacrifice of 100 oxen, if he won Helen, but forgot about it and earned her wrath. Menelaus inherited Tyndareus's throne of Sparta with Helen as his queen when her brothers, Castor and Pollux, became gods, and when Agamemnon married Helen's sister Clytemnestra and took back the throne of Mycenae.\nParis, under the guise of a supposed diplomatic mission, went to Sparta to get Helen and bring her back to Troy. Menelaus had left for Crete to bury his uncle, Crateus. In meantime, Helen fell in love with Paris and decided to elope with him.\nAccording to some accounts Hera, still resentful over the judgement of Paris, sent a storm. The storm caused the lovers to stray into Phoenicia and Cyprus, before they were able to resume their course and arrived to Troy, where they married. According to other tradition, they landed in Egypt, where the gods replaced Helen with a likeness of her made of clouds, Nephele. The myth of Helen being switched is attributed to the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; Sicilian poet Stesichorus, while for Homer the Helen in Troy was one and the same. The ship then landed in Sidon. Paris, fearful of getting caught, spent some time there and then sailed to Troy.\nParis's abduction of Helen had several precedents. Io was taken from Mycenae, Europa was taken from Phoenicia, Jason took Medea from Colchis, and the Trojan princess Hesione had been taken by Heracles, who gave her to Telamon of Salamis. According to Herodotus, Paris was emboldened by these examples to steal himself a wife from Greece, and expected no retribution, since there had been none in the other cases.\nGathering of Achaean forces and the first expedition.\nAccording to Homer, Menelaus and his ally, Odysseus, travelled to Troy, where they unsuccessfully sought to recover Helen by diplomatic means.\nMenelaus then asked Agamemnon to help him enforce the oath of Helen's suitors, which was to defend her marriage, regardless of which suitor was chosen. Agamemnon agreed, and sent emissaries to all the Achaean kings and princes to call them to observe their oath and retrieve Helen.\nOdysseus and Achilles.\nSince Menelaus's wedding, Odysseus had married Penelope and fathered a son, Telemachus. In order to avoid the war, he feigned madness and sowed his fields with salt. Palamedes outwitted him by placing Telemachus, then an infant, in front of the plough's path. Odysseus turned aside, unwilling to kill his son, so revealing his sanity and forcing him to join the war.\nAccording to Homer, however, Odysseus supported the military adventure from the beginning, and travelled the region with Pylos's king, Nestor, to recruit forces.\nAt Skyros, Achilles had an affair with the king's daughter Deidamia, resulting in a child, Neoptolemus. Odysseus, Telamonian Ajax, and Achilles's tutor Phoenix went to retrieve Achilles. Achilles's mother disguised him as a woman so that he would not have to go to war, but, according to one story, they blew a horn, and Achilles revealed himself by seizing a spear to fight intruders, rather than fleeing. According to another story, they disguised themselves as merchants bearing trinkets and weaponry, and Achilles was marked out from the other women for admiring weaponry instead of clothes and jewellery.\nPausanias said that, according to Homer, Achilles did not hide in Skyros, but rather conquered the island, as part of the Trojan War.\nFirst gathering at Aulis.\nThe Achaean forces first gathered at Aulis. All the suitors sent their forces except King Cinyras of Cyprus. Though he sent breastplates to Agamemnon and promised to send 50 ships, he sent only one real ship, led by the son of Mygdalion, and 49 ships made of clay. Idomeneus was willing to lead the Cretan contingent in Mycenae's war against Troy, but only as a co-commander, which he was granted. The last commander to arrive was Achilles, who was then 15 years old.\nFollowing a sacrifice to Apollo, a snake slithered from the altar to a sparrow's nest in a plane tree nearby. It ate the mother and her nine chicks, then was turned to stone. Calchas interpreted this as a sign that Troy would fall in the tenth year of the war.\nTelephus.\nWhen the Achaeans left for the war, they did not know the way, and accidentally landed in Mysia, ruled by King Telephus, son of Heracles, who had led a contingent of Arcadians to settle there. In the battle, Achilles wounded Telephus, who had killed Thersander. Because the wound would not heal, Telephus asked an oracle, \"What will happen to the wound?\" The oracle responded, \"he that wounded shall heal\". The Achaean fleet then set sail and was scattered by a storm. Achilles landed in Skyros and married Deidamia. A new gathering was set again in Aulis.\nTelephus went to Aulis, and either pretended to be a beggar, asking Agamemnon to help heal his wound, or kidnapped Orestes and held him for ransom, demanding the wound be healed. Achilles refused, claiming to have no medical knowledge. Odysseus reasoned that the spear that had inflicted the wound must be able to heal it. Pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the wound, and Telephus was healed. Telephus then showed the Achaeans the route to Troy.\nSome scholars have regarded the expedition against Telephus and its resolution as a derivative reworking of elements from the main story of the Trojan War, but it has also been seen as fitting the story-pattern of the \"preliminary adventure\" that anticipates events and themes from the main narrative, and therefore as likely to be \"early and integral\".\nSecond gathering.\nEight years after the storm had scattered them, the fleet of more than a thousand ships was gathered again. When they had all reached Aulis, the winds ceased. The prophet Calchas stated that the goddess Artemis was punishing Agamemnon for killing either a sacred deer or a deer in a sacred grove, and boasting that he was a better hunter than she. The only way to appease Artemis, he said, was to sacrifice Iphigenia, who was either the daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, or of Helen and Theseus entrusted to Clytemnestra when Helen married Menelaus.\nAgamemnon refused, and the other commanders threatened to make Palamedes commander of the expedition. According to some versions, Agamemnon relented and performed the sacrifice, but others claim that he sacrificed a deer in her place, or that at the last moment, Artemis took pity on the girl, and took her to be a maiden in one of her temples, substituting a lamb. Hesiod says that Iphigenia became the goddess Hecate.\nThe Achaean forces are described in detail in the Catalogue of Ships, in the second book of the \"Iliad\". They consisted of 28 contingents from mainland Greece, the Peloponnese, the Dodecanese islands, Crete, and Ithaca, comprising 1186 pentekonters, ships with 50 rowers. Thucydides says that according to tradition there were about 1200 ships, and that the Boeotian ships had 120 men, while Philoctetes's ships only had the fifty rowers, these probably being maximum and minimum. These numbers would mean a total force of 70,000 to 130,000 men. Another catalogue of ships is given by the \"Bibliotheca\" that differs somewhat but agrees in numbers. Some scholars have claimed that Homer's catalogue is an original Bronze Age document, possibly the Achaean commander's order of operations. Others believe it was a fabrication of Homer.\nThe second book of the \"Iliad\" also lists the Trojan allies, consisting of the Trojans themselves, led by Hector, and various allies listed as Dardanians led by Aeneas, Zeleians, Adrasteians, Percotians, Pelasgians, Thracians, Ciconian spearmen, Paionian archers, Halizones, Mysians, Phrygians, Maeonians, Miletians, Lycians led by Sarpedon and Carians. Nothing is said of the Trojan language; the Carians are specifically said to be barbarian-speaking, and the allied contingents are said to have spoken many languages, requiring orders to be translated by their individual commanders. The Trojans and Achaeans in the \"Iliad\" share the same religion, same culture and the enemy heroes speak to each other in the same language, though this could be dramatic effect.\nNine years of war.\nPhiloctetes.\nPhiloctetes was Heracles's friend, and because he lit Heracles's funeral pyre when no one else would, he received Heracles's bow and arrows. He sailed with seven ships full of men to the Trojan War, where he was planning on fighting for the Achaeans. They stopped either at Chryse Island for supplies, or in Tenedos, along with the rest of the fleet. Then Philoctetes was bitten by a snake. The wound festered and had a foul smell; on Odysseus's advice, the Atreidae ordered Philoctetes to stay on Lemnos.\nMedon took control of Philoctetes's men. While landing on Tenedos, Achilles killed king Tenes, son of Apollo, despite a warning by his mother that if he did so he would be killed himself by Apollo. From Tenedos, Agamemnon sent an embassy to the Priam king of Troy composed of Menelaus and Odysseus, asking for Helen's return. The embassy was refused.\nPhiloctetes stayed on Lemnos for ten years, which was a deserted island according to Sophocles's tragedy \"Philoctetes\", but according to earlier tradition was populated by Minyans.\nArrival.\nCalchas had prophesied that the first Achaean to walk on land after stepping off a ship would be the first to die. Thus even the leading Greeks hesitated to land. Finally, Protesilaus, leader of the Phylaceans, landed first. Odysseus had tricked him, in throwing his own shield down to land on, so that while he was first to leap off his ship, he was not the first to land on Trojan soil. Hector killed Protesilaus in single combat, though the Trojans conceded the beach. In the second wave of attacks, Achilles killed Cycnus, son of Poseidon. The Trojans then fled to the safety of the walls of their city.\nThe walls served as sturdy fortifications for defence against the Greeks. The build of the walls was so impressive that legend held that they had been built by Poseidon and Apollo during a year of forced service to Trojan King Laomedon. Protesilaus had killed many Trojans but was killed by Hector in most versions of the story, though others list Aeneas, Achates, or Ephorbus as his slayer. The Achaeans buried him as a god on the Thracian peninsula, across the Tro\u00e4d. After Protesilaus's death, his brother, Podarces, took command of his troops.\nAchilles's campaigns.\nThe Achaeans besieged Troy for nine years. This part of the war is the least developed among surviving sources, which prefer to talk about events in the last year of the war. After the initial landing the army was gathered in its entirety again only in the tenth year. Thucydides deduces that this was due to lack of money. They raided the Trojan allies and spent time farming the Thracian peninsula. Troy was never completely besieged, thus it maintained communications with the interior of Asia Minor. Reinforcements continued to come until the very end. The Achaeans controlled only the entrance to the Dardanelles, and Troy and her allies controlled the shortest point at Abydos and Sestos and communicated with allies in Europe.\nAchilles and Ajax were the most active of the Achaeans, leading separate armies to raid lands of Trojan allies. According to Homer, Achilles conquered 11 cities and 12 islands. According to Apollodorus, he raided the land of Aeneas in the Tro\u00e4d region and stole his cattle. He also captured Lyrnassus, Pedasus, and many of the neighbouring cities, and killed Troilus; it was said that if he reached 20 years of age, Troy would not fall. According to Apollodorus,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He also took Lesbos and Phocaea, then Colophon, and Smyrna, and Clazomenae, and Cyme; and afterwards Aegialus and Tenos, the so-called Hundred Cities; then, in order, Adramytium and Side; then Endium, and Linaeum, and Colone. He took also Hypoplacian Thebes and Lyrnessus, and further Antandrus, and many other cities.\nKakrides comments that the list is wrong in that it extends too far into the south. Other sources talk of Achilles taking Pedasus, Monenia, and Methymna (in Lesbos) with the help of Pisidice.\nAmong the loot from these cities was Briseis, from Lyrnessus, who was awarded to him, and Chryseis, from Hypoplacian Thebes, who was awarded to Agamemnon. Achilles captured Lycaon, son of Priam, while he was cutting branches in his father's orchards. Patroclus sold him as a slave in Lemnos, where he was bought by Eetion of Imbros and brought back to Troy. Only 12 days later Achilles slew him, after the death of Patroclus.\nAjax and a game of \"petteia\".\nAjax, son of Telamon, laid waste the Thracian peninsula of which Polymestor, a son-in-law of Priam, was king. Polymestor surrendered Polydorus, one of Priam's children, of whom he had custody. He then attacked the town of the Phrygian king Teleutas, killed him in single combat and carried off his daughter Tecmessa. Ajax also hunted the Trojan flocks, both on Mount Ida and in the countryside.\nNumerous paintings on pottery have suggested a tale not mentioned in the literary traditions. At some point in the war Achilles and Ajax were playing a board game (). They were absorbed in the game and oblivious to the surrounding battle. The Trojans attacked and reached the heroes, who were only saved by an intervention of Athena.\nDeath of Palamedes.\nOdysseus was sent to Thrace to return with grain, but came back empty-handed. When scorned by Palamedes, Odysseus challenged him to do better. Palamedes set out and returned with a shipload of grain.\nOdysseus had never forgiven Palamedes for threatening the life of his son. In revenge, Odysseus conceived a plot where an incriminating letter was forged, from Priam to Palamedes, and gold was planted in Palamedes's quarters. The letter and gold were \"discovered\", and Agamemnon had Palamedes stoned to death for treason.\nHowever, Pausanias, quoting the \"Cypria\", says that Odysseus and Diomedes drowned Palamedes, while he was fishing, and Dictys says that Odysseus and Diomedes lured Palamedes into a well, which they said contained gold, then stoned him to death.\nPalamedes's father Nauplius sailed to the Tro\u00e4d and asked for justice, but was refused. In revenge, Nauplius travelled among the Achaean kingdoms and told the wives of the kings that they were bringing Trojan concubines to dethrone them. Many of the Greek wives were persuaded to betray their husbands, most significantly Agamemnon's wife, Clytemnestra, who was seduced by Aegisthus, son of Thyestes.\nMutiny.\nNear the end of the ninth year since the landing, the Achaean army, tired from the fighting and from the lack of supplies, mutinied against their leaders and demanded to return to their homes. According to the \"Cypria\", Achilles forced the army to stay. According to Apollodorus, Agamemnon brought the Wine Growers, daughters of Anius, son of Apollo, who had the gift of producing by touch wine, wheat, and oil from the earth, in order to relieve the supply problem of the army.\n\"Iliad\".\nChryses, a priest of Apollo and father of Chryseis, came to Agamemnon to ask for the return of his daughter. Agamemnon refused, and insulted Chryses, who prayed to Apollo to avenge his ill-treatment. Enraged, Apollo afflicted the Achaean army with plague. Agamemnon was forced to return Chryseis to end the plague, and took Achilles's concubine Briseis as his own. Enraged at the dishonour Agamemnon had inflicted upon him, Achilles decided he would no longer fight. He asked his mother, Thetis, to intercede with Zeus, who agreed to give the Trojans success in the absence of Achilles, the best warrior of the Achaeans.\nAfter the withdrawal of Achilles, the Achaeans were initially successful. Both armies gathered in full for the first time since the landing. Menelaus and Paris fought a duel, which ended when Aphrodite snatched the beaten Paris from the field. With the truce broken, the armies began fighting again. Diomedes won great renown amongst the Achaeans, killing the Trojan hero Pandaros and nearly killing Aeneas, who was only saved by his mother, Aphrodite. With the assistance of Athena, Diomedes then wounded the gods Aphrodite and Ares. During the next days, however, the Trojans drove the Achaeans back to their camp and were stopped at the Achaean wall by Poseidon. The next day, though, with Zeus's help, the Trojans broke into the Achaean camp and were on the verge of setting fire to the Achaean ships. An earlier appeal to Achilles to return was rejected, but after Hector burned Protesilaus's ship, he allowed his companion Patroclus to go into battle wearing Achilles's armour and lead his army. Patroclus drove the Trojans all the way back to the walls of Troy, and was only prevented from storming the city by the intervention of Apollo. Patroclus was then killed by Hector, who took Achilles's armour from the body of Patroclus.\nAchilles, maddened with grief over the death of Patroclus, swore to kill Hector in revenge. The exact nature of Achilles's relationship to Patroclus is the subject of some debate. Although certainly very close, Achilles and Patroclus are never explicitly cast as lovers by Homer, but they were depicted as such in the archaic and classical periods of Greek literature, particularly in the works of Aeschylus, Aeschines and Plato. He was reconciled with Agamemnon and received Briseis back, untouched by Agamemnon. He received a new set of arms, forged by the god Hephaestus, and returned to the battlefield. He slaughtered many Trojans, and nearly killed Aeneas, who was saved by Poseidon. Achilles fought with the river god Scamander, and a battle of the gods followed. The Trojan army returned to the city, except for Hector, who remained outside the walls because he was tricked by Athena. Achilles killed Hector, and afterwards he dragged Hector's body from his chariot and refused to return the body to the Trojans for burial. The body nevertheless remained unscathed as it was preserved from all injury by Apollo and Aphrodite. The Achaeans then conducted funeral games for Patroclus. Afterwards, Priam came to Achilles's tent, guided by Hermes, and asked Achilles to return Hector's body. The armies made a temporary truce to allow the burial of the dead. The \"Iliad\" ends with the funeral of Hector.\nAfter the \"Iliad\".\nPenthesilea and the death of Achilles.\nShortly after the burial of Hector, Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons, arrived with her warriors. Penthesilea, daughter of Otrera and Ares, had accidentally killed her sister Hippolyte. She was purified from this action by Priam, and in exchange she fought for him and killed many, including Machaon (according to Pausanias, Machaon was killed by Eurypylus), and according to one version, Achilles himself, who was resurrected at the request of Thetis. In another version, Penthesilia was killed by Achilles, who would later mourn her after her death. Thersites, a simple soldier and the ugliest Achaean, taunted Achilles over his grief and gouged out Penthesilea's eyes. Achilles slew Thersites, and after a dispute sailed to Lesbos, where he was purified for his murder by Odysseus after sacrificing to Apollo, Artemis, and Leto.\nWhile they were away, Memnon of Ethiopia, son of Tithonus and Eos, came with his host to help his stepbrother Priam. He did not come directly from Ethiopia, but either from Susa in Persia, conquering all the peoples in between, or from the Caucasus, leading an army of Ethiopians and Indians. Like Achilles, he wore armour made by Hephaestus. In the ensuing battle, Memnon killed Antilochus, who took one of Memnon's blows to save his father Nestor. Achilles and Memnon then fought. Zeus weighed the fate of the two heroes; the weight containing that of Memnon sank, and he was slain by Achilles. Achilles chased the Trojans to their city, which he entered. The gods, seeing that he had killed too many of their children, decided that it was his time to die. He was killed after Paris shot a poisoned arrow that was guided by Apollo. In another version he was killed by a knife to the back (or heel) by Paris, while marrying Polyxena, daughter of Priam, in the temple of Thymbraean Apollo, the site where he had earlier killed Troilus. Both versions conspicuously deny the killer any sort of valour, saying Achilles remained undefeated on the battlefield. His bones were mingled with those of Patroclus, and funeral games were held. Like Ajax, Achilles is represented as living after his death in the island of Leuke, at the mouth of the Danube River.\nJudgment of Arms.\nA great battle raged around the dead Achilles. Ajax held back the Trojans, while Odysseus carried the body away. When Achilles's armour was offered to the smartest warrior, the two that had saved his body came forward as competitors. Agamemnon, unwilling to undertake the invidious duty of deciding between the two competitors, referred the dispute to the decision of the Trojan prisoners, inquiring of them which of the two heroes had done most harm to the Trojans. Alternatively, the Trojans and Pallas Athena were the judges in that, following Nestor's advice, spies were sent to the walls to overhear what was said. A girl said that Ajax was braver:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAccording to Pindar, the decision was made by secret ballot among the Achaeans. In all story versions, the arms were awarded to Odysseus. Driven mad with grief, Ajax desired to kill his comrades, but Athena caused him to mistake for the Achaean warriors the cattle and their herdsmen. In his frenzy he scourged two rams, believing them to be Agamemnon and Menelaus. In the morning, he came to his senses and killed himself by jumping on the sword that had been given to him by Hector, so that it pierced his armpit, his only vulnerable part. According to an older tradition, he was killed by the Trojans who, seeing he was invulnerable, attacked him with clay until he was covered by it and could no longer move, thus dying of starvation.\nProphecies.\nAfter the tenth year, it was prophesied that Troy could not fall without Heracles's bow, which was with Philoctetes in Lemnos. Odysseus and Diomedes retrieved Philoctetes, whose wound had healed. Philoctetes then shot and killed Paris.\nAccording to Apollodorus, Paris's brothers Helenus and Deiphobus vied over the hand of Helen. Deiphobus prevailed, and Helenus abandoned Troy for Mount Ida. Calchas said that Helenus knew the prophecies concerning the fall of Troy, so Odysseus waylaid Helenus. Under coercion, Helenus told the Achaeans that they would win if they retrieved Pelops's bones, persuaded Achilles's son Neoptolemus to fight for them, and stole the Trojan Palladium.\nThe Greeks retrieved Pelops's bones, and sent Odysseus to retrieve Neoptolemus, who was hiding from the war in King Lycomedes's court in Skyros. Odysseus gave him his father's arms. Eurypylus, son of Telephus, leading, according to Homer, a large force of \"K\u00eateioi\", or Hittites or Mysians according to Apollodorus, arrived to aid the Trojans. Eurypylus killed Machaon and Peneleos, but was slain by Neoptolemus.\nDisguised as a beggar, Odysseus went to spy inside Troy, but was recognised by Helen. Homesick, Helen plotted with Odysseus. Later, with Helen's help, Odysseus and Diomedes stole the Palladium.\nTrojan Horse.\nThe end of the war came with one final plan. Odysseus devised a new ruse\u00a0\u2013 a giant hollow wooden horse, an animal that was sacred to the Trojans. It was built by Epeius and guided by Athena, from the wood of a cornel tree grove sacred to Apollo, with the inscription: \"The Greeks dedicate this thank-offering to Athena for their return home\". The hollow horse was filled with soldiers led by Odysseus. The rest of the army burned the camp and sailed for Tenedos.\nWhen the Trojans discovered that the Greeks were gone, believing the war was over, they \"joyfully dragged the horse inside the city\", while they debated what to do with it. Some thought they ought to hurl it down from the rocks, others thought they should burn it, while others said they ought to dedicate it to Athena.\nBoth Cassandra and Laoco\u00f6n warned against keeping the horse. While Cassandra had been given the gift of prophecy by Apollo, she was also cursed by Apollo never to be believed. Serpents then came out of the sea and devoured either Laoco\u00f6n and one of his two sons, Laoco\u00f6n and both his sons, or only his sons, a portent which so alarmed the followers of Aeneas that they withdrew to Ida. The Trojans decided to keep the horse and turned to a night of mad revelry and celebration. Sinon, an Achaean spy, signalled the fleet stationed at Tenedos when \"it was midnight and the clear moon was rising\" and the soldiers from inside the horse emerged and killed the guards.\nSack of Troy.\nThe Achaeans entered the city and killed the sleeping population. A great massacre followed which continued into the day.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Trojans, fuelled with desperation, fought back fiercely, despite being disorganised and leaderless. With the fighting at its height, some donned fallen enemies' attire and launched surprise counterattacks in the chaotic street fighting. Other defenders hurled down roof tiles and anything else heavy down on the rampaging attackers. The outlook was grim though, and eventually the remaining defenders were destroyed along with the whole city.\nNeoptolemus killed Priam, who had taken refuge at the altar of Zeus of the Courtyard. Menelaus killed Deiphobus, Helen's husband after Paris's death, and also intended to kill Helen, but, overcome by her beauty, threw down his sword and took her to the ships.\nAjax the Lesser raped Cassandra on Athena's altar while she was clinging to her statue. Because of Ajax's impiety, the Acheaens, urged by Odysseus, wanted to stone him to death, but he fled to Athena's altar, and was spared.\nAntenor, who had given hospitality to Menelaus and Odysseus when they asked for the return of Helen, and who had advocated so, was spared, along with his family. Aeneas took his father on his back and fled, and, according to Apollodorus, was allowed to go because of his piety.\nThe Greeks then burned the city and divided the spoils. Cassandra was awarded to Agamemnon. Neoptolemus got Andromache, wife of Hector, and Odysseus was given Hecuba, Priam's wife.\nThe Achaeans threw Hector's infant son Astyanax down from the walls of Troy, either out of cruelty and hate or to end the royal line, and the possibility of a son's revenge. They (by usual tradition Neoptolemus) also sacrificed the Trojan princess Polyxena on the grave of Achilles.\nAethra, Theseus's mother and one of Helen's handmaids, was rescued by her grandsons, Demophon and Acamas.\nReturns.\nThe gods were very angry over the destruction of their temples and other sacrilegious acts by the Achaeans, and decided that most would not return home. A storm fell on the returning fleet off Tenos island. Nauplius, in revenge for the murder of his son Palamedes, set up false lights in Cape Caphereus (also known today as Cavo D'Oro, in Euboea) and many were shipwrecked.\nHouse of Atreus.\nAccording to the \"Odyssey\", Menelaus's fleet was blown by storms to Crete and Egypt, where they were unable to sail away because the winds were calm. Only five of his ships survived. Menelaus had to catch Proteus, a shape-shifting sea god, to find out what sacrifices to which gods he would have to make to guarantee safe passage. According to some stories the Helen who was taken by Paris was a fake, and the real Helen was in Egypt, where she was reunited with Menelaus. Proteus also told Menelaus that he was destined for Elysium (Heaven) after his death. Menelaus returned to Sparta with Helen eight years after he had left Troy.\nAgamemnon returned home with Cassandra to Argos. His wife Clytemnestra (Helen's sister) was having an affair with Aegisthus, son of Thyestes, Agamemnon's cousin who had conquered Argos before Agamemnon himself retook it. Possibly out of vengeance for the death of Iphigenia, Clytemnestra plotted with her lover to kill Agamemnon. Cassandra foresaw this murder, and warned Agamemnon, but he disregarded her. He was killed, either at a feast or in his bath, according to different versions. Cassandra was also killed. Agamemnon's son Orestes, who had been away, returned and conspired with his sister Electra to avenge their father. He killed Clytemnestra and Aegisthus and succeeded to his father's throne.\n\"Odyssey\".\nOdysseus's ten-year journey home to Ithaca was told in Homer's \"Odyssey\". Odysseus and his men were blown far off course to lands unknown to the Achaeans; there Odysseus had many adventures, including the famous encounter with the Cyclops Polyphemus, and an audience with the seer Teiresias in Hades. On the island of Thrinacia, Odysseus's men ate the cattle sacred to the sun-god Helios. For this sacrilege Odysseus's ships were destroyed, and all his men perished. Odysseus had not eaten the cattle, and was allowed to live; he washed ashore on the island of Ogygia, and lived there with the nymph Calypso. After seven years, the gods decided to send Odysseus home; on a small raft, he sailed to Scheria, the home of the Phaeacians, who gave him passage to Ithaca.\nOnce in his home land, Odysseus travelled disguised as an old beggar. He was recognised by his dog, Argos, who died in his lap. He then discovered that his wife, Penelope, had been faithful to him during the 20 years he was absent, despite the countless suitors that were eating his food and spending his property. With the help of his son Telemachus, Athena, and Eumaeus, the swineherd, he killed all of them except Medon, who had been polite to Penelope, and Phemius, a local singer who had only been forced to help the suitors against Penelope. Penelope tested Odysseus with his unstrung recurve bow to ensure it was him, and he forgave her. The next day the suitors' relatives tried to take revenge on him but they were stopped by Athena.\n\"Telegony\".\nThe \"Telegony\" picks up where the \"Odyssey\" leaves off, beginning with the burial of the dead suitors, and continues until the death of Odysseus. Some years after Odysseus's return, Telegonus, the son of Odysseus and Circe, came to Ithaca and plundered the island. Odysseus, attempting to fight off the attack, was killed by his unrecognised son. After Telegonus realised he had killed his father, he brought the body to his mother Circe, along with Telemachus and Penelope. Circe made them immortal; then Telegonus married Penelope and Telemachus married Circe.\n\"Aeneid\".\nThe journey of the Trojan survivor Aeneas and his resettling of Trojan refugees in Italy are the subject of the Latin epic poem the \"Aeneid\" by Virgil. Writing during the time of Augustus, Virgil has his hero give a first-person account of the fall of Troy in the second of the \"Aeneid\"'s twelve books; the Trojan Horse, which does not appear in the \"Iliad\", became legendary from Virgil's account.\nAeneas leads a group of survivors away from the city, among them his son Ascanius (also known as Iulus), his trumpeter Misenus, father Anchises, the healer Iapyx, his faithful sidekick Achates, and Mimas as a guide. His wife Creusa is killed during the sack of the city. Aeneas also carries the Lares and Penates of Troy, which the historical Romans claimed to preserve as guarantees of Rome's own security.\nThe Trojan survivors escape with a number of ships, seeking to establish a new homeland elsewhere. They land in several nearby countries that prove inhospitable, and are finally told by an oracle that they must return to the land of their forebears. They first try to establish themselves in Crete, where Dardanus had once settled, but find it ravaged by the same plague that had driven Idomeneus away. They find the colony led by Helenus and Andromache, but decline to remain. After seven years they arrive in Carthage, where Aeneas has an affair with Queen Dido (since according to tradition Carthage was founded in 814 BC, the arrival of Trojan refugees a few hundred years earlier exposes chronological difficulties within the mythic tradition). Eventually the gods order Aeneas to continue onward, and he and his people arrive at the mouth of the Tiber River in Italy. Dido commits suicide, and Aeneas's betrayal of her was regarded as an element in the long enmity between Rome and Carthage that expressed itself in the Punic Wars and led to Roman hegemony.\nAt Cumae, the Sibyl leads Aeneas on an archetypal descent to the underworld, where the shade of his dead father serves as a guide; this book of the \"Aeneid\" directly influenced Dante, who has Virgil act as his narrator's guide. Aeneas is given a vision of the future majesty of Rome, which it was his duty to found, and returns to the world of the living. He negotiates a settlement with the local king, Latinus, and was wed to his daughter, Lavinia. This triggered a war with other local tribes, which culminated in the founding of the settlement of Alba Longa, ruled by Aeneas and Lavinia's son Silvius. Roman myth attempted to reconcile two different founding myths: three hundred years later, in the more famous tradition, Romulus founded Rome after murdering his brother Remus. The Trojan origins of Rome became particularly important in the propaganda of Julius Caesar, whose family claimed descent from Venus through Aeneas's son Iulus (hence the Latin name \"Iulius\"), and during the reign of Augustus (see for instance the and the \"Troy Game\" presented frequently by the Julio-Claudian dynasty).\nDates of the Trojan War.\nSince this war was considered among the ancient Greeks as either the last event of the mythical age or the first event of the historical age, several dates are given for the fall of Troy. They usually derive from genealogies of kings. Ephorus gives 1135 BC, Sosibius 1172 BC, Eratosthenes 1184 BC/1183 BC, Timaeus 1193 BC, the Parian marble 1209 BC/1208 BC, Dicaearchus 1212 BC, Herodotus around 1250 BC, Eretes 1291 BC, while Douris gives 1334 BC. As for the exact day Ephorus gives 23/24 Thargelion (6 or 7 May), Hellanicus 12 Thargelion (26 May) while others give the 23rd of Sciroforion (7 July) or the 23rd of Ponamos (7 October).\nThe glorious and rich city Homer describes was believed to be Troy VI by many twentieth century AD authors, and destroyed about 1275 BC, probably by an earthquake. Its successor, Troy VIIa, was destroyed around 1180 BC; it was long considered a poorer city, and dismissed as a candidate for Homeric Troy, but since the excavation campaign of 1988, it has come to be regarded as the most likely candidate.\nHistorical basis.\nThe historicity of the Trojan War, including whether it occurred at all and where Troy was located if it ever existed, is still subject to debate. Most classical Greeks thought that the war was a historical event, but many believed that the Homeric poems had exaggerated the events to suit the demands of poetry. For instance, the historian Thucydides, who is known for being critical, considers it a true event but doubts that 1,186 ships were sent to Troy. Euripides started changing Greek myths at will, including those of the Trojan War. Near AD 100, Dio Chrysostom argued that while the war was historical, it ended with the Trojans winning, and the Greeks attempted to hide that fact. Around 1870 it was generally agreed in Western Europe that the Trojan War had never happened and Troy never existed. Then Heinrich Schliemann popularised his excavations at Hisarl\u0131k, \u00c7anakkale, which he and others believed to be Troy, and of the Mycenaean cities of Greece. Today many scholars agree that the Trojan War is based on a historical core of a Greek expedition against the city of Troy, but few would argue that the Homeric poems faithfully represent the actual events of the war.\nIn November 2001, geologist John C. Kraft and classicist John V. Luce presented the results of investigations into the geology of the region that had started in 1977. The geologists compared the present geology with the landscapes and coastal features described in the \"Iliad\" and other classical sources, notably Strabo's \"Geographica\". Their conclusion was that there is regularly a consistency between the location of Troy as identified by Schliemann (and other locations such as the Greek camp), the geological evidence, and descriptions of the topography and accounts of the battle in the \"Iliad\", although of course this could be a coincidence.\nSince the twentieth century, scholars have attempted to draw conclusions based on Hittite and Egyptian texts that date to the time of the Trojan War. While they give a general description of the political situation in the region at the time, their information on whether this particular conflict took place is limited. Andrew Dalby notes that while the Trojan War most likely did take place in some form and is therefore grounded in history, its true nature is unknown. The Tawagalawa letter mentions a kingdom of \"Ahhiyawa\" (Achaea, or Greece) that lies beyond the sea (that would be the Aegean) and controls Milliwanda, which is identified with Miletus. Also mentioned in this and other letters is the Assuwa confederation made of 22 cities and countries which included the city of \"Wilusa\" (Ilios or Ilium). The Milawata letter implies this city lies on the north of the Assuwa confederation, beyond the Seha river. While the identification of Wilusa with Ilium (that is, Troy) is always controversial, in the 1990s it gained majority acceptance. In the Alaksandu treaty (c.\u20091280 BC) the king of the city is named Alaksandu, and Paris's name in the \"Iliad\" (among other works) is Alexander. The Tawagalawa letter (dated c.\u20091250 BC) which is addressed to the king of Ahhiyawa actually says: \"Now as we have reached agreement on the matter of Wilusa over which we went to war-...\"\nFormerly under the Hittites, the Assuwa confederation defected after the battle of Kadesh between Egypt and the Hittites (c.\u20091274 BC). In 1230 BC Hittite king Tudhaliya IV (c.\u20091240\u20131210 BC) campaigned against this federation. Under Arnuwanda III (c.\u20091210\u20131205 BC) the Hittites were forced to abandon the lands they controlled in the coast of the Aegean. It is possible that the Trojan War was a conflict between the king of Ahhiyawa and the Assuwa confederation. This view has been supported in that the entire war includes the landing in Mysia (and Telephus's wounding), Achilles's campaigns in the North Aegean and Telamonian Ajax's campaigns in Thrace and Phrygia. Most of these regions were part of Assuwa. That most Achaean heroes did not return to their homes and founded colonies elsewhere was interpreted by Thucydides as being due to their long absence. Nowadays the interpretation followed by most scholars is that the Achaean leaders driven out of their lands by the turmoil at the end of the Mycenaean era preferred to claim descent from exiles of the Trojan War.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Trojan War has remained a popular subject since the classical period. Famous adaptations include \"Tro\u00e4des\" by Euripides, \"Troilus and Criseyde\" by Geoffrey Chaucer, \"Troilus and Cressida\" by William Shakespeare, \"Iphigenia\" and \"Polyxena\" by Samuel Coster, \"Palamedes\" by Joost van den Vondel and \"Les Troyens\" by Hector Berlioz. Modern-day adaptions include \"Helen of Troy\" (1956), \"The Trojan Horse\" (1961), \"Troy\" (2004) and \"The Song of Achilles\" (2011). \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nAncient authors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern authors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30059", "revid": "44420918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30059", "title": "Troy", "text": "Ancient Homeric-era city in northwest Asia Minor\nTroy (/; ; ) or Ilion (; ) was an ancient city located in present-day Hisarlik, Turkey. It is best known as the setting for the Greek myth of the Trojan War. The archaeological site is open to the public as a tourist destination, and was added to the UNESCO World Heritage list in 1998.\nTroy was repeatedly destroyed and rebuilt during its 4000 years of occupation. As a result, the site is divided into nine archaeological layers, each corresponding to a city built on the ruins of the previous. Archaeologists refer to these layers using Roman numerals, Troy I being the earliest and Troy IX being the latest. \nTroy was first settled around 3600 BC and grew into a small fortified city around 3000 BC (Troy I). Among the early layers, Troy II is notable for its wealth and imposing architecture. During the Late Bronze Age, Troy was called Wilusa and was a vassal of the Hittite Empire. The final layers (Troy VIII\u2013IX) were Greek and Roman cities which served as tourist attractions and religious centers because of their link to mythic tradition.\nThe site was excavated by Heinrich Schliemann and Frank Calvert starting in 1871. Under the ruins of the classical city, they found the remains of numerous earlier settlements. Several of these layers resemble literary depictions of Troy, leading some scholars to conclude that there is a kernel of truth underlying the legends. Subsequent excavations by others have added to the modern understanding of the site, though the exact relationship between myth and reality remains unclear and there is no definitive evidence for a Greek attack on the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName.\nIn Classical Greek, the city was referred to as both \"Troia\" () and \"Ilion\" () or \"Ilios\" (). Metrical evidence from the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" suggests that the latter was originally pronounced \"Wilios\". These names seem to date back to the Bronze Age, as suggested by Hittite records which refer to a city in northwest Anatolia called () or () which is generally identified with the site of Hisarl\u0131k, near Tevfikiye. In Greek myth, these names were held to originate from the names of the kingdom's founders, Tros and his son Ilus.\nIn Latin, the city was referred to as ' or '. In Turkish, it is generally known as ' or '.\nArchaeological site.\nThe archaeological site of Troy consists of the hill of Hisarl\u0131k and the fields below it to the south. The hill is a tell, composed of strata containing the remains left behind by more than three millennia of human occupation.\nThe primary divisions among layers are designated with Roman numerals, Troy\u00a0I representing the oldest layer and Troy\u00a0IX representing the most recent. Sublayers are distinguished with lowercase letters (e.g. VIIa and VIIb) and further subdivisions with numbers (e.g. VIIb1 and VIIb2). An additional major layer known as Troy\u00a00 predates the layers which were initially given Roman numeral designations.\nThe layers have been given relative dates by comparing artefacts found in them to those found at other sites. However, precise absolute dates are not always possible due to limitations in the accuracy of radiocarbon dating.\nTroy 0.\nTroy\u00a00 is a pre-Bronze Age layer known from limited finds of pottery sherds and wooden beams. It is tentatively dated to c.\u20093600\u20133500 BC but little is known about it.\nTroy I.\nTroy I was founded around 3000 BC on what was then the eastern shore of a shallow lagoon. It was significantly smaller than later settlements at the site, with a citadel covering less than 1 ha. However, it stood out from its neighbours in particular for its massive limestone fortifications which were regularly renovated and strengthened. Defensive architecture would continue to be a distinctive characteristic in later periods, reflecting perennial security concerns at the vulnerable coastal site.\nResidents lived in attached houses made of stone and mudbrick. Some houses had a megaron layout, among which one room is notably larger than the others. Although the city plan is not entirely clear from its limited remains, the houses appear to have been oriented in parallel to the southern walls. Artifacts from this era include dark coloured handmade pottery, objects made of copper, as well as a monumental stone stele with a relief depicting an armed warrior.\nTroy I was founded as part of a consolidation of settlement in the area. Its founders came from nearby towns such as Kumtepe and G\u00fclp\u0131nar, which had been part of an earlier network that had cultural and economic ties to the eastern Aegean and southeastern Europe. Troy itself appears to have maintained these connections, showing similarities to sites in Thessaly and southeastern Europe, as well as Aegean sites such as Poliochni in Lemnos and Thermi in Lesbos. Despite some connections to Anatolian sites including Badema\u011fac\u0131, it did not yet have the close ties with central Anatolia seen later.\nTroy I was destroyed by fire around 2550 BC.\nTroy II.\nTroy\u00a0II was built around 2550\u00a0BC. Although there is no evidence of a cultural break after the previous settlement, the new city had a very different character. It was twice the size of the preceding city, featuring a lower town as well as an expanded citadel divided into two precincts. These precincts, divided by colonnades, suggest growing socio-political stratification in Trojan society. At the center were large megaron-style buildings around a courtyard which was likely used for public events. One of these buildings, Megaron IIA, is the biggest known building of its kind in the Aegean-Anatolian region.\nThe citadel was protected by massive stone walls and towers topped with mudbrick superstructures. It was accessed through two ramps, one of which is well preserved and attracts attention from modern day tourists. Because the city was not large enough to require two gates for practical purposes, some archaeologists have speculated that one of the gates was intended for ceremonial processions. The lower city was protected by a wooden palisade unlike any other known in that era. It was a complex structure nearly 3 metres wide, with interior buttresses and columns and beams secured in notches cut into the bedrock.\nWheel-made pottery appears at the site for the first time, along with caches of treasures that attest to Trojan participation in networks of aristocratic competition. These items were made from amber imported from the Baltic region, carnelian imported from India, and lapis imported from Afghanistan. Some of these items are strikingly similar to those found at sites such as Poliochni and Ur, leading some scholars to speculate that they may have been made by itinerant jewellers who worked routes covering much of the Ancient Near East.\nTroy\u00a0II was destroyed twice. After the first destruction, the citadel was rebuilt with a dense cluster of small houses on an irregular plan. The final destruction took place around 2300\u00a0BC. While some scholars have linked this destruction to a broader crisis that affected other Near Eastern sites, there is no definitive evidence for the city having been destroyed by an attack.\nTroy\u00a0II is notable for having been misidentified as Homeric Troy, during initial excavations, because of its massive architecture, treasure hoards, and catastrophic destruction. In particular Schliemann saw Homer's description of Troy's Scaean Gate reflected in Troy\u00a0II's imposing western gate. However, later excavations demonstrated that the site was a thousand years too old to have coexisted with Mycenaean Greeks.\nTroy III\u2013V.\nTroy continued to be occupied between 2300\u00a0BC and 1750\u00a0BC. However, little is known about these several layers due to Schliemann's careless excavation practices. In order to fully excavate the citadel of Troy\u00a0II, he destroyed most remains from this period without first documenting them. These settlements appear to have been smaller and poorer than previous ones, though this interpretation could be merely the result of gaps in the surviving evidence. The settlements included a dense residential neighbourhood in the citadel. Walls from Troy\u00a0II may have been reused as part of Troy\u00a0III (c. 2350/2300-2200/2150 BC). \nMiddle Bronze Age.\nTroy\u00a0IV (c. 2000-1820 BC) sees the introduction of domed ovens. By the period of Troy\u00a0V (c. 1820-1750 BC), the city had once again expanded outside the citadel to the west. In Troy\u00a0V, artefacts include Anatolian-style \"red-cross bowls\" as well as imported Minoan objects. They would trade with other cities around them.\nTroy VI\u2013VII.\nTroy\u00a0VI\u2013VII was a major Late Bronze Age city consisting of a steep fortified citadel and a sprawling lower town below it. It was a thriving coastal city with a considerable population, equal in size to second-tier Hittite settlements. It had a distinct Northwest Anatolian culture and extensive foreign contacts, including with Mycenaean Greece, and its position at the mouth of the Dardanelles has been argued to have given it the function of regional capital, its status protected by treaties. Aspects of its architecture are consistent with the \"Iliad\"'s description of mythic Troy, and several of its sublayers (VIh and VIIa) show potential signs of violent destruction. Thus, these sublayers are among the candidates for a potential historical setting of those myths.(p59)\nTroy\u00a0VI and VII were given separate labels by early excavators, but current research has shown that the first several sublayers of Troy\u00a0VII were in fact continuations of the earlier city. Although some scholars have proposed revising the nomenclature to reflect this consensus, the original terms are typically used to avoid confusion.(p198)\nTroy VI.\nTroy\u00a0VI existed from around 1750\u00a0BC to 1300\u00a0BC. Its citadel was divided into a series of rising terraces, of which only the outermost is reasonably well-preserved. On this terrace, archaeologists have found the remains of freestanding multistory houses where Trojan elites would have lived. These houses lacked ground-floor windows, and their stone exterior walls mirrored the architecture of the citadel fortifications. However, they otherwise display an eclectic mix of architectural styles, some following the classic megaron design, others even having irregular floorplans. Some of these houses show potential Aegean influence, one in particular resembling the megaron at Midea in the Argolid. Archaeologists believe there may have been a royal palace on the highest terrace, but most Bronze Age remains from the top of the hill were cleared away by classical era building projects.\nThe citadel was enclosed by a massive wall whose limestone base is visible to modern day visitors. These walls were periodically renovated, expanding from an initial width of around 1400 BC. During the Bronze Age they would have been overlaid with wood and mudbrick superstructures, reaching a height over . The walls were built in a \"sawtooth\" style made of segments which joined at shallow angles. This characteristic is common in the walls of Mycenaean citadels, though at Troy it is also found in other buildings, suggesting that it may have been decorative. The walls also have a notable slope, similar to those at other sites including Hattusa. However, the walls differ from contemporary Aegean and Anatolian sites both in their lack of figural sculpture and in their masonry. While Troy VI's walls were made entirely of close-fitting ashlars, contemporary sites typically used ashlars around a rubble core.\nTroy VI's walls were overlooked by several rectangular watchtowers, which would also have provided a clear view of Trojan plain and the sea beyond it. The citadel was accessed by five gates, which led into paved and drained cobblestone streets. Some of these gates featured enormous pillars which serve no structural purpose and have been interpreted as religious symbols. The halls were built in \"megaron\" style, resembling Mycenaean architecture.\nThe lower town was built to the south of the citadel, covering an area of roughly 30\u00a0hectares. Remains of a dense neighbourhood have been found just outside the citadel walls, and traces of Bronze Age occupation have been found further away. These include huts, stone paving, threshing floors, pithoi, and waste left behind by Bronze Age industry such as murex shells associated with the manufacture of purple dye. The extent of the lower town is evidenced by a defensive ditch cut 1-2 into the bedrock. A wall or palisade may have stood several meters behind the ditch, as in the outer defences of other cities such as Qadesh and Carchemish. However, material evidence for such a wall is limited to postholes and cuts in the bedrock.\nThe lower city was only discovered in the late 1980s, earlier excavators having assumed that Troy\u00a0VI occupied only the hill of Hisarl\u0131k. Its discovery led to a dramatic reassessment of Troy\u00a0VI, showing that it was over 16\u00a0times larger than had been assumed, and thus a major city with a large population rather than a mere aristocratic residence. However, only 2\u20133% of the lower city had been excavated as of 2013, and few architectural features are likely to exist. Almost 2m of the surface has eroded, likely removing much of the evidence that hadn't already decomposed, been built over, or reused in later construction.\nThe material culture of Troy\u00a0VI appears to belong to a distinct Northwest Anatolian cultural group, with influences from the Aegean and the Balkans. The primary local pottery styles were wheel-made Tan Ware and Anatolian Gray Ware. Both styles were offshoots of an earlier Middle Helladic tradition related to Minyan Ware. The earliest grey ware at Troy was made in Aegean shapes, though by 1700 BC it had been replaced by Anatolian shapes. Foreign pottery found at the site includes Minoan, Mycenaean, Cypriot, and Levantine items. Local potters also made their own imitations of foreign styles, including Gray Ware and Tan Ware pots made in Mycenaean-style shapes, particularly after 1500 BC. Although the city appears to have been within the Hittite sphere of influence, no Hittite artefacts have been found in Troy\u00a0VI. Also notably absent are sculptures and wall paintings, otherwise common features of Bronze Age cities. Troy\u00a0VI is also notable for its architectural innovations as well as its cultural developments, which included the first evidence of horses at the site.\nThe language spoken in Troy\u00a0VI is unknown. One candidate is Luwian, an Anatolian language believed to have been spoken in the general area. Potential evidence comes from a biconvex seal inscribed with the name of a person using Anatolian hieroglyphs often used to write Luwian. However, available evidence is not sufficient to establish that Luwian was actually spoken by the city's population, and a number of alternatives, such as Greek and Lemnian-Etruscan, have been proposed. Hittite documents found at Hattusa suggest that literacy existed at Troy and that the city may have had a written archive. The \"Alaksandu Treaty\" required King Alaksandu to read its text publicly three times a year, while the \"Milawata letter\" mentions that the deposed King Walmu was still in possession of wooden investiture tablets. The archive would likely have been housed in the citadel's innermost precinct, whose remains were pushed over the northern side of the hill during 3rd century construction. Despite attempts to sift through the rubble, no documents have been found.\nTroy\u00a0VI was destroyed around 1300\u00a0BC, corresponding with the sublayer known as Troy\u00a0VIh. Damage in the Troy\u00a0VIh layer includes extensive collapsed masonry and subsidence in the southeast of the citadel, indicative of an earthquake. Alternative hypotheses include an internal uprising as well as a foreign attack, though the city was not burned and no victims were found in the debris.(p30)\nTroy VIIa.\nTroy\u00a0VIIa was the final layer of the Late Bronze Age city. It was built soon after the destruction of Troy\u00a0VI, seemingly by its previous inhabitants. The builders reused many of the earlier city's surviving structures, notably its citadel wall, which they renovated with additional stone towers and mudbrick breastworks. Numerous small houses were added inside the citadel, filling in formerly open areas. New houses were also built in the lower city, whose area appears to have been greater in Troy\u00a0VIIa than in Troy\u00a0VI. In many of these houses, archaeologists found enormous storage jars called pithoi buried in the ground. Troy\u00a0VIIa seems to have been built by survivors of Troy\u00a0VI's destruction, as evidenced by continuity in material culture. However, the character of the city appears to have changed, the citadel growing crowded and foreign imports declining.(p59)\nThe city was destroyed around 1180\u00a0BC, roughly contemporary with the Late Bronze Age collapse but subsequent to the destruction of the Mycenaean palaces. The destruction layer shows evidence of enemy attack, including scorch marks.(p59)\nTroy VIIb.\nAfter the destruction of Troy\u00a0VIIa around 1180 BC, the city was rebuilt as Troy\u00a0VIIb. Older structures were again reused, including Troy\u00a0VI's citadel walls. Its first phase, Troy\u00a0VIIb1, appears to be largely a continuation of Troy\u00a0VIIa. Residents continued using wheel-made Grey Ware pottery alongside a new handmade style sometimes known as \"barbarian ware\". Imported Mycenaean-style pottery attests to some continuing foreign trade. However, the city's population appears to have dropped, and rebuilding seems to be confined to the citadel.\nOne of the most striking finds from Troy\u00a0VIIb1 is a bronze biconvex hieroglyphic Luwian seal giving the name of a woman on one side and the name of a man who worked as a scribe on the other. The seal is important since it is the only example of preclassical writing found at the site, and provides potential evidence that Troy\u00a0VIIb1 had a Luwian-speaking population. However, the find is puzzling since palace bureaucracies had largely disappeared by this era. Proposed explanations include the possibility that it belonged to an itinerant freelance scribe and alternatively that it dates from an earlier era than its find context would suggest.(p118)\nTroy\u00a0VIIb2 is marked by dramatic cultural changes including walls made of upright stones and a handmade knobbed pottery style known as \"Buckelkeramik\". These practices, which existed alongside older local traditions, have been argued to reflect immigrant populations arriving from southwest Europe. These newcomers may have shared an origin with the Phrygians who initiated similar cultural shifts at sites such as Gordion. This layer was destroyed around 1050 BC after an apparent earthquake.\nTroy\u00a0VIIb3 dates from the Protogeometric era. No new builds were constructed, so its existence is known primarily from artefacts found in the West Sanctuary and terraces on south side of mound. These areas were excavated in the 1990s, surprising the archaeologists who had assumed that the site was abandoned until the Archaic Era. Locally made neck-handled amphoras shows that Troy still had a pottery industry, possibly associated with a wine or oil industry. The style of these pots shows stylistic similarities to other North Aegean sites, suggesting cultural contact. (Because other artefacts do not show these links, archaeologists believe that Greek settlement of Troy did not begin until later.) Both the Troy VI walls and the Troy VIIa Terrace House were reused for worship and communal feasting, as evidenced by animal bones, pottery assemblages, and traces of burned incense. Strikingly, the Terrace House was not renovated when it was adopted as a cult center and thus must have been used in a ruined state, potentially suggesting that the occupants of Troy VIIb3 were deliberately re-engaging with their past.\nTroy\u00a0VIIb was destroyed by fire around 950\u00a0BC. However, some houses in the citadel were left intact and the site continued to be occupied, if only sparsely.\nTroy VIII\u2013IX.\nTroy\u00a0VIII was founded during the Greek Dark Ages and lasted until the Roman era. Though the site had never been entirely abandoned, its redevelopment as a major city was spurred by Greek immigrants who began building around 700\u00a0BC. During the Archaic period, the city's defences once again included the reused citadel wall of Troy\u00a0VI. Later on, the walls became tourist attractions and sites of worship. Other remains of the Bronze Age city were destroyed by the Greeks' building projects, notably the peak of the citadel where the Troy\u00a0VI palace is likely to have stood. By the classical era, the city had numerous temples, a theatre, among other public buildings, and was once again expanding to the south of the citadel. Troy\u00a0VIII was destroyed in 85\u00a0BC, and subsequently rebuilt as Troy\u00a0IX. A series of earthquakes devastated the city around 500\u00a0AD, though finds from the Late Byzantine era attest to continued habitation at a small scale.\nExcavation history.\nEarly modern era.\nEarly modern travellers in the 16th and 17th centuries, including Pierre Belon and Pietro Della Valle, had mistakenly identified Troy with Alexandria Troas, a ruined Hellenistic town approximately south of Hisarl\u0131k. In the late 18th century, Jean Baptiste LeChevalier identified a location near the village of P\u0131narba\u015f\u0131, Ezine, a mound approximately south of the currently accepted location. Published in his \"Voyage de la Troade\", it was the most commonly proposed location for almost a century.\nIn 1822, the Scottish journalist Charles Maclaren was the first to identify with confidence the position of the city as it is now known. The first excavations at the site were trenches by British civil engineer John Brunton in 1855.\nFrank Calvert.\nThe next excavation at Hisarl\u0131k was conducted in 1865 by Frank Calvert, a Turkish Levantine man of English descent who owned a farm nearby. Calvert made extensive surveys of the site and correctly identified it with classical-era Ilion. This identification convinced Heinrich Schliemann that Homeric Troy should be sought beneath the classical-era remains and led to their subsequent partnership.\nHeinrich Schliemann.\nIn 1868, German businessman Heinrich Schliemann visited Calvert, and secured permission to excavate Hisarl\u0131k. At this point in time, the mound was about 200 meters long and somewhat less than 150 meters wide. It rose 31.2 meters above the plain and 38.5 meters above sea level.\nAs with Calvert and others, in April 1870 Schliemann began by excavating a trench across the mound of Hisarl\u0131k to the depth of the settlements, today called \"Schliemann's Trench\". In 1871\u20131873 and 1878\u20131879, 1882 and 1890 (the later two joined by Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld), he discovered the ruins of a series of ancient cities dating from the Bronze Age to the Roman period. Schliemann was planning for another excavation season in 1891 when he died in December 1890. He proposed that the second layer, Troy\u00a0II, corresponded to the city of legend, though later research has shown that it predated the Mycenaean era by several hundred years. Significant finds included many \"owl-headed idols\" and stone axes from the lower levels.\nSome of the most notable artefacts found by Schliemann are known as Priam's Treasure, after the legendary Trojan king. Many of these ended up in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum. Almost all the precious metal objects that went to Berlin were confiscated by the Soviet Union in 1945 and are now in Pushkin Museum in Moscow. Even in his own time Schliemann's legacy was controversial because of his excavation methods which included removing features he considered insignificant without first studying and documenting them.\nWilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld.\nWilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld (1893\u20131894) began working the site alongside Schliemann and later inherited excavation at the site and published his own independent work. His chief contributions were to the study of Troy\u00a0VI and VII, which Schliemann had overlooked due to his focus on Troy\u00a0II. D\u00f6rpfeld's interest in these layers was triggered by the need to close a hole in the initial excavators' chronology known as \"Calvert's Thousand Year Gap\". During his excavation, D\u00f6rpfeld came across a section of the Troy\u00a0VI wall which was weaker than the rest. Since the mythic city had likewise had a weak section of its walls, D\u00f6rpfeld became convinced that this layer corresponded to Homeric Troy. Schliemann himself privately agreed that Troy\u00a0VI was more likely to be the Homeric city, but he never published anything stating so.\nCarl Blegen.\nCarl Blegen, professor at the University of Cincinnati, managed the site 1932\u201338. Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld collaborated with Blegen. These archaeologists, though following Schliemann's lead, added a professional approach not available to Schliemann. He showed that there were at least nine cities. In his research, Blegen came to a conclusion that Troy's nine levels could be further divided into forty-six sublevels, which he published in his main report. A post hoc Correspondence Analysis of Blegen's pottery sequence showed a 100-year gap between Troy III and Troy IV. Combined with a similar analysis of the pottery sequences of Korfmann and Schliemann this suggests that for a time in the late Early Bronze Age occupation contracted to the western end of the citadel mound.\nManfred Korfmann.\nFrom 1988 to 2005, excavations were conducted by a team from the University of T\u00fcbingen and the University of Cincinnati under the direction of Professor Manfred Korfmann, with Professor Brian Rose overseeing Post-Bronze Age (Greek, Roman, Byzantine) excavation along the coast of the Aegean Sea at the Bay of Troy. Possible evidence of a battle was found in the form of bronze arrowheads and fire-damaged human remains buried in layers dated to the early 12th century BC. The question of Troy VI's status in the Bronze-Age world was the subject of a sometimes acerbic debate between Korfmann and the T\u00fcbingen historian Frank Kolb in 2001\u20132002.\nOne of the major discoveries of these excavations was the Troy\u00a0VI\u2013VII lower city. This lower town had a wide anti-chariot defensive ditch backed by a wooden palisade. Added to the citadel this lower town would have brought Troy up to an area of around 200,000 square meters. This discovery led to a major reinterpretation of the site, which had previously been regarded as a small aristocratic residence rather than a major settlement.\nA number of radiocarbon dates, from charcoal samples, were obtained from various phases of the Troy I level.\nFrom 2006 until 2012, these excavations continued under the direction of Korfmann's colleague Ernst Pernicka, with a new digging permit.\nRecent developments.\nIn 2013, an international team made up of cross-disciplinary experts led by William Aylward, an archaeologist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, was to carry out new excavations. This activity was to be conducted under the auspices of \u00c7anakkale Onsekiz Mart University and was to use the new technique of \"molecular archaeology\". A few days before the Wisconsin team was to leave, the Turkish government cancelled about 100\u00a0excavation permits throughout Turkey, including Wisconsin's.\nSince 2014 excavations have been conducted by a \u00c7anakkale Onsekiz Mart University team led by R\u00fcstem Aslan. The excavators claim to have found a \"Level 0\" at Troy near the entrance of Troy-II with the new level pushing the city's history back 600 years. Since 2016 the University of Amsterdam has conducted a project to examine the 150-year history of excavation at the site.\nHistorical Troy.\nTroy\u00a0I\u2013V predate writing and thus are known entirely from their archaeological remains. However, written records about the city appear starting with the Late Bronze Age Troy VI and continuing into the Greek and Roman era Troy VIII-IX.\nTroy VI\u2013VII in Hittite records.\nTroy\u00a0VI\u2013VII is believed to be the city referred to as \"Wilusa\" and \"Taruisa\" in Hittite records. These correspondences were first proposed in 1924 by E.\u00a0Forrer on the basis of linguistic similarities, since \"\"Taruisa\" is a plausible correspondent of the Greek name \"Troia\" and \"Wilusa\" likewise for the Greek \"Wilios\" (later \"Ilios\"\"). Subsequent research on Hittite geography has made these identifications more secure, though not all scholars regard them as firmly established. Texts concerning Wilusa are of particular relevance to later legends since they suggest that Wilusa was within the sphere of influence of Mycenaean Greece, which the Hittites referred to as \"Ahhiyawa\".\nWilusa first appears in Hittite records around 1400\u00a0BC, when it was one of the twenty-two states of the Assuwa Confederation which unsuccessfully attempted to oppose the Hittite Empire. Circumstantial evidence raises the possibility that the rebellion was supported by the Ahhiyawa.(p59) By the late 1300s BC, Wilusa had become politically aligned with the Hittites. Texts from this period mention two kings named Kukkunni and Alaksandu who maintained peaceful relations with the Hittites even as other states in the area did not. Wilusan soldiers may have served in the Hittite army during the Battle of Kadesh. A bit later, Wilusa seems to have experienced the political turmoil suffered by many of its neighbours. References in the Manapa-Tarhunta letter and Tawagalawa letter suggest that a Wilusan king either rebelled or was deposed. This turmoil may have been related to the exploits of Piyamaradu, a Western Anatolian warlord who toppled other pro-Hittite rulers while acting on behalf the Ahhiyawa. However, Piyamaradu is never explicitly identified as the culprit and certain features of the text suggest that he was not. The final reference to Wilusa in the historical record appears in the Milawata letter, in which the Hittite king Tudhaliya IV expresses his intention to reinstall a deposed Wilusan king named Walmu.\nIn popular writing, these anecdotes have been interpreted as evidence for a historical kernel in myths of the Trojan War. However, scholars have not found historical evidence for any particular event from the legends, and the Hittite documents do not suggest that Wilusa-Troy was ever attacked by Greeks-Ahhiyawa themselves. Noted Hittiteologist Trevor Bryce cautions that our current understanding of Wilusa's history does not provide evidence for there having been an actual Trojan War since \"the less material one has, the more easily it can be manipulated to fit whatever conclusion one wishes to come up with\".\nClassical and Hellenistic Troy (Troy\u00a0VIII).\nAccording to Herodotus, the Persian king Xerxes sacrificed 1,000\u00a0cattle at the sanctuary of Athena Ilias while marching towards Greece. Following the Persian defeat in 480\u2013479, Ilion and its territory became part of the continental possessions of Mytilene and remained under Mytilenaean control until the unsuccessful Mytilenean revolt in 428\u2013427. Athens liberated the so-called Actaean cities (called 'Actaean' cities because they were located on the \u1f00\u03ba\u03c4\u03ae (akt\u0113) or promontory of the mainland north of Lesbos.) including Ilion and enrolled these communities in the Delian League. Athenian influence in the Hellespont waned following the oligarchic coup of 411, and in that year the Spartan general Mindaros emulated Xerxes by likewise sacrificing to Athena Ilias. From c.\u00a0410\u2013399, Ilion was within the sphere of influence of the local dynasts at Lampsacus (Zenis, his wife Mania, and the usurper Meidias) who administered the region on behalf of the Persian satrap Pharnabazus.\nIn 399, the Spartan general Dercylidas expelled the Greek garrison at Ilion who were controlling the city on behalf of the Lampsacene dynasts during a campaign which rolled back Persian influence throughout the Troad. Ilion remained outside the control of the Persian satrapal administration at Dascylium until the Peace of Antalcidas in 387\u2013386. In this period of renewed Persian control c.\u00a0387\u2013367, a statue of Ariobarzanes, the satrap of Hellespontine Phrygia, was erected in front of the temple of Athena Ilias. In 360\u2013359 the city was briefly controlled by Charidemus of Oreus, a Euboean mercenary leader who occasionally worked for the Athenians. In 359, he was expelled by the Athenian Menelaos son of Arrabaios, whom the Ilians honoured with a grant of proxeny\u2014this is recorded in the earliest civic decree to survive from Ilion. In May 334 Alexander the Great crossed the Hellespont and came to the city, where he visited the temple of Athena Ilias, made sacrifices at the tombs of the Homeric heroes, and made the city free and exempt from taxes. According to the so-called 'Last Plans' of Alexander which became known after his death in June 323, he had planned to rebuild the temple of Athena Ilias on a scale that would have surpassed every other temple in the known world.\nAntigonus Monophthalmus took control of the Troad in 311 and created the new city of Antigoneia Troas which was a synoikism of the cities of Skepsis, Kebren, Neandreia, Hamaxitos, Larisa, and Kolonai. In c.\u00a0311\u2013306 the \"koinon\" of Athena Ilias was founded from the remaining cities in the Troad and along the Asian coast of the Dardanelles and soon after succeeded in securing a guarantee from Antigonus that he would respect their autonomy and freedom (he had not respected the autonomy of the cities which were synoikised to create Antigoneia). The \"koinon\" continued to function until at least the 1st century AD and primarily consisted of cities from the Troad, although for a time in the second half of the 3rd century it also included Myrlea and Chalcedon from the eastern Propontis. The governing body of the \"koinon\" was the \"synedrion\" on which each city was represented by two delegates. The day-to-day running of the \"synedrion\", especially in relation to its finances, was left to a college of five \"agonothetai\", on which no city ever had more than one representative. This system of equal (rather than proportional) representation ensured that no one city could politically dominate the \"koinon\". The primary purpose of the \"koinon\" was to organise the annual Panathenaia festival which was held at the sanctuary of Athena Ilias. The festival brought huge numbers of pilgrims to Ilion for the duration of the festival as well as creating an enormous market (the \"panegyris\") which attracted traders from across the region. In addition, the \"koinon \"financed new building projects at Ilion, for example a new theatre c.\u00a0306 and the expansion of the sanctuary and temple of Athena Ilias in the 3rd century, in order to make the city a suitable venue for such a large festival.\nIn the period 302\u2013281, Ilion and the Troad were part of the kingdom of Lysimachus, who during this time helped Ilion synoikise several nearby communities, thus expanding the city's population and territory.\nLysimachus was defeated at the Battle of Corupedium in February\u00a0281 by Seleucus I Nikator, thus handing the Seleucid kingdom control of Asia Minor, and in August or September 281 when Seleucus passed through the Troad on his way to Lysimachia in the nearby Thracian Chersonese Ilion passed a decree in honour of him, indicating the city's new loyalties. In September Seleucus was assassinated at Lysimachia by Ptolemy Keraunos, making his successor, Antiochus I Soter, the new king. In 280 or soon after Ilion passed a long decree lavishly honouring Antiochus in order to cement their relationship with him.\nDuring this period Ilion still lacked proper city walls except for the crumbling Troy\u00a0VI fortifications around the citadel, and in 278 during the Gallic invasion the city was easily sacked. Ilion enjoyed a close relationship with Antiochus for the rest of his reign: for example, in 274 Antiochus granted land to his friend Aristodikides of Assos which for tax purposes was to be attached to the territory of Ilion, and c.\u00a0275\u2013269 Ilion passed a decree in honour of Metrodoros of Amphipolis who had successfully treated the king for a wound he received in battle.\nRoman Troy (Troy\u00a0IX).\nThe city was destroyed by Sulla's rival, the Roman general Fimbria, in 85\u00a0BC following an eleven-day siege. Later that year when Sulla had defeated Fimbria, he bestowed benefactions on Ilion for its loyalty which helped rebuilding the city. Ilion reciprocated this act of generosity by instituting a new civic calendar which took 85\u00a0BC as its first year. However, the city remained in financial distress for several decades despite its favoured status with Rome. In the 80s BC, Roman \"publicani\" illegally levied taxes on the sacred estates of Athena Ilias, and the city was required to call on L. Julius Caesar for restitution; while in 80\u00a0BC, the city suffered an attack by pirates. In 77\u00a0BC the costs of running the annual festival of the \"koinon\" of Athena Ilias became too pressing for both Ilion and the other members of the \"koinon\" and L.\u00a0Julius Caesar was once again required to arbitrate, this time reforming the festival so that it would be less of a financial burden. In 74\u00a0BC the Ilians once again demonstrated their loyalty to Rome by siding with the Roman general Lucullus against Mithridates\u00a0VI. Following the final defeat of Mithridates in 63\u201362, Pompey rewarded the city's loyalty by becoming the benefactor of Ilion and patron of Athena Ilias.\nIn 48\u00a0BC, Gaius Julius Caesar likewise bestowed benefactions on the city, recalling the city's loyalty during the Mithridatic Wars, the city's connection with his cousin Lucius, and the family's claim that they were ultimately descended from Venus through the Trojan prince Aeneas and therefore shared kinship with the Ilians. In 20\u00a0BC, the emperor Augustus (Gaius Octavian Julius Caesar Augustus) visited Ilion and stayed in the house of a leading citizen, Melanippides son of Euthydikos. As a result of his visit, he also financed the restoration and rebuilding of the sanctuary of Athena Ilias, the bouleuterion (council house) and the theatre. Soon after work on the theatre was completed in 12\u201311\u00a0BC, Melanippides dedicated a statue of Augustus in the theatre to record this benefaction.\nA new city called Ilium (from Greek Ilion) was founded on the site in the reign of the Roman emperor Augustus. It flourished until the establishment of Constantinople. It fell within the Roman province Hellespontus in the civil Diocese of Asia.\nArchaeological excavations have identified one church building in the lower city. Its size\u2014\u2014and the quality of its mosaic floor suggests that it may have been the main church. It was constructed around 400. No temples seem to have been converted into churches and no church has been found on the acropolis.\nTowards the end of the reign of Gallienus, probably in 267, Ilium was sacked by the Goths returning from the sack of Athens. \"After the depredations of the Goths, the city entered the twilight zone.\"\nChristian bishopric.\nFrom the 4th century AD until the Byzantine era, perhaps as late as the 10th century, Ilion was the seat of a Christian bishop.\nTroy in legend.\nThe main literary work set at Troy is the \"Iliad\", an Archaic-era epic poem which tells the story of the final year of the Trojan War. The \"Iliad\" portrays Troy as the capital of a rich and powerful kingdom. In the poem, the city appears to be a major regional power capable of summoning numerous allies to defend it. The city itself is described as sitting on a steep hill, protected by enormous sloping stone walls, rectangular towers, and massive gates whose wooden doors can be bolted shut. According to Dares Phrygius, there were 6 of such gates \u2013 the Antenorean, the Dardanian, the Ilian, the Scaean, the Thymbraean, and the Trojan. The city's streets are broad and well-planned. At the top of the hill is the Temple of Athena as well as King Priam's palace, an enormous structure with numerous rooms around an inner courtyard.\nIn the \"Iliad\", the Achaeans set up their camp near the mouth of the Scamander river, where they beached their ships. The city itself stood on a hill across the plain of Scamander, where much of the fighting takes place.\nBesides the \"Iliad\", there are references to Troy in the other major work attributed to Homer, the \"Odyssey\", as well as in other ancient Greek literature, such as Aeschylus's \"Oresteia\". The Homeric legend of Troy was elaborated by the Roman poet Virgil in his \"Aeneid\". The fall of Troy with the story of the Trojan Horse and the sacrifice of Polyxena, Priam's youngest daughter, is the subject of a later Greek epic by Quintus Smyrnaeus (\"Quintus of Smyrna\").\nThe Greeks and Romans took for a fact the historicity of the Trojan War and the identity of Homeric Troy with a site in Anatolia on a peninsula called the Troad (Biga Peninsula). Alexander the Great, for example, visited the site in 334\u00a0BC and there made sacrifices at tombs associated with the Homeric heroes Achilles and Patroclus.(p724)\nCurrent status.\nThe Turkish government created the Historical National Park at Troy on 30 September 1996. It contains to include Troy and its vicinity, centered on Troy. The purpose of the park is to protect the historical sites and monuments within it, as well as the environment of the region. In 1998 the park was accepted as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nPublic access to the ancient site is along the road from the vicinity of the museum in Tevfikiye to the east side of Hisarl\u0131k. In its square is a large wooden horse monument, with a ladder and internal chambers for use of the public. Bordering the square is the gate to the site. The public passes through turnstiles. Admission is usually not free. Within the site, the visitors tour the features on dirt roads or for access to more precipitous features on railed boardwalks. There are many overlooks with multilingual boards explaining the feature. Most are outdoors, but a permanent canopy covers the site of an early megaron and wall.\nIn 2018 the Troy Museum (Turkish: Troya M\u00fczesi) was opened at Tevfikiye village east of the excavation. A design contest for the architecture had been won by Yalin Mimarlik in 2011. The cube-shaped building with extensive underground galleries holds more than 40,000 portable artefacts, 2000 of which are on display. Artifacts were moved here from a few other former museums in the region. The range is the entire prehistoric Troad.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArchaeological.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEcclesiastical history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMythology and literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "30061", "revid": "46591300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30061", "title": "T\u00fcbingen", "text": "City in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany\nT\u00fcbingen (; ; ) is a traditional university city in central Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany, south of the state capital, Stuttgart. With students accounting for almost one in three of T\u00fcbingen's 90,000 residents, the city has one of the youngest profiles in Germany, with an average age of just under 40.\nFounded in 1477, Eberhard Karl University is one of the oldest universities north of the Alps. It associated T\u00fcbingen, in the 19th century with the German-patriotic student \"Burschenschaften,\" whose large fraternity houses are still a notable feature of the town; in the years between the World Wars, with the rise of National Socialism; and in the German Federal Republic with the emergence of the liberal-left Greens, currently the largest tendency in local government.\nExceptionally, T\u00fcbingen survived the Second World War with its historic fabric almost wholly intact. It has since experienced two major expansions: in the 1960s the construction of university institutes and new housing on the high ground to the north, and following the end of the Cold War, and the evacuation of extensive military bases by the French', the new mixed-use Loretto and French Quarter to the south.\nLocation.\nT\u00fcbingen developed around the base of the fortress \"Schloss Hohent\u00fcbingen\" and of the \"Stiftskirche zu St. Georg\", the collegiate church, and on both sides of the Neckar and Ammer rivers. \nImmediately north of the city lies the Sch\u00f6nbuch, a densely wooded nature park. The Swabian Alb mountains rise about (beeline T\u00fcbingen City to Ro\u00dfberg - 869 m) to the southeast of T\u00fcbingen. The Ammer and Steinlach rivers are tributaries of the Neckar river, which flows in an easterly direction through the city, just south of the medieval old town. Large parts of the city are hilly, with the Schlossberg and the \u00d6sterberg in the city centre and the Schnarrenberg and Herrlesberg, among others, rising immediately adjacent to the inner city.\nThe highest point is at about above sea level near Bebenhausen in the Sch\u00f6nbuch forest, while the lowest point is in the city's eastern Neckar valley. The geographical centre of the state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg is in a small forest called Elysium, near the Botanical Gardens of the city's university.\nHistory.\nThe area was probably first settled in the 12th millennium BC. The Romans left some traces here in AD 85, when, in confrontation with the local Alamanni, they built a limes frontier wall at the Neckar River. The local castle, \"Hohent\u00fcbingen\", has records going back to 1078, when it was besieged by Henry IV, King of Germany.\nIn the middle of the 12th century, the local the Counts of Zollern were raised to Imperial Counts Palatine, with their seat in T\u00fcbingen. By 1231, T\u00fcbingen was a \"civitas\", indicating recognition by the Crown of civil liberties, a market and a court system. In the later decades of the 13th century, the town saw the establishment an Augustinian, and a Franciscan, monastery, and a Latin school (today's Uhland-Gymnasium). In 1342, the town and castle passed to the Counts of W\u00fcrttemberg. \nThe \"Stiftskirche\" was built between 1430 and 1470. Its collegiate offices contributed to the founding in 1477 of the university by Count Eberhard V (\"Eberhard im Bart\"), later the first Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg. It was to develop as one of the most influential places of learning in the Holy Roman Empire, particularly in theology. Today, the university is still the biggest source of income for the residents of the city and one of the biggest universities in Germany with more than 26,000 students.\nFaced with a popular rebellion, in the Treaty of T\u00fcbingen 1514, Eberhard's successor, Duke Ulrich, was obliged to submit to co-governance with the assembled Estates (knights, clergy and burghers) and to concede freedom of movement, profession, and enterprise, achievements that were still being fought for in other German states in 1848. In recognition of the treaty, the town assumed the right to bear the Ducal stag antlers above its blazon on its coat of arms.\nIn 1535, after recovering his bankrupted Duchy from a prolonged imperial-Hapsburg occupation, Duke Ulrich declared for the reformed Lutheran faith and seized church property (the Augustinian monastery was converted to a Protestant seminary, the T\u00fcbinger Stift). The religious division in Germany contributed to the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) during which the town was successively occupied by the Catholic League, by the Swedes in 1638, and by the French, and was devastated by plague.\nIn 1789, parts of the old town burned down, but were later rebuilt in the original style. In 1798 the \"Allgemeine Zeitung\", a leading newspaper in early 19th-century Germany, was founded in T\u00fcbingen by Johann Friedrich Cotta. At his residence, the \"Cottahaus\", a sign commemorates Goethe's stay of a few weeks while visiting his publisher: \"Hier kotzte Goethe\" (lit.: \"Goethe puked here\"). \nFrom the beginning of the 19th century, the town grew significantly beyond its medieval borders for the first time with the rectangular \"Wilhelmsvorstadt\" at the Neue Aula and the old Botanical Garden. \nIn the so-called \"G\u00f4genaufstand\" (G\u00f4gen Uprising) of 1831, journeymen and winegrowers marched through the town in protest against police brutality, singing singing a hymn to freedom from Friedrich Schiller's drama Die R\u00e4uber (The Robbers). The local authorities appealed for help to the officially banned \"Burschenschaften\", and armed student security guards were deployed against the insurgents. They relied on students once more during the \"T\u00fcbinger Brotkrawall\" (T\u00fcbingen Bread Riot) of 1847. \nIn 1861, with the opening on the right bank of the Neckar of today's main train station, T\u00fcbingen was connected to the Royal W\u00fcrttemberg State Railways network.\nIn 1873, the 10th W\u00fcrttemberg Infantry Regiment was quartered in barracks erected behind the station, the later \"Thiepval Kaserne\" so named for the village where the regiment suffered heavy losses during the First World War Battle of the Somme in 1916. A second barracks, later named the \"Loretto Kaserne\", was built in 1913, and a third, the \"Hindenburg Kaserne\" was constructed in the course of National Socialist rearmament in the 1930s. \nT\u00fcbingen had been a regional stronghold of National Socialism before Hitler's ascent to power in January 1933. The university became a leading centre for research on the \"Jewish question\", with faculty in both the sciences and humanities contributing to the notions of \"racial hygiene\" that informed the genocidal policies of the new regime. On Kristallnacht, November 9, 1938, the Nazi Stormtroopers burned down the T\u00fcbingen Synagogue. Of the 23 members of synagogue who remained in T\u00fcbingen at the outbreak of war, only two survived the Shoah.\nIn 1934, in a rare instance of resistance to the new order, , one of the university's typically nationalist and conservative student \"Burschenschaften\", refused an order to exclude Jewish students and was dissolved.\nThere were three bombing raids on the town during Second World War, but damage was comparatively slight: the Neckar Bridge and some 85 houses. In April 1945, the town was surrendered to the French who were to remain as occupiers until the creation of the German Federal Republic in 1949, and as an allied garrison until the end of the Cold War in 1991. \nConsistent with the role of the Marshall Plan in post-war reconstruction, the United States also had a presence in the town. Originally the \"Amerika Haus,\" the German-American Institute (\"d.a.i.\"), at the Neckar Bridge continues to promote English-language classes and \"cultural exchange\".\nIn 1946, under the French, T\u00fcbingen served as the capital of the consolidated state of W\u00fcrttemberg-Hohenzollern, but in 1952, in a further amalgamation, it was absorbed in the federal state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg with its capital in Stuttgart.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, T\u00fcbingen's administrative area was extended beyond what is now called the \"core city\" to include several outlying small towns and villages. Most notable among these is Bebenhausen, a village clustered around a castle and Bebenhausen Abbey, a Cistercian cloister about north of T\u00fcbingen. The enlargement accommodated a 1958 general development plan for hills overlooking the town from the north, which included, a new botanical gardens, natural sciences institute and contemporary art museum (Kunsthalle Tubingen).\nFollowing the departure of the French in 1992, the vacated Thiepval Barracks served as a hostel for asylum seekers and German immigrants from Eastern Europe, and the Loretto and Hindenburg barracks were redeveloped as the new mixed-use French Quarter (\"Franz\u00f6sische Viertel\"). Success in developing the new district has been followed up, more recently, by a car-free, courtyard-cluster project in the Derendingen district, and an extensive renovation of the Waldh\u00e4user Ost district featuring timber-hybrid construction methods.\nIn the 1960s, T\u00fcbingen was one of the centres of the German student movement and of the protests of 1968, which made an issue of perceived continuities between the Federal Republic and the Hitler regime. Emerging from this scene, in the early 1970s, a graduate of the university, Gudrun Ensslin, led her Red Army Faction in a nation-wide campaign of bombing and assassination. \nIn a town in which neither of the major federal parties, the SPD and the CDU, could command majorities, in 1980 a very different successor to the generation of '68 emerged as an electoral force. Since 2004, the Greens have been the largest party in the local council (\"Gemeinderat\"). In the 2024 local elections (in which there was no mandate for the AfD or other far-right groupings), they commanded over a third of the vote.\nOverview.\nIn 2020[ [update]], the city had 90,000 inhabitants. Life in the city is dominated by its roughly 28,000 students. T\u00fcbingen is best described as a mixture of old and distinguished academic flair, including liberal and green politics on one hand and traditional German-style student fraternities on the other, with rural-agricultural environs and shaped by typical Lutheran-Pietist characteristics, such as austerity and a Protestant work ethic, and traditional Swabian elements, such as frugality, order, and tidiness. The city is home to many picturesque buildings from previous centuries and lies on the River Neckar.\nIn 1995[ [update]], the German weekly magazine \"Focus\" published a national survey, according to which T\u00fcbingen had the highest quality of life of all cities in Germany. Factors taken into consideration included the infrastructure, the integration of bicycle lanes into the road system, a bus system connecting surrounding hills and valleys, late-night services, areas of the city that can be reached on foot, the pedestrianised old town, and other amenities and cultural events offered by the university. T\u00fcbingen is the city with the youngest average population in Germany.\nMain sights.\nIn central T\u00fcbingen, the Neckar divides briefly into two streams, forming the elongated \"Neckarinsel\" (Neckar Island), famous for its \"Platanenallee\" with high plane trees, which are around 200 years old, and for the National Socialist-themed memorial to the composer and Volkslied collector, Friedrich Silcher. \nPedestrians can reach the island via stairs on the narrow ends leading down from a bridge spanning the Neckar, and by a smaller foot bridge nearer the middle of the island. During the summer, the \"Neckarinsel\" is occasionally the venue for concerts, plays, and literary readings. The row of historical houses across one side of the elongated \"Neckarinsel\" is called the \"Neckarfront\" and includes the house with adjoining tower where poet and philosopher Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin spent the last 36 years of his life, as he struggled with mental instability. \nT\u00fcbingen's \"Altstadt\" (old town) survived World War II due to the city's lack of heavy industry. The result is a growing domestic tourism business as visitors come to wander through one of the few completely intact historic \"Altst\u00e4dte\" in Germany. The highlights of T\u00fcbingen include its crooked cobblestone lanes, narrow-stair alleyways picking their way through the hilly terrain, streets lined with canals, and well-maintained traditional half-timbered houses.\nOld city landmarks include the city hall on Markt Square and the Hohent\u00fcbingen Castle, now part of the University of T\u00fcbingen. The central landmark is the \"Stiftskirche\" (Collegiate Church). Along with the rest of the city, the Stiftskirche was one of the first to convert to Martin Luther's protestant church. As such, it maintains (and carefully defends) several \"Roman Catholic\" features, such as patron saints. Below the \"Rathaus\" is a quiet, residential street called the \"Judengasse\", the former Jewish neighborhood of T\u00fcbingen until the city's Jews were expelled in 1477. On the street corner is a plaque commemorating the fate of T\u00fcbingen's Jews.\nThe centre of T\u00fcbingen is the site of weekly and seasonal events, including regular market days on the \"Holzmarkt\" by the Stiftskirche and the \"Marktplatz\" by the Rathaus, an outdoor cinema in winter and summer, festive autumn and Christmas markets and (formerly) Europe's largest Afro-Brazilian festival.\nStudents and tourists also come to the Neckar River in the summer to visit beer gardens or go boating in \"Stocherk\u00e4hne\", the T\u00fcbingen equivalent of Oxford and Cambridge punts, only slimmer. A \"Stocherkahn\" carries up to 20 people. On the second Thursday of June, all \"Stocherkahn\" punts take part in a major race, the \"Stocherkahnrennen\".\nBebenhausen Abbey lies in the village of Bebenhausen, a district of T\u00fcbingen. A subdivision of the pilgrimage route known as the Way of St. James starts here and runs through T\u00fcbingen.\nGovernment.\nT\u00fcbingen is governed by the mayor, elected by citizens every eight years, and by the municipal council, elected by citizens every five years. The current mayor is Boris Palmer, first elected in 2007 and, after the relatively conservative positions he had taken on a number of issues, including immigration, caused him to be dismissed by the Green Party, to a third term in 2022 with 52% of the vote as an independent \nT\u00fcbingen's council decided that the city should be climate-neutral by 2030. In 2022, the city was the first in Germany to tax disposable food packaging. Restaurants in T\u00fcbingen are charged 50 cents per disposable cup and cardboard bowl, and 20 cents per piece of cutlery.\nRegional structure.\nT\u00fcbingen is the capital of an eponymous district and an eponymous administrative region (\"Regierungsbezirk\"), before 1973 called \"S\u00fcdw\u00fcrttemberg-Hohenzollern\".\nT\u00fcbingen and Reutlingen with a population of over 100,000 (about east) form a large centre of the Neckar-Alb region. Both cities are based on a different heritage and always belonged to different administrative entities. While they both had a long lasting rivalry they also complement each other. Reutlingen is more business oriented and industrialized and is successful in engineering and trade, while T\u00fcbingen excels in education and science, specialized health care and arts. The double centre is surrounded by smaller cities and connected to Albstadt, Balingen, Hechingen, Metzingen, M\u00fcnsingen, Rottenburg, that each form middle centres and contribute to the high population density of the region. \nAdministratively, it is not part of the Stuttgart Region, bordering it to the north and west (B\u00f6blingen district). However, the city and northern parts of its district can be regarded as belonging to that region in a wider regional and cultural context.\nDistricts.\nT\u00fcbingen is divided into 22 districts, the city core of twelve districts (population of about 51,000) and ten outer districts (suburbs) (population of about 31,000):\nCore city districts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOuter districts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nT\u00fcbingen has a notable arts culture as well as nightlife. In addition to the full roster of official and unofficial university events that range from presentations by the university's official poet in residence to parties hosted by the student associations of each faculty, the city can boast of several choirs, theatre companies and nightclubs. Also, T\u00fcbingen's \"Kunsthalle\" (art exhibition hall), on the \"Wanne\", houses two or three exhibits of international note each year.\nEvents.\nThere are several festivals, open air markets and other events on a regular basis:\nPopulation.\nPopulation development.\nSince World War II, T\u00fcbingen's population has almost doubled from about 45,000 to the current 88,000, also due to the incorporation of formerly independent villages into the city in the 1970s.\nCurrently, Lord Mayor Boris Palmer (Green Party) has set the ambitious goal of increasing the population of T\u00fcbingen to 100,000 within the next several years. To achieve this, the city is closing gaps between buildings within the city proper by allowing new houses to be built there; this is also to counter the tendency of urban sprawl and land consumption that has been endangering the preservation of rural landscapes of Southern Germany. http://\nHistorical population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nT\u00fcbingen has an oceanic climate, Cfb in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nT\u00fcbingen is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor their commitment to their international partnership, the Council of Europe awarded the Europe Prize to T\u00fcbingen and Aix-en-Provence in 1965. The city's dedication to European understanding is also reflected in the naming of several streets and squares, including the large \"Europaplatz\" (Europe Square) outside the railway station.\nInfrastructure.\nBy plane: T\u00fcbingen is about from the Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg state airport (\"Landesflughafen Stuttgart\", also called Stuttgart Airport).\nBy automobile: T\u00fcbingen is on the \"Bundesstra\u00dfe 27\" (a \"federal road\") that crosses through Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, connecting the city with W\u00fcrzburg, Heilbronn, Stuttgart and the \"Landesflughafen\" (Stuttgart Airport) to the north and Rottweil and Donaueschingen to the south.\nBy rail: T\u00fcbingen Hauptbahnhof is the terminus of several train lines and a major railway hub. There is the regional train line Neckar-Alb Railway-Bahn (\"Neckar-Alb-Bahn\") from Stuttgart Hauptbahnhof via Esslingen and Reutlingen to T\u00fcbingen. The average time of travel to Stuttgart is 1:01 hrs., with some trains taking only 45 mins. Other regional lines are the \"Hohenzollerische Landesbahn\", connecting the city with Hechingen and Sigmaringen (so-called Zollernalb Railway), \"Zollernalbbahn\" and connections to Herrenberg (Ammer Valley Railway, \"Ammertalbahn\") and Horb (Upper Neckar Railway, \"Obere Neckarbahn\"). Since 2009, there is also a daily direct Intercity link to Mannheim, Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf as well as to Berlin.\nLocal public transport: The city, due to its high student population, features an extensive public bus network with more than 20 lines connecting the city districts and places outside of T\u00fcbingen such as Ammerbuch, Gomaringen and Nagold. There are also several night bus lines in the early hours every day. A direct bus is available to Stuttgart Airport (via Leinfelden-Echterdingen) as well as to B\u00f6blingen and Reutlingen.\nSport.\nTigers T\u00fcbingen are the city's only professional sports team, playing basketball. They play in the Paul Horn-Arena.\nEducation.\nHigher education and research.\nThe Eberhard Karls University of T\u00fcbingen dates from 1477, making it one of the oldest in Germany. Including the university hospitals, it is also the city's largest employer. The town is also host to several research institutes including the Max Planck Institutes for Biological Cybernetics, Developmental Biology, Intelligent Systems, The Friedrich Miescher Laboratory of the MPG, and the Max Planck Institute for Biology, the Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, the Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and many others. A modern technology park is growing in the northern part of the city, where science, industrial companies and start-ups are conducting joint research, primarily on biotechnology and artificial intelligence. The university also maintains a botanical garden, the Botanischer Garten der Universit\u00e4t T\u00fcbingen. Furthermore, there is a Protestant College of Church Music.\nSchools.\nMore than 10,000 children and young adults in T\u00fcbingen regularly attend school. There are 30 schools in the city, some of which consist of more than one type of school. Of these, 17 are primary schools while the others are for secondary education: four schools are of the lowest rank, \"Hauptschule\", three of the middle rank, \"Realschule\", and six are \"Gymnasien\" (grammar schools). There also are four vocational schools (\"Berufsschule\") and three special needs schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrimary schools\nHauptschulen\nRealschulen\nGymnasien\nVocational schools (\"Berufsschulen\")\nPeople.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30062", "revid": "42330296", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30062", "title": "Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus", "text": "1921 philosophical work by Ludwig Wittgenstein\nThe Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (widely abbreviated and cited as TLP) is the only book-length philosophical work by the Austrian philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein that was published during his lifetime. The project had a broad goal: to identify the relationship between language and reality, and to define the limits of science. Wittgenstein wrote the notes for the \"Tractatus\" while he was a soldier during World War I and completed it during a military leave in the summer of 1918. It was originally published in German in 1921 as \"Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung\" (Logical-Philosophical Treatise). In 1922 it was published together with an English translation and a Latin title, which was suggested by G. E. Moore as homage to Baruch Spinoza's \"Tractatus Theologico-Politicus\" (1670).\nThe \"Tractatus\" is written in an austere and succinct literary style, containing almost no arguments as such, but consists of 525 declarative statements altogether, which are hierarchically numbered.\nThe \"Tractatus\" is recognized by philosophers as one of the most significant philosophical works of the twentieth century and was influential chiefly amongst the logical positivist philosophers of the Vienna Circle, such as Rudolf Carnap and Friedrich Waismann and Bertrand Russell's article \"The Philosophy of Logical Atomism\".\nWittgenstein's later works, notably the posthumously published \"Philosophical Investigations\", criticised many of his ideas in the \"Tractatus\". There is nevertheless a common thread in Wittgenstein's thinking. Indeed, the contrast between 'early' and 'late' Wittgenstein has been countered by such scholars as Pears (1987) and Hilmy (1987). For example, a relevant, yet neglected aspect of continuity in Wittgenstein's thought concerns 'meaning' as 'use'. Connecting his early and later writings on 'meaning as use' is his appeal to direct consequences of a term or phrase, reflected, for example, in his speaking of language as a 'calculus'. These passages are crucial to Wittgenstein's view of 'meaning as use', though they have been widely neglected in scholarly literature. The centrality and importance of these passages are corroborated and augmented by renewed examination of Wittgenstein's \"Nachla\u00df\", as is done in \"From Tractatus to Later Writings and Back \u2013 New Implications from Wittgenstein's \"Nachlass\"\" (de Queiroz 2023).\nDescription and context.\nThe \"Tractatus\" employs an austere and succinct literary style. The work contains almost no arguments as such, but rather consists of declarative statements, or passages, that are meant to be self-evident. The statements are hierarchically numbered, with seven basic propositions at the primary level (numbered 1\u20137), with each sub-level being a comment on or elaboration of the statement at the next higher level (e.g., 1, 1.1, 1.11, 1.12, 1.13). In all, the \"Tractatus\" comprises 525 numbered statements.\nThe book's writing style has been described variously as aphoristic or epigrammatic. When Bertrand Russell suggested to Wittgenstein that he ought to provide arguments and not merely state what he thinks, Wittgenstein replied that this would spoil the book's beauty and would be like touching a flower with muddy hands. Wittgenstein described the writing style of the \"Tractatus\" as \"highly syncopated\" and in his later years he came to regret this style. In 1949 he told Maurice O'Connor Drury that \"every sentence in the \"Tractatus\" should be seen as the heading of a chapter, needing further exposition. My present style is quite different; I am trying to avoid that error\".\nThe book was first published in German in 1921 in the 14th issue of Wilhelm Ostwald's \"Annalen der Naturphilosophie\". The English translation of the \"Tractatus\" was published with an introduction by Bertrand Russell, even though Wittgenstein considered Russell's introduction superficial and a misunderstanding of his work. The \"Tractatus\" is dedicated to the memory of Wittgenstein's close friend David Pinsent, who was killed in a flying accident in 1918. Below this dedication is what he described as a \"motto\", a quote from Austrian writer Ferdinand K\u00fcrnberger: \"and whatever a man knows, whatever is not mere rumbling and roaring that he has heard, can be said in three words\" (Pears and McGuinness translation).\nOriginally, in 1919, Wittgenstein had attempted to get the \"Tractatus\" published in the Austrian journal \"Der Brenner\". He wrote a letter to the editor Ludwig von Ficker explaining that the point of the book was \"ethical\":\n\u2026.The book's point is an ethical one. I once meant to include in the preface a sentence which is not in fact there now but which I will write out for you here, because it will perhaps be a key to the work for you...My work consists of two parts: the one presented here plus all that I have not written. And it is precisely this second part that is the important one. My book draws limits to the sphere of the ethical from the inside as it were, and I am convinced that this is the ONLY rigorous way of drawing those limits. In short, I believe that where many others today are just gassing, I have managed in my book to put everything firmly into place by being silent about it.\nMain theses.\nThere are seven main propositions in the text. These are:\nProposition 1.\nThe first chapter is very brief:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis, along with the beginning of two, can be taken to be the relevant parts of Wittgenstein's metaphysical view that he will use to support his picture theory of language.\nPropositions 2 and 3.\nThese sections concern Wittgenstein's view that the sensible, changing world we perceive does not consist of substance but of facts. Proposition two begins with a discussion of objects, form and substance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis epistemic notion is further clarified by a discussion of objects or things as metaphysical substances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis use of the word \"composite\" in 2.021 can be taken to mean a combination of form and matter, in the Platonic sense.\nThe notion of a static unchanging Form and its identity with Substance represents the metaphysical view that has come to be held as an assumption by the vast majority of the Western philosophical tradition since Plato and Aristotle, as it was something they agreed on. \"[W]hat is called a form or a substance is not generated.\" (Z.8 1033b13)\nThe opposing view states that unalterable Form does not exist, or at least if there is such a thing, it contains an ever changing, relative substance in a constant state of flux. Although this view was held by Greeks like Heraclitus, it has existed only on the fringe of the Western tradition since then. It is commonly known now only in \"Eastern\" metaphysical views where the primary concept of substance is Qi, or something similar, which persists through and beyond any given Form. The former view is shown to be held by Wittgenstein in what follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough Wittgenstein largely disregarded Aristotle (Ray Monk's biography suggests that he never read Aristotle at all) it seems that they shared some anti-Platonist views on the universal/particular issue regarding primary substances. He attacks universals explicitly in his Blue Book.\n\"The idea of a general concept being a common property of its particular instances connects up with other primitive, too simple, ideas of the structure of language. It is comparable to the idea that properties are ingredients of the things which have the properties; e.g. that beauty is an ingredient of all beautiful things as alcohol is of beer and wine, and that we therefore could have pure beauty, unadulterated by anything that is beautiful.\"\nAnd Aristotle agrees: \"The universal cannot be a substance in the manner in which an essence is\", (Z.13 1038b17) as he begins to draw the line and drift away from the concepts of universal Forms held by his teacher Plato.\nThe concept of Essence, taken alone is a potentiality, and its combination with matter is its actuality. \"First, the substance of a thing is peculiar to it and does not belong to any other thing\" (Z.13 1038b10), i.e. not universal and we know this is essence. This concept of form/substance/essence, which we have now collapsed into one, being presented as potential is also, apparently, held by Wittgenstein:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere ends what Wittgenstein deems to be the relevant points of his metaphysical view and he begins in 2.1 to use said view to support his Picture Theory of Language. \"The Tractatus's notion of substance is the modal analogue of Immanuel Kant's temporal notion. Whereas for Kant, substance is that which 'persists' (i.e., exists at all times), for Wittgenstein it is that which, figuratively speaking, 'persists' through a 'space' of possible worlds.\" Whether the Aristotelian notions of substance came to Wittgenstein via Kant, or via Bertrand Russell, or even whether Wittgenstein arrived at his notions intuitively, one cannot but see them.\nThe further thesis of 2. and 3. and their subsidiary propositions is Wittgenstein's \"picture theory\" of language. This can be summed up as follows:\nPropositions 4.\"N\" to 5.\"N\".\nThe 4s are significant as they contain some of Wittgenstein's most explicit statements concerning the nature of philosophy and the distinction between what can be said and what can only be shown. It is here, for instance, that he first distinguishes between material and grammatical propositions, noting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA philosophical treatise attempts to \"say\" something where nothing can properly be said. It is predicated upon the idea that philosophy should be pursued in a way analogous to the natural sciences; that philosophers are looking to construct true theories. This sense of philosophy does not coincide with Wittgenstein's conception of philosophy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWittgenstein is to be credited with the popularization of truth tables (4.31) and truth conditions (4.431) which now constitute the standard semantic analysis of first-order sentential logic. The philosophical significance of such a method for Wittgenstein was that it alleviated a confusion, namely the idea that logical inferences are justified by rules. If an argument form is valid, the conjunction of the premises will be logically equivalent to the conclusion and this can be clearly seen in a truth table; it is \"displayed\". The concept of tautology is thus central to Wittgenstein's Tractarian account of logical consequence, which is strictly deductive.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nProposition 6.\"N\".\nAt the beginning of Proposition 6, Wittgenstein postulates the essential form of all sentences. He uses the notation formula_1, where\nProposition 6 says that any logical sentence can be derived from a series of NOR operations on the totality of atomic propositions. Wittgenstein drew from Henry M. Sheffer's logical theorem making that statement in the context of the propositional calculus. Wittgenstein's N-operator is a broader infinitary analogue of the Sheffer stroke, which applied to a set of propositions produces a proposition that is equivalent to the denial of every member of that set. Wittgenstein shows that this operator can cope with the whole of predicate logic with identity, defining the quantifiers at 5.52, and showing how identity would then be handled at 5.53\u20135.532.\nThe subsidiaries of 6. contain more philosophical reflections on logic, connecting to ideas of knowledge, thought, and the \"a priori\" and transcendental. The final passages argue that logic and mathematics express only tautologies and are transcendental, i.e. they lie outside of the metaphysical subject's world. In turn, a logically \"ideal\" language cannot supply meaning, it can only reflect the world, and so, sentences in a logical language cannot remain meaningful if they are not merely reflections of the facts.\nFrom Propositions 6.4\u20136.54, the \"Tractatus\" shifts its focus from primarily logical considerations to what may be considered more traditionally philosophical foci (God, ethics, meta-ethics, death, the will) and, less traditionally along with these, the mystical. The philosophy of language presented in the \"Tractatus\" attempts to demonstrate just what the limits of language are \u2013 to delineate precisely what can and cannot be sensically said. Among the sensibly sayable for Wittgenstein are the propositions of natural science, and to the nonsensical, or unsayable, those subjects associated with philosophy traditionally \u2013 ethics and metaphysics, for instance. Curiously, on this score, the penultimate proposition of the \"Tractatus\", proposition 6.54, states that once one understands the propositions of the \"Tractatus\", he will recognize that they are senseless, and that they must be thrown away. Proposition 6.54, then, presents a difficult interpretative problem. If the so-called 'picture theory' of meaning is correct, and it is impossible to represent logical form, then the theory, by trying to say something about how language and the world must be for there to be meaning, is self-undermining. This is to say that the 'picture theory' of meaning itself requires that something be said about the logical form sentences must share with reality for meaning to be possible. This requires doing precisely what the 'picture theory' of meaning precludes. It would appear, then, that the metaphysics and the philosophy of language endorsed by the \"Tractatus\" give rise to a paradox: for the \"Tractatus\" to be true, it will necessarily have to be nonsense by self-application; but for this self-application to render the propositions of the \"Tractatus\" nonsense (in the Tractarian sense), then the \"Tractatus\" must be true.\nThere are three primarily dialectical approaches to solving this paradox 1) the traditionalist, or Ineffable-Truths View; 2) the resolute, 'new Wittgenstein', or Not-All-Nonsense View; 3) the No-Truths-At-All View. The traditionalist approach to resolving this paradox is to hold that Wittgenstein accepted that philosophical statements could not be made, but that nevertheless, by appealing to the distinction between saying and showing, that these truths can be communicated by showing. On the resolute reading, some of the propositions of the \"Tractatus\" are withheld from self-application, they are not themselves nonsense, but point out the nonsensical nature of the \"Tractatus\". This view often appeals to the so-called 'frame' of the \"Tractatus\", comprising the preface and propositions 6.54. The No-Truths-At-All View states that Wittgenstein held the propositions of the \"Tractatus\" to be ambiguously both true and nonsensical, at once. While the propositions could not be, by self-application of the attendant philosophy of the \"Tractatus\", true (or even sensical), it was only the philosophy of the \"Tractatus\" itself that could render them so. This is presumably what made Wittgenstein compelled to accept the philosophy of the \"Tractatus\" as specially having solved the problems of philosophy. It is the philosophy of the \"Tractatus\", alone, that can solve the problems. Indeed, the philosophy of the \"Tractatus\" is for Wittgenstein, on this view, problematic only when applied to itself.\nAt the end of the text Wittgenstein uses an analogy from Arthur Schopenhauer and compares the book to a ladder that must be thrown away after it has been climbed.\nProposition 7.\nAs the last line in the book, proposition 7 has no supplementary propositions. It ends the book with the proposition \"Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent\" ().\nPicture theory.\nA prominent view set out in the \"Tractatus\" is the picture theory, sometimes called the picture theory of language. The picture theory is a proposed explanation of the capacity of language and thought to represent the world.44 Although something need not be a proposition to represent something in the world, Wittgenstein was largely concerned with the way propositions function as representations.\nAccording to the theory, propositions can \"picture\" the world as being a certain way, and thus accurately represent it either truly or falsely. If someone thinks the proposition, \"There is a tree in the yard\", then that proposition accurately pictures the world if and only if there is a tree in the yard.53 One aspect of pictures which Wittgenstein finds particularly illuminating in comparison with language is the fact that we can directly see in the picture what situation it depicts without knowing if the situation actually obtains. This allows Wittgenstein to explain how false propositions can have meaning (a problem which Russell struggled with for many years): just as we can see directly from the picture the situation which it depicts without knowing if it in fact obtains, analogously, when we understand a proposition we grasp its truth conditions or its sense, that is, we know what the world must be like if it is true, without knowing if it is in fact true (TLP 4.024, 4.431).\nIt is believed that Wittgenstein was inspired for this theory by the way that traffic courts in Paris reenact automobile accidents.35 A toy car is a representation of a real car, a toy truck is a representation of a real truck, and dolls are representations of people. In order to convey to a judge what happened in an automobile accident, someone in the courtroom might place the toy cars in a position like the position the real cars were in, and move them in the ways that the real cars moved. In this way, the elements of the picture (the toy cars) are in spatial relation to one another, and this relation itself pictures the spatial relation between the real cars in the automobile accident.45\nPictures have what Wittgenstein calls or pictorial form, which they share with what they depict. This means that all the logically possible arrangements of the pictorial elements in the picture correspond to the possibilities of arranging the things which they depict in reality. Thus if the model for car A stands to the left of the model for car B, it depicts that the cars in the world stand in the same way relative to each other. This picturing relation, Wittgenstein believed, was our key to understanding the relationship a proposition holds to the world. Although language differs from pictures in lacking direct pictorial mode of representation (e.g., it does not use colors and shapes to represent colors and shapes), still Wittgenstein believed that propositions are \"logical pictures\" of the world by virtue of sharing logical form with the reality which they represent (TLP 2.18\u20132.2). And that, he thought, explains how we can understand a proposition without its meaning having been explained to us (TLP 4.02); we can directly see in the proposition what it represents as we see in the picture the situation which it depicts just by virtue of knowing its method of depiction: propositions \"show\" their sense (TLP 4.022).\nHowever, Wittgenstein claimed that pictures cannot represent their \"own\" logical form, they cannot \"say\" what they have in common with reality but can only \"show\" it (TLP 4.12\u20134.121). If representation consist in depicting an arrangement of elements in logical space, then logical space itself cannot be depicted since it is itself not an arrangement of \"anything\"; rather logical form is a feature of an arrangement of objects and thus it can be properly expressed (that is depicted) in language by an analogous arrangement of the relevant signs in sentences (which contain the same possibilities of combination as prescribed by logical syntax), hence logical form can only be shown by presenting the logical relations between different sentences.\nWittgenstein's conception of representation as picturing also allows him to derive two striking claims: that no proposition can be known \"a priori\" \u2013 there are no apriori truths (TLP 3.05), and that there is only \"logical\" necessity (TLP 6.37). Since all propositions, by virtue of being pictures, have sense independently of anything being the case in reality, we cannot see from the proposition alone whether it is true (as would be the case if it could be known apriori), but we must compare it to reality in order to know that it is true (TLP 4.031 \"In the proposition a state of affairs is, as it were, put together for the sake of experiment\"). And for similar reasons, no proposition is necessarily true except in the limiting case of tautologies, which Wittgenstein say lack sense (TLP 4.461). If a proposition pictures a state of affairs in virtue of being a picture in logical space, then a non-logical or metaphysical \"necessary truth\" would be a state of affairs which is satisfied by any possible arrangement of objects (since it is true for any possible state of affairs), but this means that the would-be necessary proposition would not depict anything as \"being so\" but will be true no matter what the world is actually like; but if that's the case, then the proposition cannot say anything about the world or describe any fact in it \u2013 it would not be correlated with any particular state of affairs, just like a tautology (TLP 6.37).\nLogical atomism.\nAlthough Wittgenstein did not use the term himself, his metaphysical view throughout the \"Tractatus\" is commonly referred to as logical atomism. While his logical atomism resembles that of Bertrand Russell, the two views are not strictly the same.58\nRussell's theory of descriptions is a way of logically analyzing sentences containing definite descriptions without presupposing the existence of an object satisfying the description. According to the theory, a statement like \"There is a man to my left\" should be analyzed into: \"There is some \"x\" such that \"x\" is a man and \"x\" is to my left, and for any \"y\", if \"y\" is a man and \"y\" is to my left, \"y\" is identical to \"x\"\". If the statement is true, \"x\" refers to the man to my left.\nWhereas Russell believed the names (like \"x\") in his theory should refer to things we can know directly by virtue of acquaintance, Wittgenstein did not believe that there are any epistemic constraints on logical analyses: the simple objects are whatever is contained in the elementary propositions which cannot be logically analyzed any further.63\nBy \"objects\", Wittgenstein did not mean physical objects in the world, but the absolute base of logical analysis\u2014objects that can be combined but not divided (TLP 2.02\u20132.0201). According to Wittgenstein's logico-atomistic metaphysical system, objects each have a \"nature\", which is their capacity to combine with other objects. When combined, objects form \"states of affairs\". A state of affairs that obtains is a \"fact\". Facts make up the entirety of the world; they are logically independent of one another, as are states of affairs. That is, the existence of one state of affairs (or fact) does not allow us to infer whether another state of affairs (or fact) exists or does not exist.\nWithin states of affairs, objects are in particular relations to one another.59 This is analogous to the spatial relations between toy cars discussed above. The structure of states of affairs comes from the arrangement of their constituent objects (TLP 2.032), and such arrangement is essential to their intelligibility, just as the toy cars must be arranged in a certain way in order to picture the automobile accident.\nA fact might be thought of as the obtaining state of affairs that Madison is in Wisconsin, and a possible (but not obtaining) state of affairs might be Madison's being in Utah. These states of affairs are made up of certain arrangements of objects (TLP 2.023). However, Wittgenstein does not specify what objects are. Madison, Wisconsin, and Utah cannot be atomic objects: they are themselves composed of numerous facts. Instead, Wittgenstein believed objects to be the things in the world that would correlate to the smallest parts of a logically analyzed language, such as names like \"x\". Our language is not sufficiently (i.e., not completely) analyzed for such a correlation, so one cannot \"say\" what an object is.60 We can, however, talk about them as \"indestructible\" and \"common to all possible worlds\". Wittgenstein believed that the philosopher's job is to discover the structure of language through analysis.38\nAnthony Kenny provides a useful analogy for understanding Wittgenstein's logical atomism: a slightly modified game of chess. Just like objects in states of affairs, the chess pieces alone do not constitute the game\u2014their arrangements, together with the pieces (objects) themselves, determine the state of affairs.\nThrough Kenny's chess analogy, we can see the relationship between Wittgenstein's logical atomism and his picture theory of representation.61 For the sake of this analogy, the chess pieces are objects, they and their positions constitute states of affairs and therefore facts, and the totality of facts is the entire particular game of chess.\nWe can communicate such a game of chess in the exact way that Wittgenstein says a proposition represents the world. We might say \"WR/KR1\" to communicate a white rook's being on the square commonly labeled as king's rook 1. Or, to be more thorough, we might make such a report for every piece's position.\nThe logical form of our reports must be the same logical form of the chess pieces and their arrangement on the board in order to be meaningful. Our communication about the chess game must have as many possibilities for constituents and their arrangement as the game itself. Kenny points out that such logical form need not strictly resemble the chess game. The logical form can be had by the bouncing of a ball (for example, twenty bounces might communicate a white rook's being on the king's rook 1 square). One can bounce a ball as many times as one wishes, which means that the ball's bouncing has \"logical multiplicity\", and can therefore share the logical form of the game.62 A motionless ball cannot communicate this same information, as it does not have logical multiplicity.\nDistinction between saying and showing.\nAccording to traditional reading of the \"Tractatus\", Wittgenstein's views about logic and language led him to believe that some features of language and reality cannot be expressed in senseful language but only \"shown\" by the form of certain expressions. Thus, for example, according to the picture theory, when a proposition is thought or expressed, the proposition represents reality (truly or falsely) by virtue of sharing some features with that reality in common. However, those features themselves are something Wittgenstein claimed we could not \"say\" anything about, because we cannot describe the relationship that pictures bear to what they depict, but only \"show\" it via fact-stating propositions (TLP 4.121). Thus, we cannot say \"that\" there is a correspondence between language and reality; the correspondence itself can only be \"shown\",56 since our language is not capable of describing its own logical structure.47\nHowever, on the more recent \"resolute\" interpretation of the \"Tractatus\" (see below), the remarks on \"showing\" were not in fact an attempt by Wittgenstein to gesture at the existence of some ineffable features of language or reality, but rather, as Cora Diamond and James Conant have argued, the distinction was meant to draw a sharp contrast between logic and descriptive discourse. On their reading, Wittgenstein indeed meant that some things are shown when we reflect on the logic of our language, but \"what\" is shown is not \"that\" something is the case, as if we could somehow think it (and thus understand what Wittgenstein tries to show us) but for some reason we just could not say it. As Diamond and Conant explain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Speaking and thinking are different from activities the practical mastery of which has no logical side; and they differ from activities like physics the practical mastery of which involves the mastery of content specific to the activity. On Wittgenstein's view ... linguistic mastery does not, as such, depend on even an inexplicit mastery of some sort of content. ... The logical articulation of the activity itself can be brought more clearly into view, without that involving our coming to awareness \"that\" anything. When we speak about the activity of philosophical clarification, grammar may impose on us the use of 'that'-clauses and 'what'-constructions in the descriptions we give of the results of the activity. But, one could say, the final 'throwing away of the ladder' involves the recognition that that grammar of 'what'-ness has been pervasively misleading us, even as we read through the Tractatus. To achieve the relevant sort of increasingly refined awareness of the logic of our language is not to grasp a content of any sort.\nSimilarly, Michael Kremer suggested that Wittgenstein's distinction between saying and showing could be compared with Gilbert Ryle's famous distinction between \"knowing that\" and \"knowing how\". Just as practical knowledge or skill (such as riding a bike) is not reducible to propositional knowledge according to Ryle, Wittgenstein also thought that the mastery of the logic of our language is a unique practical skill that does not involve any sort of propositional \"knowing that\", but rather is reflected in our ability to operate with senseful sentences and grasping their internal logical relations.\nReception and influence.\nPhilosophical.\nAt the time of its publication in 1921, Wittgenstein concluded that the \"Tractatus\" had resolved all philosophical problems, leaving one free to focus on what really matters \u2013 ethics, faith, music and so on. He would later recant this view, beginning in 1945, leading him to begin work on what would ultimately become the \"Philosophical Investigations\".\nThe book was translated into English in 1922 by C. K. Ogden with help from the teenaged Cambridge mathematician and philosopher Frank P. Ramsey. Ramsey later visited Wittgenstein in Austria. Translation issues make the concepts hard to pinpoint, especially given Wittgenstein's usage of terms and difficulty in translating ideas into words.\nThe \"Tractatus\" caught the attention of the philosophers of the Vienna Circle (1921\u20131933), especially Rudolf Carnap and Moritz Schlick. The group spent many months working through the text out loud, line by line. Schlick eventually convinced Wittgenstein to meet with members of the circle to discuss the \"Tractatus\" when he returned to Vienna (he was then working as an architect). Although the Vienna Circle's logical positivists appreciated the \"Tractatus\", they argued that the last few passages, including Proposition 7, are confused. Carnap hailed the book as containing important insights but encouraged people to ignore the concluding sentences. Wittgenstein responded to Schlick, commenting: \"I cannot imagine that Carnap should have so completely misunderstood the last sentences of the book and hence the fundamental conception of the entire book.\" Additionally, Bertrand Russell's article \"The Philosophy of Logical Atomism\" is presented as a working out of ideas that he had learned from Wittgenstein.\nA more recent interpretation comes from The New Wittgenstein family of interpretations under development since 2000. This so-called \"resolute reading\" is controversial and much debated. The main contention of such readings is that Wittgenstein in the \"Tractatus\" does not provide a theoretical account of language that relegates ethics and philosophy to a mystical realm of the unsayable. Rather, the book has a therapeutic aim. By working through the propositions of the book the reader comes to realize that language is perfectly suited to all our needs, and that philosophy rests on a confused relation to the logic of our language. The confusion that the \"Tractatus\" seeks to dispel is not a confused theory, such that a correct theory would be a proper way to clear the confusion. Rather, the confusion lies in the notion that any theory is needed. The method of the \"Tractatus\" is to make the reader aware of the logic of our language as we are already familiar with it. Dispelling the need for a theoretical account of the logic of our language is intended to spread to other areas of philosophy. Thereby the confusion involved in putting forward ethical and metaphysical theories, for example, is cleared in the same \"coup\".\nWittgenstein would not meet the Vienna Circle proper, but only a few of its members, including Moritz Schlick, Rudolf Carnap, and Friedrich Waismann. Often, though, he refused to discuss philosophy, and would insist on giving the meetings over to reciting the poetry of Rabindranath Tagore with his chair turned to the wall. He largely broke off formal relations even with these members of the circle after coming to believe Carnap had used some of his ideas without permission.\nAlfred Korzybski credits Wittgenstein as an influence in his book, \"Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics\".\nCasimir Lewy wrote that \"I do not find...any evidence in \"Mind\" that the book had much direct influence on the development of philosophy in England during the period that I am reviewing [1976]\", with the exception of Frank Ramsey's paper on universals. This is in contrast to Wittgenstein's latter philosophy, \"with the later philosophy of Wittgenstein the story is very different\".\nIn a 1999 poll of philosophers by the journal \"Philosophical Forum\", the \"Tractatus\" came in fourth in response to the prompt to name the five most important books in 20th century philosophy.\nArtistic.\nThe \"Tractatus\" was the theme of a 1992 film by the Hungarian filmmaker P\u00e9ter Forg\u00e1cs. The 32-minute production, named \"Wittgenstein Tractatus\", features citations from the \"Tractatus\" and other works by Wittgenstein.\nIn 1989 the Finnish artist M. A. Numminen released a black vinyl album, \"The Tractatus Suite\", consisting of extracts from the \"Tractatus\" set to music, on the Forward! label (GN-95). The tracks were [T. 1] \"The World is...\", [T. 2] \"In order to tell\", [T. 4] \"A thought is...\", [T. 5] \"A proposition is...\", [T. 6] \"The general form of a truth-function\", and [T. 7] . It was recorded at Finnvox Studios, Helsinki between February and June 1989. The \"lyrics\" were provided in German, English, Esperanto, French, Finnish and Swedish. The music was reissued as a CD in 2003, \"M. A. Numminen sings Wittgenstein\".\nThe \"Tractatus\" is featured as a predominate thematic basis for the visual novel \"Wonderful Everyday\".\nEditions and English translations.\nThe \"Tractatus\" is the English translation of:\nA notable German edition of the works of Wittgenstein is:\nThe first two English translations of the \"Tractatus\", as well as the first publication in German from 1921, include an introduction by Bertrand Russell. Wittgenstein revised the Ogden translation.\nA manuscript of an early version of the \"Tractatus\" was discovered in Vienna in 1965 by Georg Henrik von Wright, who named it the \"Prototractatus\" and provided a historical introduction to a published facsimile with English translation: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOnline English versions\nOnline German versions\nVisualization graphs"}
{"id": "30064", "revid": "1302184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30064", "title": "The Fugitive", "text": "A fugitive is a person fleeing from arrest.\nThe Fugitive, The Fugitives, Fugitive, or Fugitives may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30065", "revid": "11745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30065", "title": "TeX", "text": "Typesetting system\nTeX (), stylized within the system as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TeX wordmark/style.css\" /&gt;TeX, is a typesetting program which was designed and written by computer scientist and Stanford University professor Donald Knuth and first released in 1978. The term now refers to the system of extensions \u2013 which includes software programs called TeX \"engines\", sets of TeX macros, and packages which provide extra typesetting functionality \u2013 built around the original TeX language. TeX is a popular means of typesetting complex mathematical formulae; it has been noted as one of the most sophisticated digital typographical systems.\nTeX is widely used in academia, especially in mathematics, computer science, economics, political science, engineering, linguistics, physics, statistics, and quantitative psychology. It has long since displaced Unix troff (the previously favored formatting system), in most Unix installations (although \"troff\" still remains as the default formatter of the UNIX documentation). It is also used for many other typesetting tasks, especially in the form of LaTeX, ConTeXt, and other macro packages.\nTeX was designed with two main goals in mind: to allow anybody to produce high-quality books with minimal effort, and to provide a system that would give exactly the same results on all computers, at any point in time (together with the Metafont language for font description and the Computer Modern family of typefaces). TeX is free software, which made it accessible to a wide range of users.\nHistory.\nWhen the first paper volume of Knuth's \"The Art of Computer Programming\" was published in 1968, it was typeset using hot metal typesetting on a Monotype machine. This method, dating back to the 19th century, produced a \"classic style\" appreciated by Knuth. When the second edition was published, in 1976, the whole book had to be typeset again because the Monotype technology had been largely replaced by phototypesetting, and the original fonts were no longer available. When Knuth received the galley proofs of the new book on 30 March 1977, he found them inferior. Disappointed, Knuth set out to design his own typesetting system.\nKnuth saw for the first time the output of a high-quality digital typesetting system, and became interested in digital typography. On 13 May 1977, he wrote a memo to himself describing the basic features of TeX. He planned to finish it on his sabbatical in 1978 (though ultimately the language's syntax was not frozen until 1989). Guy Steele happened to be at Stanford during the summer of 1978, when Knuth was developing his first version of TeX. When Steele returned to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that autumn, he rewrote TeX's input/output (I/O) to run under the Incompatible Timesharing System (ITS) operating system. The first version of TeX, called TeX78, was written in the SAIL programming language to run on a PDP-10 under Stanford's WAITS operating system.\nFor later versions of TeX, Knuth invented the concept of literate programming, a way of producing compilable source code and cross-linked documentation typeset in TeX from the same original file. The language used is called WEB and produces programs in DEC PDP-10 Pascal.\nTeX82, a new version of TeX rewritten from scratch, was published in 1982. Among other changes, the original hyphenation algorithm was replaced by a new algorithm written by Frank Liang. TeX82 also uses fixed-point arithmetic instead of floating-point, to ensure reproducibility of the results across different computer hardware, and includes a real, Turing-complete programming language, following intense lobbying by Guy Steele. In 1989, Donald Knuth released new versions of TeX and Metafont. Despite his desire to keep the program stable, Knuth realized that 128\u00a0different characters for the text input were not enough to accommodate foreign languages; the main change in version 3.0 of TeX is thus the ability to work with 8-bit inputs, allowing 256 different characters in the text input. TeX3.0 was released on March 15, 1990.\nSince version 3, TeX has used an idiosyncratic version numbering system, where updates have been indicated by adding an extra digit at the end of the decimal, so that the version number asymptotically approaches \u03c0. This is a reflection of the fact that TeX is now very stable, and only minor updates are anticipated. The current version of TeX is 3.141592653; it was last updated in 2021. The design was frozen after version 3.0, and no new feature or fundamental change will be added, so all newer versions will contain only bug fixes. Even though Donald Knuth himself has suggested a few areas in which TeX could have been improved, he indicated that he firmly believes that having an unchanged system that will produce the same output now and in the future is more important than introducing new features. For this reason, he has stated that the \"absolutely final change (to be made after my death)\" will be to change the version number to \u03c0, at which point all remaining bugs will become features. Likewise, versions of Metafont after 2.0 asymptotically approach e (currently at 2.7182818), and a similar change will be applied after Knuth's death.\nPronunciation and spelling.\nThe name TeX is intended by its developer to be pronounced , with the final consonant of \"loch.\" The letters of the name are meant to represent the capital Greek letters tau, epsilon, and chi, as TeX is an abbreviation of \u03c4\u03ad\u03c7\u03bd\u03b7 ( ), Greek for both \"art\" and \"craft\", which is also the root word of \"technical\". English speakers often pronounce it , like the first syllable of \"technical\". Knuth instructs that it be typeset with the \"E\" below the baseline and reduced spacing between the letters. This is done, as Knuth mentions in his \"TeXbook\", to distinguish TeX from other system names such as TEX, the Text EXecutive processor (developed by Honeywell Information Systems).\nSyntax.\nTeX commands commonly start with a backslash and are grouped with curly braces. Almost all of TeX's syntactic properties can be changed on the fly, which makes TeX input hard to parse by anything but TeX itself. TeX is a macro- and token-based language: many commands, including most user-defined ones, are expanded on the fly until only unexpandable tokens remain, which are then executed. Expansion itself is practically free from side effects. Tail recursion of macros takes no memory, and if-then-else constructs are available. This makes TeX a Turing-complete language even at the expansion level. The system can be divided into four levels: in the first, characters are read from the input file and assigned a category code (sometimes called \"catcode\", for short). Combinations of a backslash (actually, any character of category zero) followed by letters (characters of category 11) or a single other character are replaced by a control-sequence token. In this sense, this stage is like lexical analysis, although it does not form numbers from digits. In the next stage, expandable control sequences (such as conditionals or defined macros) are replaced by their replacement text. The input for the third stage is then a stream of characters (including the ones with special meaning) and unexpandable control sequences (typically assignments and visual commands). Here, the characters get assembled into a paragraph, and TeX's paragraph breaking algorithm works by optimizing breakpoints over the whole paragraph. The fourth stage breaks the vertical list of lines and other material into pages.\nThe TeX system has precise knowledge of the sizes of all characters and symbols, and using this information, it computes the optimal arrangement of letters per line and lines per page. It then produces a DVI file (\"DeVice Independent\") containing the final locations of all characters. This DVI file can then be printed directly given an appropriate printer driver, or it can be converted to other formats. Nowadays, pdfTeX is often used, which bypasses DVI generation altogether. The base TeX system understands about 300 commands, called \"primitives\". These low-level commands are rarely used directly by users, and most functionality is provided by format files (predumped memory images of TeX after large macro collections have been loaded). Knuth's original default format, which adds about 600 commands, is Plain TeX. The most widely used format is LaTeX, originally developed by Leslie Lamport, which incorporates document styles for books, letters, slides, etc., and adds support for referencing and automatic numbering of sections and equations. Another widely used format, AMS-TeX, is produced by the American Mathematical Society and provides many more user-friendly commands, which can be altered by journals to fit with their house style. Most of the features of AMS-TeX can be used in LaTeX by using the \"AMS packages\" (e.g., codice_1, codice_2) and the \"AMS document classes\" (e.g., codice_3, codice_4). This is then referred to as AMS-LaTeX. Other formats include ConTeXt, used primarily for desktop publishing and written mostly by Hans Hagen at Pragma.\nDesign.\nThe TeX software incorporates several aspects that were not available, or were of lower quality, in other typesetting programs at the time when TeX was released. Some of the innovations are based on interesting algorithms, and have led to several theses for Knuth's students. While some of these discoveries have now been incorporated into other typesetting programs, others, such as the rules for mathematical spacing, are still unique.\nMathematical spacing.\nSince the primary goal of the TeX language is high-quality typesetting for publishers of books, Knuth gave a lot of attention to the spacing rules for mathematical formulae. He took three bodies of work that he considered to be standards of excellence for mathematical typography: the books typeset by the Addison-Wesley Publishing house (the publisher of \"The Art of Computer Programming\") under the supervision of Hans Wolf; editions of the mathematical journal \"Acta Mathematica\" dating from around 1910; and a copy of \"Indagationes Mathematicae\", a Dutch mathematics journal. Knuth looked closely at these printed papers to sort out and look for a set of rules for spacing. While TeX provides some basic rules and the tools needed to specify proper spacing, the exact parameters depend on the font used to typeset the formula. For example, the spacing for Knuth's Computer Modern fonts has been precisely fine-tuned over the years and is now set; but when other fonts, such as AMS Euler, were used by Knuth for the first time, new spacing parameters had to be defined.\nThe typesetting of math in TeX is not without criticism, particularly with respect to technical details of the font metrics, which were designed in an era when significant attention was paid to storage requirements. This resulted in some \"hacks\" overloading some fields, which in turn required other \"hacks\". On an aesthetics level, the rendering of radicals has also been criticized. The OpenType math font specification largely borrows from TeX, but has some new features/enhancements.\nHyphenation and justification.\nIn comparison with manual typesetting, the problem of justification is easy to solve with a digital system such as TeX, which, provided that good points for line breaking have been defined, can automatically spread the spaces between words to fill in the line. The problem is thus to find the set of breakpoints that will give the most visually pleasing result. Many line-breaking algorithms use a \"first-fit\" approach, where the breakpoints for each line are determined one after the other, and no breakpoint is changed after it has been chosen. Such a system is not able to define a breakpoint depending on the effect that it will have on the following lines. In comparison, the \"total-fit\" line-breaking algorithm used by TeX and developed by Donald Knuth and Michael Plass considers \"all\" the possible breakpoints in a paragraph, and finds the combination of line breaks that will produce the most globally pleasing arrangement.\nFormally, the algorithm defines a value called \"badness\" associated with each possible line break; the badness is increased if the spaces on the line must stretch or shrink too much to make the line the correct width. Penalties are added if a breakpoint is particularly undesirable: for example, if a word must be hyphenated, if two lines in a row are hyphenated, or if a very loose line is immediately followed by a very tight line. The algorithm will then find the breakpoints that will minimize the sum of squares of the badness (including penalties) of the resulting lines. If the paragraph contains formula_1 possible breakpoints, the number of situations that must be evaluated naively is formula_2. However, by using the method of dynamic programming, the complexity of the algorithm can be brought down to formula_3 (see Big O notation). Further simplifications (for example, not testing extremely unlikely breakpoints such as a hyphenation in the first word of a paragraph, or very overfull lines) lead to an efficient algorithm whose running time is formula_4, where formula_5 is the width of a line. A similar algorithm is used to determine the best way to break paragraphs across two pages, in order to avoid widows or orphans (lines that appear alone on a page while the rest of the paragraph is on the following or preceding page). However, in general, a thesis by Michael Plass shows how the page-breaking problem can be NP-complete because of the added complication of placing figures. TeX's line-breaking algorithm has been adopted by several other programs, such as Adobe InDesign (a desktop publishing application) and the GNU fmt Unix command line utility.\nIf no suitable line break can be found for a line, the system will try to hyphenate a word. The original version of TeX used a hyphenation algorithm based on a set of rules for the removal of prefixes and suffixes of words, and for deciding if it should insert a break between the two consonants in a pattern of the form vowel\u2013consonant\u2013consonant\u2013vowel (which is possible most of the time). TeX82 introduced a new hyphenation algorithm, designed by Frank Liang in 1983, to assign priorities to breakpoints in letter groups. A list of hyphenation patterns is first generated automatically from a corpus of hyphenated words (a list of 50,000 words). If TeX must find the acceptable hyphenation positions in the word \"encyclopedia\", for example, it will consider all the subwords of the extended word \".encyclopedia.\", where \".\" is a special marker to indicate the beginning or end of the word. The list of subwords includes all the subwords of length 1 (\".\", \"e\", \"n\", \"c\", \"y\", etc.), of length 2 (\".e\", \"en\", \"nc\", etc.), etc., up to the subword of length 14, which is the word itself, including the markers. TeX will then look into its list of hyphenation patterns, and find subwords for which it has calculated the desirability of hyphenation at each position. In the case of our word, 11 such patterns can be matched, namely 1c4l4, 1cy, 1d4i3a, 4edi, e3dia, 2i1a, ope5d, 2p2ed, 3pedi, pedia4, y1c. For each position in the word, TeX will calculate the \"maximum value\" obtained among all matching patterns, yielding en1cy1c4l4o3p4e5d4i3a4. Finally, the acceptable positions are those indicated by an odd number, yielding the acceptable hyphenations \"en-cy-clo-pe-di-a\". This system based on subwords allows the definition of very general patterns (such as 2i1a), with low indicative numbers (either odd or even), which can then be superseded by more specific patterns (such as 1d4i3a) if necessary. These patterns find about 90% of the hyphens in the original dictionary; more importantly, they do not insert any spurious hyphen. In addition, a list of exceptions (words for which the patterns do not predict the correct hyphenation) are included with the Plain TeX format; additional ones can be specified by the user.\nMetafont.\nMetafont, not strictly part of TeX, is a font description system which allows the designer to describe characters algorithmically. It uses B\u00e9zier curves in a fairly standard way to generate the actual characters to be displayed, but Knuth devotes substantial attention to the rasterizing problem on bitmapped displays. Another thesis, by John Hobby, further explores this problem of digitizing \"brush trajectories\". This term derives from the fact that Metafont describes characters as having been drawn by abstract brushes (and erasers). It is commonly believed that TeX is based on bitmap fonts but, in fact, these programs \"know\" nothing about the fonts that they are using other than their dimensions. It is the responsibility of the device driver to appropriately handle fonts of other types, including PostScript Type 1 and TrueType. Computer Modern (commonly known as \"the TeX font\") is freely available in Type 1 format, as are the AMS math fonts. Users of TeX systems that output directly to PDF, such as pdfTeX, XeTeX, or LuaTeX, generally never use Metafont output at all.\nMacro language.\nTeX documents are written and programmed using an unusual macro language. Broadly speaking, the running of this macro language involves expansion and execution stages which do not interact directly. Expansion includes both literal expansion of macro definitions as well as conditional branching, and execution involves such tasks as setting variables/registers and the actual typesetting process of adding glyphs to boxes.\nThe definition of a macro not only includes a list of commands but also the syntax of the call. It differs with most widely used lexical preprocessors like M4, in that the body of a macro gets tokenized at definition time.\nThe TeX macro language has been used to write larger document production systems, most notably including LaTeX and ConTeXt.\nOperation.\nA sample Hello world program in plain TeX is:\nHello, World\n\\bye % marks the end of the file; not shown in the final output\nThis might be in a file \"myfile.tex\", as \".tex\" is a common file extension for plain TeX files. By default, everything that follows a percent sign on a line is a comment, ignored by TeX. Running TeX on this file (for example, by typing tex\u00a0myfile.tex in a command-line interpreter, or by calling it from a graphical user interface) will create an output file called \"myfile.dvi\", representing the content of the page in a device independent format (DVI). A DVI file could then be either viewed on screen or converted to a suitable format for any of the various printers for which a device driver existed (printer support was generally not an operating system feature at the time that TeX was created). Knuth has said that there is nothing inherent in TeX that requires DVI as the output format, and later versions of TeX, notably pdfTeX, XeTeX, and LuaTeX, all support output directly to PDF.\nTeX provides a different text syntax specifically for mathematical formulas. For example, the quadratic formula (which is the solution of the quadratic equation) appears as:\nThe formula is printed in a way a person would write by hand, or typeset the equation. In a document, entering \"mathematics mode\" is done by starting with a $ symbol, then entering a formula in TeX syntax, and closing again with another of the same symbol. Knuth explained in jest that he chose the dollar sign to indicate the beginning and end of mathematical mode in plain TeX because typesetting mathematics was traditionally supposed to be expensive. \"Display mathematics\" (mathematics presented centred on a new line) is similar but uses $$ instead of a single $ symbol. For example, the above with the quadratic formula in display math:\nUses.\nIn several technical fields such as computer science, mathematics, engineering and physics, TeX has become a de facto standard. Many thousands of books have been published using TeX, including books published by Addison-Wesley, Cambridge University Press, Elsevier, Oxford University Press, and Springer. Numerous journals in these fields are produced using TeX or LaTeX, allowing authors to submit their raw manuscript written in TeX. While many publications in other fields, including dictionaries and legal publications, have been produced using TeX, it has not been as successful as in the more technical fields, as TeX was primarily designed to typeset mathematics.\nWhen he designed TeX, Donald Knuth did not believe that a single typesetting system would fit everyone's needs; instead, he designed many hooks inside the program so that it would be possible to write extensions, and released the source code, hoping that the publishers would design versions tailoring to their own needs. While such extensions have been created (including some by Knuth himself), most people have extended TeX only using macros and it has remained a system associated with technical typesetting.\nChemistry notation.\nPackages like mhchem, XyMTeX, chemfig, and chemmacros for typesetting chemical equations, structures, and reactions in LaTeX.\nXML publication.\nIt is possible to use TeX for automatic generation of sophisticated layout for XML data. The differences in syntax between the two description languages can be overcome with the help of TeXML. In the context of XML publication, TeX can thus be considered an alternative to XSL-FO. TeX allowed scientific papers in mathematical disciplines to be reduced to relatively small files that could be rendered client-side, allowing fully typeset scientific papers to be exchanged over the early Internet and emerging World Wide Web, even when sending large files was difficult. This paved the way for the creation of repositories of scientific papers such as arXiv, through which papers could be 'published' without an intermediary publisher.\nDevelopment.\nThe original source code for the current TeX software is written in WEB, a mixture of documentation written in TeX and a Pascal subset in order to ensure readability and portability. For example, TeX does all of its dynamic allocation itself from fixed-size arrays and uses only fixed-point arithmetic for its internal calculations. As a result, TeX has been ported to almost all operating systems, usually by using the web2c program to convert the source code into C instead of directly compiling the Pascal code. Knuth has kept a very detailed log of all the bugs he has corrected and changes he has made in the program since 1982; as of 2021[ [update]], the list contains 440 entries, not including the version modification that should be done after his death as the final change in TeX. Knuth offers monetary awards to people who find and report a bug in TeX. The award per bug started at US$2.56 (one \"hexadecimal dollar\") and doubled every year until it was frozen at its current value of $327.68. Knuth has lost relatively little money as there have been very few bugs claimed. In addition, recipients have been known to frame their check as proof that they found a bug in TeX rather than cashing it.\nDue to scammers finding scanned copies of his checks on the internet and using them to try to drain his bank account, Knuth no longer sends out real checks, but those who submit bug reports can get credit at The Bank of San Serriffe instead.\nDistributions and extensions.\nTeX is usually provided in the form of an easy-to-install bundle of TeX itself along with Metafont and all the necessary fonts, documents formats, and utilities needed to use the typesetting system. On UNIX-compatible systems, including Linux and Apple macOS, TeX is distributed as part of the larger TeX Live distribution. (Prior to TeX Live, the teTeX distribution was the de facto standard on UNIX-compatible systems.) On Microsoft Windows, there is the MiKTeX distribution (enhanced by proTeXt) and the Microsoft Windows version of TeX Live.\nSeveral document processing systems are based on TeX, notably jadeTeX, which uses TeX as a backend for printing from James Clark's DSSSL Engine, the Arbortext publishing system, and Texinfo, the GNU documentation processing system. TeX has been the official typesetting package for the GNU operating system since 1984.\nNumerous extensions and companion programs for TeX exist, among them BibTeX for bibliographies (distributed with LaTeX); pdfTeX, a TeX-compatible engine which can directly produce PDF output (as well as continuing to support the original DVI output); XeTeX, a TeX-compatible engine that supports Unicode and OpenType; and LuaTeX, a Unicode-aware extension to TeX that includes a Lua runtime with extensive hooks into the underlying TeX routines and algorithms. Most TeX extensions are available for free from CTAN, the Comprehensive TeX Archive Network.\nLicense.\nDonald Knuth has indicated several times that the source code of TeX has been placed into the \"public domain\", and he strongly encourages modifications or experimentations with this source code. However, since Knuth highly values the reproducibility of the output of all versions of TeX, any changed version must not be called TeX, or anything confusingly similar. To enforce this rule, any implementation of the system must pass a test suite called the TRIP test before being allowed to be called TeX. The question of licence is somewhat confused by the statements included at the beginning of the TeX source code, which indicate that \"all rights are reserved. Copying of this file is authorized only if\u00a0... you make absolutely no changes to your copy\". This restriction should be interpreted as a prohibition to change the source code \"as long as the file is called tex.web\". The copyright note at the beginning of tex.web (and mf.web) was changed in 2021 to explicitly state this. This interpretation is confirmed later in the source code when the TRIP test is mentioned (\"If this program is changed, the resulting system should not be called 'TeX'\"). The American Mathematical Society tried in the early 1980s to claim a trademark for TeX. This was rejected because at the time \"TEX\" (all caps) was registered by Honeywell for the \"Text EXecutive\" text processing system.\nSince the source code of TeX is essentially in the public domain, other programmers are allowed (and explicitly encouraged) to improve the system, but are required to use another name to distribute the modified TeX, meaning that the source code can still evolve. For example, the Omega project was developed after 1991, primarily to enhance TeX's multilingual typesetting abilities. Knuth created \"unofficial\" modified versions, such as TeX-XeT, which allows a user to mix texts written in left-to-right and right-to-left writing systems in the same document.\nCommunity.\nNotable entities in the TeX community include the TeX Users Group (TUG), which currently publishes \"TUGboat\" and formerly published \"The PracTeX Journal\", covering a wide range of topics in digital typography relevant to TeX. The Deutschsprachige Anwendervereinigung TeX (DANTE) is a large user group in Germany. The TeX Users Group was founded in 1980 for educational and scientific purposes, provides an organization for those who have an interest in typography and font design, and are users of the TeX typesetting system invented by Knuth. The TeX Users Group represents the interests of TeX users worldwide. The TeX Users Group publishes the journal \"TUGboat\" three times per year; DANTE publishes \"Die TeXnische Kom\u00f6die\" four times per year. Other user groups include DK-TUG in Denmark, GUTenberg in France, GuIT in Italy, NTG in the Netherlands and UK-TUG in the United Kingdom; the user groups jointly maintain a complete list.\nEditors.\nThere are a variety of :\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30066", "revid": "48775249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30066", "title": "The Big Test", "text": "1999 book by Nicholas Lemann\nThe Big Test: The Secret History of the American Meritocracy is a 1999 history book by Nicholas Lemann .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30067", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30067", "title": "Tradition", "text": "Long-existing custom or belief\nA tradition is a system of beliefs or behaviors (folk custom) passed down within a group of people or society with symbolic meaning or special significance with origins in the past. A component of cultural expressions and folklore, common examples include holidays or impractical but socially meaningful clothes (like lawyers' wigs or military officers' spurs), but the idea has also been applied to social norms and behaviors such as greetings, etc. Traditions can persist and evolve for thousands of years\u2014 the word \"tradition\" itself derives from the Latin word \"tradere\" literally meaning to transmit, to hand over, to give for safekeeping. While it is reportedly assumed that traditions have an ancient history, many traditions have been invented on purpose, whether it be political or cultural, over short periods of time. Various academic disciplines also use the word in a variety of ways.\nThe phrase \"according to tradition\" or \"by tradition\" usually means that what follows is known only through oral tradition and is not supported (and might even be refuted) by solid evidence. Here, \"tradition\" describes the source or nature of the information. For example, \"According to tradition, Homer was born on Chios, but many other places have historically claimed him as theirs.\" This tradition may never be proven or disproved. Another example is, \"King Arthur, according to history, a true British king, has inspired many well loved stories.\" Whether the claims are supported by evidence or not does not reduce their value as cultural history and literature.\nTraditions are subject of study in several academic fields of learning, especially in the humanities and social sciences, including anthropology, archaeology, history, and sociology.\nThe conceptualization of tradition, as the notion of holding on to a previous time, is also found in political and philosophical discourse. For example, it is the basis of the political concept of traditionalism, and also strands of many world religions including traditional Catholicism. In artistic contexts, tradition is used to decide the correct display of an art form. For example, in the performance of traditional genres (such as traditional dance), adherence to guidelines dictating how an art form should be composed are given greater importance than the performer's own preferences. A host of factors can exacerbate the loss of tradition, including industrialization, globalization, and the assimilation or marginalization of specific cultural groups. In response to this, tradition-preservation attempts and initiatives have now been started in many countries around the world, focusing on aspects such as traditional languages. Tradition is usually contrasted with the goal of modernity and should be differentiated from customs, conventions, laws, norms, routines, rules and similar concepts.\nDefinition.\nThe English word \"tradition\" comes from the Latin \"traditio\" via French, the noun from the verb \"tradere\" (to transmit, to hand over, to give for safekeeping); it was originally used in Roman law to refer to the concept of legal transfers and inheritance. According to Anthony Giddens and others, the modern meaning of tradition evolved during the Enlightenment period, in opposition to modernity and progress.\nAs with many other generic terms, there are many definitions of tradition. The concept includes a number of interrelated ideas; the unifying one is that tradition refers to beliefs, objects or customs performed or believed in the past, originating in it, transmitted through time by being taught by one generation to the other, and are performed or believed in the present.\nTradition can also refer to beliefs or customs that are prehistoric, with lost or arcane origins, existing from \"time immemorial\". Originally, traditions were passed orally, without the need for a writing system. Tools to aid this process include poetic devices such as rhyme, epic stories and alliteration. The stories thus preserved are also referred to as tradition, or as part of an oral tradition. Even such traditions, however, are presumed to have originated (been \"invented\" by humans) at some point. Traditions are often presumed to be ancient, unalterable, and deeply important, though they may sometimes be much less \"natural\" than is presumed. It is presumed that at least two transmissions over three generations are required for a practice, belief or object to be seen as traditional. Some traditions were deliberately introduced for one reason or another, often to highlight or enhance the importance of a certain institution or truth. Traditions may also be adapted to suit the needs of the day, and the changes can become accepted as a part of the ancient tradition. Tradition changes slowly, with changes from one generation to the other being seen as significant. Thus, those carrying out the traditions will not be consciously aware of the change, and even if a tradition undergoes major changes over many generations, it will be seen as unchanged.\nThere are various origins and fields of tradition; they can refer to:\nMany objects, beliefs and customs can be traditional. Rituals of social interaction can be traditional, with phrases and gestures such as saying \"thank you\", sending birth announcements, greeting cards, etc. Tradition can also refer to larger concepts practiced by groups (family traditions at Christmas), organizations (company's picnic) or societies, such as the practice of national and public holidays. Some of the oldest traditions include monotheism (three millennia) and citizenship (two millennia). It can also include material objects, such as buildings, works of art or tools.\nTradition is often used as an adjective, in contexts such as traditional music, traditional medicine, traditional values and others. In such constructions tradition refers to specific values and materials particular to the discussed context, passed through generations.\nInvention of tradition.\nThe term \"invention of tradition\", introduced by E. J. Hobsbawm, refers to situations when a new practice or object is introduced in a manner that implies a connection with the past that is not necessarily present. A tradition may be deliberately created and promulgated for personal, commercial, political, or national self-interest, as was done in colonial Africa; or it may be adopted rapidly based on a single highly publicized event, rather than developing and spreading organically in a population, as in the case of the white wedding dress, which only became popular after Queen Victoria wore a white gown at her wedding to Albert of Saxe-Coburg.\nAn example of an invention of tradition is the rebuilding of the Palace of Westminster (location of the British Parliament) in the Gothic style. Similarly, most of the traditions associated with monarchy of the United Kingdom, seen as rooted deep in history, actually date to 19th century. Other examples include the invention of tradition in Africa and other colonial holdings by the occupying forces. Requiring legitimacy, the colonial power would often invent a \"tradition\" which they could use to legitimize their own position. For example, a certain succession to a chiefdom might be recognized by a colonial power as traditional in order to favour their own candidates for the job. Often these inventions were based in some form of tradition, but were exaggerated, distorted, or biased toward a particular interpretation.\nInvented traditions are central components of modern national cultures, providing a commonality of experience and promoting the unified national identity espoused by nationalism. Common examples include public holidays (particularly those unique to a particular nation), the singing of national anthems, and traditional national cuisine (see national dish). Expatriate and immigrant communities may continue to practice the national traditions of their home nation.\nIn scholarly discourse.\nIn science, tradition is often used in the literature in order to define the relationship of an author's thoughts to that of his or her field. In 1948, philosopher of science Karl Popper suggested that there should be a \"rational theory of tradition\" applied to science which was fundamentally sociological. For Popper, each scientist who embarks on a certain research trend inherits the tradition of the scientists before them as he or she inherits their studies and any conclusions that superseded it. Unlike myth, which is a means of explaining the natural world through means other than logical criticism, scientific tradition was inherited from Socrates, who proposed critical discussion, according to Popper. For Thomas Kuhn, who presented his thoughts in a paper presented in 1977, a sense of such a critical inheritance of tradition is, historically, what sets apart the best scientists who change their fields is an embracement of tradition.\nTraditions are a subject of study in several academic fields in social sciences\u2014chiefly anthropology, archaeology, and biology\u2014with somewhat different meanings in different fields. It is also used in varying contexts in other fields, such as history, psychology and sociology. Social scientists and others have worked to refine the commonsense concept of tradition to make it into a useful concept for scholarly analysis. In the 1970s and 1980s, Edward Shils explored the concept in detail. Since then, a wide variety of social scientists have criticized traditional ideas about tradition; meanwhile, \"tradition\" has come into usage in biology as applied to nonhuman animals.\nTradition as a concept variously defined in different disciplines should not be confused with various traditions (perspectives, approaches) in those disciplines.\nAnthropology.\nTradition is one of the key concepts in anthropology; it can be said that anthropology is the study of \"tradition in traditional societies\". There is however no \"theory of tradition\", as for most anthropologists the need to discuss what tradition is seems unnecessary, as defining tradition is both unnecessary (everyone can be expected to know what it is) and unimportant (as small differences in definition would be just technical). There are however dissenting views; scholars such as Pascal Boyer argue that defining tradition and developing theories about it are important to the discipline.\nArchaeology.\nIn archaeology, the term \"tradition\" is a set of cultures or industries which appear to develop on from one another over a period of time. The term is especially common in the study of American archaeology.\nBiology.\nBiologists, when examining groups of non-humans, have observed repeated behaviors which are taught within communities from one generation to the next. Tradition is defined in biology as \"a behavioral practice that is relatively enduring (i.e., is performed repeatedly over a period of time), that is shared among two or more members of a group, that depends in part on socially aided learning for its generation in new practitioners\", and has been called a precursor to \"culture\" in the anthropological sense.\nBehavioral traditions have been observed in groups of fish, birds, and mammals. Groups of orangutans and chimpanzees, in particular, may display large numbers of behavioral traditions, and in chimpanzees, transfer of traditional behavior from one group to another (not just within a group) has been observed. Such behavioral traditions may have evolutionary significance, allowing adaptation at a faster rate than genetic change.\nMusicology and ethnomusicology.\nIn the field of musicology and ethnomusicology tradition refers to the belief systems, repertoire, techniques, style and culture that is passed down through subsequent generations. Tradition in music suggests a historical context with which one can perceive distinguishable patterns. Along with a sense of history, traditions have a fluidity that cause them to evolve and adapt over time.\nWhile both musicology and ethnomusicology are defined by being 'the scholarly study of music' they differ in their methodology and subject of research. 'Tradition, or traditions, can be presented as a context in which to study the work of a specific composer or as a part of a wide-ranging historical perspective.'\nSociology.\nThe concept of tradition, in early sociological research (around the turn of the 19th and 20th century), referred to that of the traditional society, as contrasted by the more modern industrial society. This approach was most notably portrayed in Max Weber's concepts of traditional authority and modern rational-legal authority. In more modern works, One hundred years later, sociology sees tradition as a social construct used to contrast past with the present and as a form of rationality used to justify certain course of action.\nTraditional society is characterized by lack of distinction between family and business, division of labor influenced primarily by age, gender, and status, high position of custom in the system of values, self-sufficiency, preference to saving and accumulation of capital instead of productive investment, relative autarky. Early theories positing the simple, unilineal evolution of societies from traditional to industrial model are now seen as too simplistic.\nIn 1981, Edward Shils in his book \"Tradition\" put forward a definition of tradition that became universally accepted. According to Shils, tradition is anything which is transmitted or handed down from the past to the present.\nAnother important sociological aspect of tradition is the one that relates to rationality. It is also related to the works of Max Weber (see theories of rationality), and were popularized and redefined in 1992 by Raymond Boudon in his book \"Action\". In this context tradition refers to the mode of thinking and action justified as \"it has always been that way\". This line of reasoning forms the basis of the logical flaw of the appeal to tradition (or \"argumentum ad antiquitatem\"), which takes the form \"this is right because we've always done it this way.\" In most cases such an appeal can be refuted on the grounds that the \"tradition\" being advocated may no longer be desirable, or, indeed, may never have been despite its previous popularity.\nPhilosophy.\nThe idea of tradition is important in philosophy. Twentieth century philosophy is often divided between an 'analytic' tradition, dominant in Anglophone and Scandinavian countries, and a 'continental' tradition, dominant in German and Romance speaking Europe. Increasingly central to continental philosophy is the project of deconstructing what its proponents, following Martin Heidegger, call 'the tradition', which began with Plato and Aristotle. In contrast, some continental philosophers - most notably, Hans-Georg Gadamer - have attempted to rehabilitate the tradition of Aristotelianism. This move has been replicated within analytic philosophy by Alasdair MacIntyre. However, MacIntyre has himself deconstructed the idea of 'the tradition', instead posing Aristotelianism as one philosophical tradition in rivalry with others.\nIn political and religious discourse.\nThe concepts of tradition and traditional values are frequently used in political and religious discourse to establish the legitimacy of a particular set of values. In the United States in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, the concept of tradition has been used to argue for the centrality and legitimacy of conservative religious values. Similarly, strands of orthodox theological thought from a number of world religions openly identify themselves as wanting a return to tradition, although \"tradition\" or its plural can also refer simply to the core teaching of religious group: thus Paul in 1 Corinthians 11:2 refers to \"the traditions, even as I delivered them to you\". In contrast to the Protestant Christian doctrine of \"scripture alone\" (Latin: \"Sola scriptura\"), Catholic theological doctrine sees \"tradition\" alongside \"scripture\" as sources of authority:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sacred tradition, therefore, and Sacred Scripture of both the Old and New Testaments, are like a mirror in which the pilgrim Church on earth looks at God.\nThe term \"traditionalist Catholic\" refers to those, such as Archbishop Lefebvre, who want the worship and practices of the Church to be as they were before the Second Vatican Council of 1962\u201365. Likewise, Sunni Muslims are referred to as \"Ahl el-Sunnah wa Al-Jam\u0101\u2018ah\" (), literally \"people of the tradition [of Muhammad] and the community\", emphasizing their attachment to religious and cultural tradition.\nMore generally, tradition has been used as a way of determining the political spectrum, with right-wing parties having a stronger affinity to certain ways of the past than left-wing ones. Here, the concept of adherence tradition is embodied by the political philosophy of traditionalist conservatism (or simply \"traditionalism\"), which emphasizes the need for the principles of natural law and transcendent moral order, hierarchy and organic unity, agrarianism, classicism and high culture, and the intersecting spheres of loyalty. Traditionalists would therefore reject the notions of individualism, liberalism, modernity, and social progress, but promote cultural and educational renewal, and revive interest in the Church, the family, the State and local community. This view has been criticised for including in its notion of tradition practices which are no longer considered to be desirable, for example, stereotypical views of the place of women in domestic affairs.\nIn other societies, especially ones experiencing rapid social change, the idea of what is \"traditional\" may be widely contested, with different groups striving to establish their own values as the legitimate traditional ones. Defining and enacting traditions in some cases can be the means of building unity between subgroups in a diverse society; in other cases, tradition is a means of othering and keeping groups distinct from one another.\nIn artistic discourse.\nIn artistic contexts, in the performance of traditional genres (such as traditional dance), adherence to traditional guidelines is of greater importance than performer's preferences. It is often the unchanging form of certain arts that leads to their perception as traditional. For artistic endeavors, tradition has been used as a contrast to \"creativity\", with traditional and folk art associated with unoriginal imitation or repetition, in contrast to fine art, which is valued for being original and unique. More recent philosophy of art, however, considers interaction with tradition as integral to the development of new artistic expression.\nRelationship to other concepts.\nIn the social sciences, \"tradition\" is often contrasted with \"modernity\", particularly in terms of whole societies. This dichotomy is generally associated with a linear model of social change, in which societies progress from being traditional to being modern. Tradition-oriented societies have been characterized as valuing filial piety, harmony and group welfare, stability, and interdependence, while a society exhibiting modernity would value \"individualism (with free will and choice), mobility, and progress.\" Another author discussing tradition in relationship to modernity, Anthony Giddens, sees tradition as something bound to ritual, where ritual guarantees the continuation of tradition. Gusfield and others, though, criticize this dichotomy as oversimplified, arguing that tradition is dynamic, heterogeneous, and coexists successfully with modernity even within individuals.\nTradition should be differentiated from \"customs, conventions, laws, norms, routines, rules\" and similar concepts. Whereas tradition is supposed to be invariable, they are seen as more flexible and subject to innovation and change. Whereas justification for tradition is ideological, the justification for other similar concepts is more practical or technical. Over time, customs, routines, conventions, rules and such can evolve into traditions, but that usually requires that they stop having (primarily) a practical purpose. For example, wigs worn by lawyers were at first common and fashionable; spurs worn by military officials were at first practical but now are both impractical and traditional.\nPreservation.\nThe legal protection of tradition includes a number of international agreements and national laws. In addition to the fundamental protection of cultural property, there is also cooperation between the United Nations, UNESCO and Blue Shield International in the protection or recording of traditions and customs. The protection of culture and traditions is becoming increasingly important nationally and internationally.\nIn many countries, concerted attempts are being made to preserve traditions that are at risk of being lost. A number of factors can exacerbate the loss of tradition, including industrialization, globalization, and the assimilation or marginalization of specific cultural groups. Customary celebrations and lifestyles are among the traditions that are sought to be preserved. Likewise, the concept of tradition has been used to defend the preservation and reintroduction of minority languages such as Cornish under the auspices of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Specifically, the charter holds that these languages \"contribute to the maintenance and development of Europe's cultural wealth and traditions\". The Charter goes on to call for \"the use or adoption... of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages\". Similarly, UNESCO includes both \"oral tradition\" and \"traditional manifestations\" in its definition of a country's cultural properties and heritage. So therefore it works to preserve tradition in countries such as Brazil.\nIn Japan, certain artworks, structures, craft techniques and performing arts are considered by the Japanese government to be a precious legacy of the Japanese people, and are protected under the Japanese Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties. This law also identifies people skilled at traditional arts as \"National Living Treasures\", and encourages the preservation of their craft.\nFor native peoples like the M\u0101ori in New Zealand, there is conflict between the fluid identity assumed as part of modern society and the traditional identity with the obligations that accompany it; the loss of language heightens the feeling of isolation and damages the ability to perpetuate tradition.\nTraditional cultural expressions.\nThe phrase \"traditional cultural expressions\" is used by the World Intellectual Property Organization to refer to \"any form of artistic and literary expression in which traditional culture and knowledge are embodied. They are transmitted from one generation to the next, and include handmade textiles, paintings, stories, legends, ceremonies, music, songs, rhythms and dance.\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30068", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30068", "title": "The Boston Globe", "text": "American daily newspaper\nThe Boston Globe, also known locally as the Globe, is an American daily newspaper founded and based in Boston, Massachusetts. The newspaper has won a total of 27 Pulitzer Prizes. \"The Boston Globe\" is the oldest and largest daily newspaper in Boston and tenth-largest newspaper by print circulation in the United States of America as of 2023.\nFounded in 1872, the paper was mainly controlled by Irish Catholic interests before being sold to Charles H. Taylor and his family. After being privately held until 1973, it was sold to \"The New York Times\" in 1993 for $1.1billion, making it one of the most expensive print purchases in United States history. The newspaper was purchased in 2013 by Boston Red Sox and Liverpool F.C. owner John W. Henry for $70million from The New York Times Company, having lost over 90% of its value in 20 years. The chief print rival of \"The Boston Globe\" is the \"Boston Herald\", whose circulation is smaller and is shrinking faster.\nThe newspaper is \"one of the nation's most prestigious papers\". In 1967, \"The Boston Globe\" became the first major paper in the U.S. to oppose the Vietnam War. The paper's 2002 coverage of the Roman Catholic Church sex abuse scandal received international media attention and served as the basis for the 2015 American drama film \"Spotlight\". Since February 2023, the editor has been Nancy Barnes.\nHistory.\n19th century.\n\"The Boston Globe\" was founded in 1872 by six Boston businessmen who jointly invested $150,000 (). The founders included Eben Dyer Jordan of the Jordan Marsh department store, and Cyrus Wakefield of the Wakefield Rattan Company and namesake of the town of Wakefield, Massachusetts. The first issue was published on March 4, 1872, and sold for four cents (). In August 1873, Jordan hired Charles H. Taylor as temporary business manager; in December, Taylor signed a contract to be general manager of the paper for two years. He would serve as the first publisher of \"The Boston Globe\" until his death in 1921, and was succeeded by four of his descendants until 1999.\nOriginally a morning daily, the \"Globe\" began its Sunday edition in 1877. A weekly edition called The Boston Weekly Globe, catering to mail subscribers outside the city, was published from 1873 until it was absorbed by the Sunday edition in 1892. In 1878, \"The Boston Globe\" started an afternoon edition called The Boston Evening Globe, which ceased publication in 1979. The morning edition bore the title The Boston Daily Globe until the word \"Daily\" was dropped from the nameplate in 1960. By the 1890s, \"The Boston Globe\" had become a stronghold, with an editorial staff dominated by Irish American Catholics.\n20th century.\nIn 1912, the \"Globe\" was one of a cooperative of four newspapers, including the \"Chicago Daily News\", \"The New York Globe\", and the \"Philadelphia Bulletin\", to form the Associated Newspapers syndicate.\nIn the early 1900s Charles H. Taylor was responsible for making the Globe the most used newspaper in New England. He went into greater details regarding social movements such as the Women's suffrage movement, while other competitors such as \"The Boston Post\" did not shine as much light on these social movements.\nIn the 1940 Massachusetts gubernatorial election, the \"Globe\" correctly projected the re-election of Republican incumbent Leverett Saltonstall, using methods first established by Taylor; rival \"The Boston Post\" called the race incorrectly for Democrat Paul A. Dever.\nIn 1955, Laurence L. Winship was named editor, ending a 75-year period of the role being held by the paper's publishers. In the next decade, the \"Globe\" rose from third to first in the competitive field of what was then eight Boston newspapers.\nIn 1958, the \"Globe\" moved from its original location on Washington Street in downtown Boston to Morrissey Boulevard in the Dorchester neighborhood.\nIn 1965, Thomas Winship succeeded his father as editor. The younger Winship transformed the \"Globe\" from a mediocre local paper into a regional paper of national distinction. He served as editor until 1984, during which time the paper won a dozen Pulitzer Prizes, the first in the paper's history.\n\"The Boston Globe\" was a private company until 1973 when it went public under the name Affiliated Publications. It continued to be managed by the descendants of Charles Taylor. In 1993, The New York Times Company purchased Affiliated Publications for US$1.1billion, making \"The Boston Globe\" a wholly owned subsidiary of \"The New York Times\"' parent. The Jordan and Taylor families received substantial The New York Times Company stock, but by 1999 the last Taylor family members had left management.\nBoston.com, the online edition of \"The Boston Globe\", was launched on the World Wide Web in 1995. Consistently ranked among the top ten newspaper websites in America, it has won numerous national awards and took two regional Emmy Awards in 2009 for its video work.\n\"The Boston Globe\" has consistently been ranked in the forefront of American journalism. \"Time\" magazine listed it as one of the ten best US daily newspapers in 1974 and 1984, and the \"Globe\" tied for sixth in a national survey of top editors who chose \"America's Best Newspapers\" in the \"Columbia Journalism Review\" in 1999.\n21st century.\nUnder two editors, Martin Baron and then Brian McGrory, the \"Globe\" shifted away from coverage of international news in favor of Boston-area news.\n\"Globe\" reporters Michael Rezendes, Matt Carroll, Sacha Pfeiffer and Walter Robinson, and editor Ben Bradlee Jr. were instrumental in uncovering the Roman Catholic Church sex abuse scandal in 2001\u20132003, especially in relation to Massachusetts churches. \"The Boston Globe\" was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for their work and the work of other staff, one of several the paper has received for its investigative journalism, and their work was dramatized in the 2015 Academy Award\u2013winning film \"Spotlight\", named after the paper's in-depth investigative division.\n\"The Boston Globe\" was the paper that allowed Peter Gammons to start his \"Notes\" section on baseball, which has become a mainstay in many major newspapers nationwide. In 2004, Gammons became the 56th recipient of the J. G. Taylor Spink Award for outstanding baseball writing, given by the BBWAA; he was honored at the Baseball Hall of Fame on July 31, 2005.\nIn 2007, Charlie Savage, whose reports on President Bush's use of signing statements made national news, won the Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting.\nOn April 2, 2009, The New York Times Company threatened to close the paper if its unions did not agree to $20 million of cost savings. Some of the cost savings include reducing union employees' pay by 5%, ending pension contributions, and ending certain employees' tenures.\n\"The Boston Globe\" eliminated the equivalent of 50 full-time jobs; among buy-outs and layoffs, it swept out most of the part-time employees in the editorial sections. However, early on the morning of May 5, 2009, The New York Times Company announced it had reached a tentative deal with the Boston Newspaper Guild, which represents most of the \"Globe\"'s editorial staff, that allowed it to get the concessions it demanded. The paper's other three major unions had agreed to concessions on May 3, 2009, after The New York Times Company threatened to give the government 60 days' notice that it intended to close the paper. Despite the cuts helping to \"significantly [improve]\" its financial performance by October of that year, the \"Globe\"'s parent company indicated that it was considering strategic alternatives for the paper, but did not plan to sell it.\nAs of 2010, the \"Globe\" hosted 28 blogs covering a variety of topics, including Boston sports, local politics, and a blog made up of posts from the paper's opinion writers.\nIn September 2011, \"The Boston Globe\" launched a dedicated, subscription-based website at bostonglobe.com.\nStarting in 2012, the \"Globe\" provided a printing and circulating service for the \"Boston Herald\", and by 2013, was handling its rival's entire press run. This arrangement remained in place until 2018, ending after the acquisition of the \"Herald\" by Digital First Media.\nIn February 2013, The New York Times Company announced that it would sell its New England Media Group, which encompasses the \"Globe\"; bids were received by six parties, including John Gormally, then-owner of WGGB-TV in Springfield, Massachusetts, another group included members of former \"Globe\" publishers, the Taylor family, and Boston Red Sox principal owner John W. Henry, who bid for the paper through the New England Sports Network, which was majority owned by Fenway Sports Group and the Boston Bruins. However, after the NESN group dropped out of the running to buy the paper, Henry made his separate bid to purchase the \"Globe\" in July 2013.\nOn October 24, 2013, he took ownership of the \"Globe\", at a $70million purchase price, and renamed the venture Boston Globe Media.\nOn January 30, 2014, Henry named himself publisher and named Mike Sheehan, a prominent former Boston ad executive, to be CEO. As of January 2017[ [update]], Doug Franklin replaced Mike Sheehan as CEO, then Franklin resigned after six months in the position, in July 2017, as a result of strategic conflicts with owner Henry.\nIn July 2016, the 815,000-square-foot headquarters in Dorchester was sold to an unknown buyer for an undisclosed price. The \"Globe\" moved its printing operations in June 2017 to Myles Standish Industrial Park in Taunton, Massachusetts. Also in June 2017, the \"Globe\" moved its headquarters to Exchange Place in Boston's Financial District.\nIn July 2022, James Dao, a senior editor with 30 years of experience at \"The New York Times\", was named the editorial page editor, succeeding Bina Venkataraman.\nIn November 2022, \"The Boston Globe\" announced that NPR news chief Nancy Barnes would replace Brian McGrory as editor.\nFrom September 1, 2022, to August 31, 2023, the \"Globe\"'s combined print and digital circulation for weekdays increased by 2.7%, to 346,944, and for Sundays it rose by 1.3%, to 408,974. There are more than 245,000 digital-only subscriptions, an increase of about 10,000 since February 2022.\nEditorial pages.\nStarting with the Sunday edition in 1891, and expanded to weekday editions in 1913, each lead editorial in the \"Globe\" was signed \"Uncle Dudley\", a practice ended by editor Thomas Winship in 1966.\nIn March 1980, the \"Globe\" published an editorial about a speech by President Jimmy Carter, which included the accidental headline \"Mush from the Wimp\" during part of the press run, drawing national attention.\nSince 1981, the editorial pages of the \"Globe\" have been separate from the news operation, as is frequently customary in the news industry. Editorials represent the official view of \"The Boston Globe\" as a community institution. The publisher reserves the right to veto an editorial and usually determines political endorsements for high office.\nThe \"Globe\" made its first political endorsement in 1967, supporting Kevin White in that year's Boston mayoral election. The \"Globe\" has consistently endorsed Democratic presidential candidates, such as Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election, but has sometimes endorsed Republicans in state and local elections, such as Charlie Baker for governor.\nDescribing the political position of \"The Boston Globe\" editorial page in 2001, former editorial page editor Ren\u00e9e Loth told the Boston University alumni magazine:\nThe \"Globe\" has a long tradition of being a progressive institution, and especially on social issues. We support woman's rights; We are pro-choice; we're against the death penalty; we're for gay rights. But if people read us carefully, they will find that on a whole series of other issues, we are not knee-jerk. We're for charter schools; we're for any number of business-backed tax breaks. We are a lot more nuanced and subtle than that liberal stereotype does justice to.\nJames Dao became the editorial page editor in 2022.\nAugust 2018 campaign.\nIn August 2018, the editorial board launched a coordinated campaign for newspapers nationwide to respond to President Donald Trump's \"enemy of the people\" attacks and \"fake news\" rants against the media by publishing locally produced editorial responses on Thursday, August 16. Within a couple of days, an estimated 100+ newspapers had pledged to join the campaign, jumping to roughly 200 a few days later.\nOn August 13, the Radio Television Digital News Association and its Voice of the First Amendment Task Force encouraged its 1,200 member organizations to join the campaign, while other media organizations also helped spread the call to action. Even as some right-leaning outlets portrayed the \"Globe\"'s campaign as an attack on the president, rather than his rhetorical attacks on the Fourth Estate, some newspapers got a head start, releasing content on August 15, while 350 newspapers participated in the event on August 16.\nFrom August 10 to 22, approximately 14 threatening phone calls were made to \"Boston Globe\" offices. The caller stated that the \"Globe\" was the \"enemy of the people\" and threatened to kill newspaper employees. On August 30, California resident Robert Chain was arrested by an FBI SWAT team and charged with a single count of making a threatening communication in interstate commerce. In May 2019, Chain pleaded guilty in a US federal court to seven counts of making threatening communications in interstate commerce.\nMagazines.\n\"The Boston Globe Magazine\".\nAppearing in the Sunday paper almost every week is \"The Boston Globe Magazine\". As of 2018[ [update]], Veronica Chao is the editor, and contributors include Neil Swidey and Meredith Goldstein.\nSince 2004, the December issue features a \"Bostonian of the Year\". Past winners include Red Sox general manager Theo Epstein (2004), retired judge and Big Dig whistleblower Edward Ginsburg (2005), governor Deval Patrick (2006), Neighborhood Assistance Corporation of America founder and CEO Bruce Marks (2007), NBA champion Paul Pierce (2008), professor Elizabeth Warren (2009), Republican politician Scott Brown (2010), U.S. attorney Carmen Ortiz and ArtsEmerson executive director Robert Orchard (2011), Olympic gold medalists Aly Raisman and Kayla Harrison (2012), three people who were near the Boston Marathon bombing, Dan Marshall, Natalie Stavas, and Larry Hittinger (2013), Market Basket employees (2014), and neuropathologist Ann McKee (2017). \n\"Design New England\".\nOn October 23, 2006, Boston Globe Media announced the publication of \"Design New England: The Magazine of Splendid Homes and Gardens\". The glossy oversized magazine was published six times per year. The magazine ceased publication in 2018.\n\"Boston\" magazine.\nOn January 22, 2025, Boston Globe Media acquired \"Boston\" magazine\u2014\"known for its long form journalism, lifestyle and food coverage\" and 50-year-old \"Best of Boston\" franchise from Philadelphia-based Metrocorp Publishing. As of 2025, Chris Vogel is the editor-in-chief.\nPulitzer Prizes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable personnel.\nEditors.\nThe \"Globe\" uses \"editor\" as the highest title; other newspapers may call this role editor-in-chief. The role of editor was held by three people in the earliest years of the paper, then from 1880 to 1955 by the publishers. The extended period of a publisher-editor ended in 1955, when Laurence L. Winship was named editor by publisher William Davis Taylor. Winship became the paper's top editor following the death of James Morgan, longtime \"de facto\" executive editor. Morgan had joined the \"Globe\" in January 1884, hired by Charles H. Taylor.\nSource:\nIncidents of fabrication and plagiarism.\nIn 1998, columnist Patricia Smith was forced to resign after it was discovered that she had fabricated people and quotations in several of her columns. In August of that year, columnist Mike Barnicle was discovered to have copied material for a column from a George Carlin book, \"Brain Droppings\". He was suspended for this offense, and his past columns were reviewed. \"The Boston Globe\" editors found that Barnicle had fabricated a story about two cancer patients, and Barnicle was forced to resign. Columnist Jeff Jacoby was suspended by the \"Globe\" in 2000 for failing to credit non-original content used in his column.\nIn 2004, the \"Globe\" apologized for printing graphic photographs that the article represented as showing U.S. soldiers raping Iraqi women during the Iraq War from a city councilor's presentation before they were verified. The photos had already been found by other news organizations to be from an internet pornography site.\nIn the spring of 2005, the \"Globe\" retracted a story describing the events of a seal hunt near Halifax, Nova Scotia, that took place on April 12, 2005. Written by freelancer Barbara Stewart, a former \"New York Times\" staffer, the article described the specific number of boats involved in the hunt and graphically described the killing of seals and the protests that accompanied it. In reality, weather had delayed the hunt, which had not yet begun the day the story had been filed, proving that the details were fabricated.\nColumnist Kevin Cullen was suspended by the \"Globe\" in 2018 for embellishing claims he made on radio and in public appearances related to the Boston Marathon bombing.\nWebsites.\n\"The Boston Globe\" maintains two distinct major websites: \"BostonGlobe.com\" is a subscriber-supported site with a paywall and content from the printed paper; and \"Boston.com\", one of the first regional news portals, is supported by advertising. Between September 2011 and March 2014, the \"Globe\" gradually withdrew stories written by \"Globe\" journalists from Boston.com, making the sites more and more separated. BostonGlobe.com was designed to emphasize a premium experience focusing on content and emulating the visual appearance of \"The Boston Globe\" newspaper; the site was one of the first major websites to use a responsive design that automatically adapts its layout to a device's screen size. Boston.com followed suit in 2014. The two sites are aimed towards different readers; while Boston.com became targeted towards \"casual\" readers and local content, the new \"Boston Globe\" website is targeted towards the audience of the paper itself.\nIn 2012, the Society for News Design selected BostonGlobe.com as the world's best-designed news website.\nDigital subscriptions.\nThe \"Globe\" had 226,000 digital subscribers as of December 2021, among the highest of any metro newspapers in the country.\nBoston Globe Media Partners, which owns the \"Globe\", operates a number of websites covering certain niche subjects. The sites share many resources, like office space, with the \"Globe\", but are often branded separately from the newspaper:\n\"Crux\".\n\"Crux\" was launched by the \"Globe\" in September 2014 to focus on news related to the Catholic Church. At the end of March 2016, \"The Globe\" ended its association with \"Crux\", transferring ownership of the website to the \"Crux\" staff. With John L. Allen Jr. as the new editor, \"Crux\" received sponsorship from the Knights of Columbus and several Catholic dioceses.\nStat.\nStat, launched in 2015, covers health, medicine and life sciences, with a particular focus on the biotechnology industry based in and around Boston. \"Stat\" employs journalists in Boston, Washington, D.C., New York City and San Francisco.\n\"The Emancipator\".\n\"The Emancipator\", launched in 2022 in partnership with Boston University, covers racial justice. The \"Globe\"'s involvement ended in March 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30071", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30071", "title": "T", "text": "Twentieth letter of the Latin alphabet\nT, or t, is the twentieth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"tee\" (pronounced ), plural \"tees\".\nIt is derived from the Semitic Taw \ud802\udd15 of the Phoenician and Paleo-Hebrew script (Aramaic and Hebrew Taw \u05ea/\ud802\udc55/, Syriac Taw \u072c, and Arabic \u062a T\u0101\u02bc) via the Greek letter \u03c4 (tau). In English, it is most commonly used to represent the voiceless alveolar plosive, a sound it also denotes in the International Phonetic Alphabet. It is the most commonly used consonant and the second-most commonly used letter in English-language texts.\nHistory.\n\"Taw\" was the last letter of the Western Semitic and Hebrew alphabets. The sound value of Semitic \"Taw\", the Greek alphabet T\u03b1\u03c5 (\"Tau\"), Old Italic and Latin T has remained fairly constant, representing in each of these, and it has also kept its original basic shape in most of these alphabets.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English, \u27e8t\u27e9 usually denotes the voiceless alveolar plosive (: ), as in \"tart\", \"tee\", or \"ties\", often with aspiration at the beginnings of words or before stressed vowels. The letter \u27e8t\u27e9 corresponds to the affricate in some words as a result of yod-coalescence (for example, in words ending in -\"ture\", such as \"future\").\nA common digraph is \u27e8th\u27e9, which usually represents a dental fricative, but occasionally represents (as in \"Thomas\" and \"thyme\"). The digraph \u27e8ti\u27e9 often corresponds to the sound (a voiceless palato-alveolar sibilant) word-medially when followed by a vowel, as in \"nation\", \"ratio\", \"negotiation\", and \"Croatia\".\nIn a few words of modern French origin, the letter T is silent at the end of a word; these include \"croquet\" and \"debut\".\nOther languages.\nIn the orthographies of other languages, \u27e8t\u27e9 is often used for , the voiceless dental plosive , or similar sounds.\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8\u27e9 denotes the voiceless alveolar plosive.\nOther representations.\nComputing.\nUnicode:\nCodepoints 005416 (8410) and x007416 (11610) were used for encodings based on ASCII, including the DOS, Windows, ISO-8859 and Macintosh families of encodings.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30072", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30072", "title": "Thales of Miletus", "text": "Ancient Greek philosopher (c. 624 \u2013 c. 545 BC)\nThales of Miletus ( ; ; c.\u2009626/623\u00a0\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009548/545\u00a0BC) was an Ancient Greek pre-Socratic philosopher from Miletus in Ionia, Asia Minor. Thales was one of the Seven Sages, founding figures of Ancient Greece.\nBeginning in eighteenth-century historiography, many came to regard him as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition, breaking from the prior use of mythology to explain the world and instead using natural philosophy. He is thus otherwise referred to as the first to have engaged in mathematics, science, and deductive reasoning.\nThales's view that all of nature is based on the existence of a single ultimate substance, which he theorized to be water, was widely influential among the philosophers of his time. Thales thought the Earth floated on water.\nIn mathematics, Thales is the namesake of Thales's theorem, and the intercept theorem can also be referred to as Thales's theorem. Thales was said to have calculated the heights of the pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore. In science, Thales was an astronomer who reportedly predicted the weather and a solar eclipse. The discovery of the position of the constellation Ursa Major is also attributed to Thales, as well as the timings of the solstices and equinoxes. He was also an engineer, known for having allowed the Lydian army to cross the Halys River. Plutarch wrote that \"at that time, Thales alone had raised philosophy from mere speculation to practice.\"\nLife.\nThe main source concerning the details of Thales's life and career is the doxographer Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, in his third-century-AD work \"Lives and Opinions of the Eminent Philosophers\". While it is all we have, Diogenes wrote some eight centuries after Thales's death and his sources often contained \"unreliable or even fabricated information\". It is known Thales was from Miletus, a mercantile city settled at the mouth of the Maeander river, near modern Didim, Turkey.\nThe dates of Thales's life are not exactly known, but are roughly established by a few datable events mentioned in the sources. According to the historian Herodotus, writing in the 5th century BC, Thales predicted a solar eclipse in 585 BC. Assuming one's acme (or floruit) occurred at the age of 40, the chronicle of Apollodorus of Athens, written during the 2nd century BC, therefore placed Thales's birth about the year 625 BC.\nAncestry and family.\nWhile the probability is that Thales was as Greek as most Milesians, Herodotus described Thales as \"a Phoenician by remote descent\". Diogenes La\u00ebrtius references Herodotus, Duris, and Democritus, who all agree \"that Thales was the son of Examyas and Cleobulina, and belonged to the Thelidae who are Phoenicians and amongst the noblest descendants of Cadmus and Agenor\" who had been banished from Phoenicia and that Thales was enrolled as a citizen in Miletus along with Neleus.\nHowever, Friedrich Nietzsche and others interpret this quote as meaning only that his ancestors were seafaring Cadmeians from Boeotia. It is also possible that he was of mixed ancestry, given his father had a Carian name and his mother had a Greek name. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius seems to also reference an alternative account: \"Most writers, however, represent him as a genuine Milesian and of a distinguished family\". \"Encyclopedia Britannica\" (1952) concluded that Thales was most likely a native Milesian of noble birth and that he was certainly a Greek.\nDiogenes continues, by delivering more conflicting reports: one that Thales married and either fathered a son (Cybisthus or Cybisthon) or adopted his nephew of the same name; the second that he never married, telling his mother as a young man that it was too early to marry, and as an older man that it was too late. Plutarch had earlier told this version: Solon visited Thales and asked him why he remained single; Thales answered that he did not like the idea of having to worry about children. Nevertheless, several years later, anxious for family, he adopted his nephew Cybisthus.\nTravels.\nThe culture of Archaic Greece was heavily influenced by those of the Levant and Mesopotamia. It is said Thales was engaged in trade and visited either Egypt or Babylonia. However, there is no strong evidence that Thales ever visited countries in the Near East, and the issue is disputed among scholars. Visits to such places were a commonplace attribution to various philosophers by later writers, especially when these writers tried to explain the origin of their mathematical knowledge, such as with Thales or Pythagoras or Eudoxus.\nEgypt.\nSeveral ancient authors assume that Thales, at one point in his life, visited Egypt, where he learned about geometry. It is considered possible that Thales visited Egypt, since Miletus had a permanent colony there (namely Naucratis). It is also said Thales had close contacts with the priests of Thebes who instructed him, or even that he instructed \"them\" in geometry. It is also possible Thales knew about Egypt from accounts of others, without actually visiting it.\nBabylon.\nAside from Egypt, the other mathematically advanced, ancient civilization before the Greeks was Babylonia, another commonplace attribution of travel for a mathematically-minded philosopher.\nHistorians Roger L. Cooke and B.L. Van der Waerden come down on the side of Babylonian mathematics influencing the Greeks, citing the use of e. g. the sexagesimal system (or base 60). Cooke notes \"This relation, however, is controversial.\" Other historians, such as D. R. Dicks, take issue with the idea of Babylonian influence on Greek mathematics. For until around the time of Hipparchus (c. 190\u2013120\u00a0BC) their sexagesimal system was unknown.\nHerodotus wrote the Greeks learnt the \"gnomon\" from the Babylonians. Thales's follower Anaximander is credited with introducing the \"gnomon\" to the Greeks. Herodotus also wrote that the practice of dividing the day into 12 parts, and the \"polos\", came to the Greeks from the Babylonians. Yet this too is disputed, for example by historian L. Zhmud, who points out the \"gnomon\" was known to both Egyptians and Babylonians, the division of the day into twelve parts (and by analogy the year) was known to the Egyptians already in the 2nd millennium BC, and the idea of the \"polos\" was not used outside of Greece at this time.\nSagacity.\nThales is recognized as one of the Seven Sages of Greece, semi-legendary wise statesmen and founding figures of Ancient Greece. While which seven one chooses may change, the seven has a canonical four which includes Thales, Solon of Athens, Pittacus of Mytilene, and Bias of Priene. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius tells us that the Seven Sages were created in the archonship of Damasius at Athens about 582\u00a0BC and that Thales was the first sage.\nThe sages were associated with the Delphic maxims, a quote or maxim attributed to each one inscribed on the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. Thales has arguably the most famous of all, \"gnothi seauton\" or know thyself. According to the 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia the \"Suda\", the proverb is both \"applied to those whose boasts exceed what they are\" and \"a warning to pay no attention to the opinion of the multitude.\"\nGolden tripod.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius relates several stories of an expensive, gold tripod or bowl that is to go to the most wise. In one version (that La\u00ebrtius credits to Callimachus in his \"Iambics\") Bathycles of Arcadia states in his will that an expensive bowl \"'should be given to him who had done most good by his wisdom.' So it was given to Thales, went the round of all the sages, and came back to Thales again. And he sent it to Apollo at Didyma, with this dedication...'Thales the Milesian, son of Examyas [dedicates this] to Delphinian Apollo after twice winning the prize from all the Greeks.'\"\nDiplomacy.\nAccording to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, Thales gained fame as a counselor when he advised the Milesians not to engage in a symmachia, a \"fighting together\", with the Lydians. This has sometimes been interpreted as an alliance.\nCroesus was defeated before the city of Sardis by Cyrus the Great, who subsequently spared Miletus because it had taken no action. Cyrus was so impressed by Croesus\u2019 wisdom and his connection with the sages that he spared him and took his advice on various matters. The Ionian cities should be demoi, or \"districts\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMiletus, however, received favorable terms from Cyrus. The others remained in an Ionian League of twelve cities (excluding Miletus), and were subjugated by the Persians.\nTheories and studies.\nEarly Greeks, and other civilizations before them, often invoked idiosyncratic explanations of natural phenomena with reference to the will of anthropomorphic gods and heroes. Instead, Thales aimed to explain natural phenomena via rational hypotheses that referenced natural processes themselves\u2014 \"Logos\" rather than \"mythos\".\nAristotle advocated the view that Thales was the first natural philosopher (\"physiologoi\"), although this position was typically not adopted among other writers, even those within Aristotle's Peripatetic school, until the view became more prominent among eighteenth-century historians. Also, while the other Seven Sages were strictly law-givers and statesmen and not speculative philosophers, Plutarch noted \"it would seem that Thales was the only wise man of the time who carried his speculations beyond the realm of the practical.\"\nWater as the \"arche\".\nThales's most famous idea was his philosophical and cosmological thesis that all is water, which comes down to us through a passage from Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\". In the work, Aristotle reported Thales's theory that the \"arche\" or originating principle of nature was a single material substance: water. Aristotle then proceeded to proffer a number of conjectures based on his own observations to lend some credence to why Thales may have advanced this idea (though Aristotle did not hold it himself).\nWhile Aristotle's conjecture on why Thales held water as the originating principle of matter is his own thinking, his statement that Thales held it as water is generally accepted as genuinely originating with Thales. Writing centuries later, Diogenes La\u00ebrtius also states that Thales taught \"Water constituted (, 'stood under') the principle of all things.\"\nAccording to Aristotle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That from which is everything that exists and from which it first becomes and into which it is rendered at last, its substance remaining under it, but transforming in qualities, that they say is the element and principle of things that are. \u2026For it is necessary that there be some nature (), either one or more than one, from which become the other things of the object being saved... [The first philosophers] do not all agree as to the number and the nature of these principles. Thales the founder of this type of philosophy says that it is water.\nAristotle further adds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe 1870 book \"Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology\" noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his dogma that water is the origin of things, that is, that it is that out of which every thing arises, and into which every thing resolves itself, Thales may have followed Orphic cosmogonies, while, unlike them, he sought to establish the truth of the assertion. Hence, Aristotle, immediately after he has called him the originator of philosophy brings forward the reasons which Thales was believed to have adduced in confirmation of that assertion; for that no written development of it, or indeed any book by Thales, was extant, is proved by the expressions which Aristotle uses when he brings forward the doctrines and proofs of the Milesian. (p. 1016)Most agree that Thales's stamp on thought is the unity of substance. Not merely the empirical claim that all is water, but the deeper philosophical claim that all is one. For example, Friedrich Nietzsche, in his \"Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks\", wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Greek philosophy seems to begin with an absurd notion, with the proposition that \"water\" is the primal origin and the womb of all things. Is it really necessary for us to take serious notice of this proposition? It is, and for three reasons. First, because it tells us something about the primal origin of all things; second, because it does so in language devoid of image or fable, and finally, because contained in it, if only embryonically, is the thought, \"all things are one.\"\nMathematics.\nThales was known for introducing the theoretical and practical use of geometry to Greece, and has been described as the first person in the Western world to apply deductive reasoning to geometry, making him the West's \"first mathematician\". He is also credited with the West's oldest definition of number: a \"collection of units\", \"following the Egyptian view\".\nThe evidence for the primacy of Thales comes to us from a book by Proclus, who lived a thousand years afterward but is believed to have had a copy of Eudemus's lost book \"History of Geometry\" (4th century BC). Proclus wrote that Thales was the first to visit Egypt and bring the Egyptian study of mathematics to Greece, and that Thales \"himself discovered many propositions and disclosed the underlying principles of many others to his successors, in some case his method being more general, in others more empirical.\" In addition to Proclus, Hieronymus of Rhodes (3rd century BC) also cites Thales as the first Greek mathematician.\nProclus attributes to Thales the discovery that a circle is bisected by its diameter, that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal and that vertical angles are equal. Two fundamental theorems of elementary geometry are customarily called \"Thales's theorem\": one of them has to do with a triangle inscribed in a circle and having the circle's diameter as one side; the other, also called the intercept theorem, is about an angle intercepted by two parallel lines, forming a pair of similar triangles.\nModern scholars are skeptical that anyone in Thales's time was producing mathematical proofs to the standard of later Greek mathematics, though not enough direct evidence remains to draw firm conclusions. While Thales may have discovered some basic geometric relations and provided some justification for them, attribution to him of formal proofs is now thought to represent speculative rationalization and reconstruction by later authors, rather than concrete accomplishments of Thales himself or his contemporaries.\nVertical angles.\nAccording to one author, while visiting Egypt, Thales observed that when the Egyptians drew two intersecting lines, they would measure the vertical angles to make sure that they were equal. Thales concluded that one could prove that all vertical angles are equal if one accepted some general notions such as: all straight angles are equal, equals added to equals are equal, and equals subtracted from equals are equal.\nRight triangle inscribed in a circle.\nPamphila says that, having learnt geometry from the Egyptians, Thales was the first to inscribe in a circle a right-angled triangle, whereupon he sacrificed an ox. This is sometimes cited as history's first mathematical discovery. Due to the variations among testimonies, such as the story of the ox sacrifice being accredited to Pythagoras upon discovery of the Pythagorean theorem rather than Thales, some historians (such as D. R. Dicks) question whether such anecdotes have any historical worth whatsoever.\nIt is believed the Babylonians knew the theorem for special cases.\nThe theorem is mentioned and proved as part of the 31st proposition in the third book of Euclid's \"Elements\". Dante's \"Paradiso\" refers to Thales's theorem in the course of a speech.\nSimilar triangles.\nThe story is told in Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, Pliny the Elder, and Plutarch, sourced from Hieronymus of Rhodes, that when Thales visited Egypt, he measured the height of the pyramids by their shadows at the moment when his own shadow was equal to his height. According to Plutarch, it pleased the pharoah Amasis. More practically, Thales was said to have the ability to measure the distances of ships at sea.\nThese stories indicate familiarity with the intercept theorem, and for this reason the 26th proposition in the first book of Euclid's Elements was attributed to Thales. They also indicate that he was familiar with the Egyptian \"seked\", or \"seqed\", the ratio of the run to the rise of a slope (cotangent). According to Kirk &amp; Raven, all you need for this feat is three straight sticks pinned at one end and knowledge of your altitude. One stick goes vertically into the ground. A second is made level. With the third you sight the ship and calculate the \"seked\" from the height of the stick and its distance from the point of insertion to the line of sight.\nAstronomy.\nThales was also a noted astronomer, acknowledged in antiquity for describing the position of Ursa Minor, and he thought the constellation might be useful as a guide for navigation at sea. He calculated the duration of the year and the timings of the equinoxes and solstices. He is additionally attributed with calculating the position of the Pleiades.\nPlutarch indicates that in his day (c. AD 100) there was an extant work, the \"Astronomy\", composed in verse and attributed to Thales. While some say he left no writings, others say that he wrote \"On the Solstice\" and \"On the Equinox\". The \"Nautical Star-guide\" has also been attributed to him, but this was disputed even in ancient times. No writing attributed to him has survived. Lobon of Argus asserted that the writings of Thales amounted to two hundred lines.\nCosmological model.\nThales thought the Earth must be a flat disk or mound of land and dirt which is floating in an expanse of water. Heraclitus Homericus states that Thales drew his conclusion from seeing moist substance turn into air, slime and earth. It seems likely that Thales viewed the land as coming from the water on which it floated and the oceans that surround it, perhaps inspired by observing silt deposits.\nHe thought the stars were balls of earth on fire. He seemed to correctly gather that the moon reflects the Sun's light. A crater on the Moon is named in his honor.\nMeteorology.\nRather than assuming that earthquakes were the result of supernatural whims, Thales explained them by theorizing that the Earth floats on water and that earthquakes occur when the Earth is rocked by waves. He is attributed with the first observation of the Hyades, supposed by the ancients to indicate the approach of rain when they rose with the Sun. According to Seneca, Thales explained the flooding of the Nile as due to the river being beaten back by the etesian wind.\nOlive presses.\nA story, with different versions, recounts how Thales achieved riches from an olive harvest by prediction of the weather. In one version, he bought all the in Miletus after predicting the weather and a good harvest for a particular year. Another version of the story has Aristotle explain that Thales had reserved presses in advance, at a discount, and could rent them out at a high price when demand peaked, following his prediction of a particularly good harvest. This first version of the story would constitute the first historically known creation and use of futures, whereas the second version would be the first historically known creation and use of options.\nAristotle explains that Thales's objective in doing this was not to enrich himself but to prove to his fellow Milesians that philosophy could be useful, contrary to what they thought, or alternatively, Thales had made his foray into enterprise because of a personal challenge put to him by an individual who had asked why, if Thales was an intelligent famous philosopher, he had yet to attain wealth.\nPrediction of solar eclipse.\nAs mentioned above, according to Herodotus, Thales predicted a solar eclipse which occurred during a battle between the Lydians and the Medes. Among eclipses of the era, only the eclipse of 28 May 585 BC reached totality in Anatolia where the war took place. American writer Isaac Asimov described this battle as the earliest historical event whose date is known with precision to the day, and called the prediction \"the birth of science\".\nHerodotus writes that in the sixth year of the war, the Lydians under King Alyattes and the Medes under Cyaxares were engaged in an indecisive battle when suddenly day turned into night, leading to both parties halting the fighting and negotiating a peace agreement. Herodotus also mentions that the loss of daylight had been predicted by Thales. He does not, however, mention the location of the battle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, based on the list of Median kings and the duration of their reign reported elsewhere by Herodotus, Cyaxares died 10 years before the eclipse.\nD. R. Dicks joins other historians (F. Martini, J. L. E. Dreyer, O. Neugebauer) in rejecting the historicity of the eclipse story. Dicks links the story of Thales discovering the cause for a solar eclipse with Herodotus' claim that Thales discovered the cycle of the sun with relation to the solstices, and concludes \"he could not possibly have possessed this knowledge which neither the Egyptians nor the Babylonians nor his immediate successors possessed.\" Thomas Worthen instead proposes that the battle could have been the same \"night engagement\" mentioned, disrupted by a predicted lunar eclipse.\nFalling into a well.\nPlato, Diogenes Laertius, and Hippolytus all relay the story\u00a0that Thales was so intent upon watching the stars that he failed to watch where he was walking, and fell into a well.\n\"Thales was studying the stars and gazing into the sky, when he fell into a well, and a jolly and witty Thracian servant girl made fun of him, saying that he was crazy to know about what was up in the heavens while he could not see what was in front of him beneath his feet.\"\nEngineering.\nIn addition to astronomy, Thales involved himself in other practical applications of mathematics, including engineering. Another story by Herodotus is that Croesus sent his army to the Persian territory. He was stopped by the river Halys, then unbridged. Thales then got the army across the river by digging a diversion upstream so as to reduce the flow, making it possible to cross the river. While Herodotus reported that most of his fellow Greeks believe that Thales did divert the river Halys to assist King Croesus' military endeavors, he himself finds it doubtful. Plato praises Thales along with Anacharsis, who is credited as the originator of the potter's wheel and the anchor.\nDivinity.\nAccording to Aristotle, Thales thought \"all things are full of gods\", i. e. lodestones had souls, because iron is attracted to them (by the force of magnetism). The same applied to amber for its capacity to generate static electricity. The reasoning for such hylozoism or organicism seems to be if something moved, then it was alive, and if it was alive, then it must have a soul.\nAs well as gods seen in the movement caused by what came to be known as magnetism and electricity, it seems Thales also had a supreme God which structured the universe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \"Thales\", says Cicero, \"assures that \"water\" is the principle of all things; and that God is that Mind which shaped and created all things from water.\"\nAccording to Henry Fielding (1775), Diogenes La\u00ebrtius (1.35) affirmed that Thales posed \"the independent pre-existence of God from all eternity, stating \"that God was the oldest of all beings, for he existed without a previous cause even in the way of generation; that the world was the most beautiful of all things; for it was created by God.\"\nNicholas Molinari has recently argued that Thales was influenced by the archaic water deity Acheloios, who was equated with water and worshipped in Miletus during Thales's life. For evidence, he points to the fact that \"hydor\" meant specifically \"fresh water\", and also that Acheloios was seen as a shape-shifter in myth and art, so able to become anything. He also points out that the rivers of the world were seen as the \"sinews of Acheloios\" in antiquity, and this multiplicity of deities is reflected in Thales's idea that \"all things are full of gods.\"\nDeath and legacy.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius quotes Apollodorus as saying that Thales died at the age of 78 during the 58th Olympiad (548\u2013545\u00a0BC) and attributes his death to heat stroke and thirst while watching the games.\nInfluence.\nThales had a profound influence on other Greek thinkers and therefore on Western history. However, due to the scarcity of sources concerning Thales and the discrepancies between the accounts given in the sources that have survived, there is a scholarly debate over the extent of the influence Thales had and on which of the Greek philosophers and mathematicians that came after him.\nThe first three philosophers in the Western tradition were all cosmologists from Miletus, and Thales was the very first, followed by Anaximander, who was followed in turn by Anaximenes. They have been dubbed the Milesian school. According to the \"Suda\", Thales had been the \"teacher and kinsman\" of Anaximander. Rather than water, Anaximander held all was made of \"apeiron\" or the unlimited; while Anaximenes, the successor of Anaximander, perhaps more like Thales with water, held that everything was composed of air.\nJohn Burnet (1892) noted\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lastly, we have one admitted instance of a philosophic guild, that of the Pythagoreans. And it will be found that the hypothesis, if it is to be called by that name, of a regular organisation of scientific activity will alone explain all the facts. The development of doctrine in the hands of Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes, for instance, can only be understood as the elaboration of a single idea in a school with a continuous tradition.\nAs two of the first Greek mathematicians, Thales is also considered an influence on Pythagoras. According to Iamblichus, Pythagoras \"had benefited by the instruction of Thales in many respects, but his greatest lesson had been to learn the value of saving time.\" Early sources report that Pythagoras, in this story a pupil of Anaximander, visited Thales as a young man, and that Thales advised him to travel to Egypt to further his philosophical and mathematical studies.\nThales was also considered the teacher of the astronomer Mandrolytus of Priene. It is possible he was also the teacher of Cleostratus of Tenedos.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30075", "revid": "13518729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30075", "title": "Tiger", "text": "Species of large cat\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe tiger (Panthera tigris) is a large cat and a member of the genus \"Panthera\" native to Asia. It has a powerful, muscular body with a large head and paws, a long tail and orange fur with black, mostly vertical stripes. It is traditionally classified into nine recent subspecies, though some recognise only two subspecies, mainland Asian tigers and the island tigers of the Sunda Islands.\nThroughout the tiger's range, it inhabits mainly forests, from coniferous and temperate broadleaf and mixed forests in the Russian Far East and Northeast China to tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests on the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia. The tiger is an apex predator and preys mainly on ungulates, which it takes by ambush. It lives a mostly solitary life and occupies home ranges, defending these from individuals of the same sex. The range of a male tiger overlaps with that of multiple females with whom he mates. Females give birth to usually two or three cubs that stay with their mother for about two years. When becoming independent, they leave their mother's home range and establish their own.\nSince the early 20th century, tiger populations have lost at least 93% of their historic range and are locally extinct in West and Central Asia, in large areas of China and on the islands of Java and Bali. Today, the tiger's range is severely fragmented. It is listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, as its range is thought to have declined by 53% to 68% since the late 1990s. Major threats to tigers are habitat destruction and fragmentation due to deforestation, poaching for fur and the illegal trade of body parts for medicinal purposes. Tigers are also victims of human\u2013wildlife conflict as they attack and prey on livestock in areas where natural prey is scarce. The tiger is legally protected in all range countries. National conservation measures consist of action plans, anti-poaching patrols and schemes for monitoring tiger populations. In several range countries, wildlife corridors have been established and tiger reintroduction is planned.\nThe tiger is among the most popular of the world's charismatic megafauna. It has been kept in captivity since ancient times and has been trained to perform in circuses and other entertainment shows. The tiger featured prominently in the ancient mythology and folklore of cultures throughout its historic range and has continued to appear in culture worldwide.\nEtymology.\nThe Old English \"tigras\" derives from Old French , from Latin , which was a borrowing from ().\nSince ancient times, the word has been suggested to originate from the Armenian or Persian word for 'arrow', which may also be the origin of the name for the river Tigris. However, today, the names are thought to be homonyms, and the connection between the tiger and the river is doubted.\nTaxonomy.\nIn 1758, Carl Linnaeus described the tiger in his work \"Systema Naturae\" and gave it the scientific name \"Felis tigris\", as the genus \"Felis\" was being used for all cats at the time. His scientific description was based on descriptions by earlier naturalists such as Conrad Gessner and Ulisse Aldrovandi. In 1929, Reginald Innes Pocock placed the species in the genus \"Panthera\" using the scientific name \"Panthera tigris\".\nSubspecies.\nNine recent tiger subspecies have been proposed between the early 19th and early 21st centuries, namely the Bengal, Malayan, Indochinese, South China, Siberian, Caspian, Javan, Bali and Sumatran tigers. The validity of several tiger subspecies was questioned in 1999 as most putative subspecies were distinguished on the basis of fur length and colouration, striping patterns and body size of specimens in natural history museum collections that are not necessarily representative for the entire population. It was proposed to recognise only two tiger subspecies as valid, namely \"P. t. tigris\" in mainland Asia and the smaller \"P. t. sondaica\" in the Greater Sunda Islands.\nThis two-subspecies proposal was reaffirmed in 2015 through a comprehensive analysis of morphological, ecological and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) traits of all putative tiger subspecies.\nIn 2017, the Cat Classification Task Force of the IUCN Cat Specialist Group revised felid taxonomy in accordance with the 2015 two-subspecies proposal and recognised only \"P. t. tigris\" and \"P. t. sondaica\". Results of a 2018 whole-genome sequencing study of 32 samples from the six living putative subspecies\u2014the Bengal, Malayan, Indochinese, South China, Siberian and Sumatran tiger\u2014found them to be distinct and separate clades. These results were corroborated in 2021 and 2023. A 2023 study found validity for all nine recent subspecies. The Cat Specialist Group states that \"Given the varied interpretations of data, the [subspecific] taxonomy of this species is currently under review by the IUCN SSC Cat Specialist Group.\"\nThe following tables are based on the classification of the tiger as of 2005, and also reflect the classification recognised by the Cat Classification Task Force in 2017.\nEvolution.\nThe tiger shares the genus \"Panthera\" with the lion, leopard, jaguar and snow leopard. Results of genetic analyses indicate that the tiger and snow leopard are sister species whose lineages split from each other between 2.70 and 3.70 million years ago. The tiger's whole genome sequencing shows repeated sequences that parallel those in other cat genomes.\nThe fossil species \"Panthera palaeosinensis\" of early Pleistocene northern China was described as a possible tiger ancestor when it was discovered in 1924, but modern cladistics places it as basal to modern \"Panthera\". \"Panthera zdanskyi\" lived around the same time and place, and was suggested to be a sister species of the modern tiger when it was examined in 2014. However, as of 2023, at least two subsequent studies considered \"P. zdanskyi\" likely to be a synonym of \"P. palaeosinensis\", noting that its proposed differences from that species fell within the range of individual variation. The earliest appearance of the modern tiger species in the fossil record are jaw fragments from Lantion in China that are dated to the early Pleistocene.\nMiddle- to late-Pleistocene tiger fossils have been found throughout China, Sumatra and Java. Prehistoric subspecies include \"Panthera tigris trinilensis\" and \"P. t. soloensis\" of Java and Sumatra and \"P. t. acutidens\" of China; late Pleistocene and early Holocene fossils of tigers have also been found in Borneo and Palawan, Philippines. Fossil specimens of tigers have also been reported from the Middle-Late Pleistocene of Japan. Results of a phylogeographic study indicate that all living tigers have a common ancestor that lived between 108,000 and 72,000 years ago. Genetic studies suggest that the tiger population contracted around 115,000 years ago due to glaciation. Modern tiger populations originated from a refugium in Indochina and spread across Asia after the Last Glacial Maximum. As they colonised northeastern China, the ancestors of the South China tiger intermixed with a relict tiger population.\nHybrids.\nTigers can interbreed with other \"Panthera\" cats and have done so in captivity. The liger is the offspring of a female tiger and a male lion and the tigon the offspring of a male tiger and a female lion. The lion sire passes on a growth-promoting gene, but the corresponding growth-inhibiting gene from the female tiger is absent, so that ligers grow far larger than either parent species. By contrast, the male tiger does not pass on a growth-promoting gene while the lioness passes on a growth inhibiting gene; hence, tigons are around the same size as their parents. Since they often develop life-threatening birth defects and can easily become obese, breeding these hybrids is regarded as unethical.\nDescription.\nThe tiger has a typical felid morphology, with a muscular body, shortened legs, strong forelimbs with wide front paws, a large head and a tail that is about half the length of the rest of its body. It has five digits, including a dewclaw, on the front feet and four on the back, all of which have retractile claws that are compact and curved, and can reach long. The ears are rounded and the eyes have a round pupil. The snout ends in a triangular, pink tip with small black dots, the number of which increase with age. The tiger's skull is robust, with a constricted front region, proportionally small, elliptical orbits, long nasal bones and a lengthened cranium with a large sagittal crest. It resembles a lion's skull, but differs from it in the concave or flattened underside of the lower jaw and in its longer nasals. The tiger has 30 fairly robust teeth and its somewhat curved canines are the longest in the cat family at .\nThe tiger has a head-body length of with a tail and stands at the shoulder. The Siberian and Bengal tigers are the largest. Male Bengal tigers weigh , and females weigh ; island tigers are the smallest, likely due to insular dwarfism. Male Sumatran tigers weigh , and females weigh . The tiger is popularly thought to be the largest living felid species; but since tigers of the different subspecies and populations vary greatly in size and weight, the tiger's average size may be less than the lion's, while the largest tigers are bigger than their lion counterparts.\nCoat.\nThe tiger's coat usually has short hairs, reaching up to , though the hairs of the northern-living Siberian tiger can reach . Belly hairs tend to be longer than back hairs. The density of their fur is usually thin, though the Siberian tiger develops a particularly thick winter coat. The tiger has lines of fur around the face and long whiskers, especially in males. It has an orange colouration that varies from yellowish to reddish. White fur covers the underside, from head to tail, along with the inner surface of the legs and parts of the face. On the back of the ears, it has a prominent white spot, which is surrounded by black. The tiger is marked with distinctive black or dark brown stripes, which are uniquely patterned in each individual. The stripes are mostly vertical, but those on the limbs and forehead are horizontal. They are more concentrated towards the backside and those on the trunk may reach under the belly. The tips of stripes are generally sharp and some may split up or split and fuse again. Tail stripes are thick bands and a black tip marks the end.\nThe tiger is one of only a few striped cat species. Stripes are advantageous for camouflage in vegetation with vertical patterns of light and shade, such as trees, reeds and tall grass. This is supported by a Fourier analysis study showing that the striping patterns line up with their environment.\nThe orange colour may also aid in concealment, as the tiger's prey is colour blind and possibly perceives the tiger as green and blended in with the vegetation.\nColour variations.\nThe three colour variants of Bengal tigers \u2013 nearly stripeless snow-white, white and golden \u2013 are now virtually non-existent in the wild due to the reduction of wild tiger populations but continue in captive populations. The white tiger has a white background colour with sepia-brown stripes. The golden tiger is pale golden with reddish-brown stripes. The snow-white tiger is a morph with extremely faint stripes and a pale sepia-brown ringed tail. White and golden morphs are the result of an autosomal recessive trait with a white locus and a wideband locus, respectively. The snow-white variation is caused by polygenes with both white and wideband loci. The breeding of white tigers is controversial, as they have no use for conservation. Only 0.001% of wild tigers have the genes for this colour morph and the overrepresentation of white tigers in captivity is the result of inbreeding. Hence, their continued breeding will risk both inbreeding depression and loss of genetic variability in captive tigers.\nPseudo-melanistic tigers with thick, merged stripes have been recorded in Simlipal National Park and three Indian zoos; a population genetic analysis of Indian tiger samples revealed that this phenotype is caused by a mutation of a transmembrane aminopeptidase gene. Around 37% of the Simlipal tiger population has this feature, which has been linked to genetic isolation.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe tiger historically ranged from eastern Turkey, northern Iran and Afghanistan to Central Asia and from northern Pakistan through the Indian subcontinent and Indochina to southeastern Siberia, Sumatra, Java and Bali. As of 2022, it inhabits less than 7% of its historical distribution and has a scattered range in the Indian subcontinent, the Indochinese Peninsula, Sumatra, northeastern China and the Russian Far East. As of 2020, India had the largest extent of global tiger habitat with , followed by Russia with .\nThe tiger mainly lives in forest habitats and is highly adaptable. Records in Central Asia indicate that it primarily inhabited Tugay riverine forests and hilly and lowland forests in the Caucasus. In the Amur-Ussuri region of Russia and China, it inhabits Korean pine and temperate broadleaf and mixed forests; riparian forests serve as dispersal corridors, providing food and water for both tigers and ungulates. On the Indian subcontinent, it inhabits mainly tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests, temperate broadleaf and mixed forests, tropical moist evergreen forests, tropical dry forests, alluvial plains and the mangrove forests of the Sundarbans. In the Eastern Himalayas, it was documented in temperate forest up to an elevation of in Bhutan, of in the Mishmi Hills and of in M\u00eadog County, southeastern Tibet. In Thailand, it lives in deciduous and evergreen forests. In Sumatra, it inhabits lowland peat swamp forests and rugged montane forests.\nPopulation density.\nCamera trapping during 2010\u20132015 in the deciduous and subtropical pine forest of Jim Corbett National Park, northern India revealed a stable tiger population density of 12\u201317 individuals per in an area of .\nIn northern Myanmar, the population density in a sampled area of roughly in a mosaic of tropical broadleaf forest and grassland was estimated to be 0.21\u20130.44 tigers per as of 2009.\nPopulation density in mixed deciduous and semi-evergreen forests of Thailand's Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary was estimated at 2.01 tigers per ; during the 1970s and 1980s, logging and poaching had occurred in the adjacent Mae Wong and Khlong Lan National Parks, where population density was much lower, estimated at only 0.359 tigers per as of 2016.\nPopulation density in dipterocarp and montane forests in northern Malaysia was estimated at 1.47\u20132.43 adult tigers per in Royal Belum State Park, but 0.3\u20130.92 adult tigers per in the unprotected selectively logged Temengor Forest Reserve.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nCamera trap data show that tigers in Chitwan National Park avoided locations frequented by people and were more active at night than during day.\nIn Sundarbans National Park, six radio-collared tigers were most active from dawn to early morning and reached their zenith around 7:00 o'clock in the morning.\nA three-year-long camera trap survey in Shuklaphanta National Park revealed that tigers were most active from dusk until midnight.\nIn northeastern China, tigers were crepuscular and active at night with activity peaking at dawn and dusk; they were largely active at the same time as their prey.\nThe tiger is a powerful swimmer and easily transverses rivers as wide as ; it immerses in water, particularly on hot days. In general, it is less capable of climbing trees than many other cats due to its size, but cubs under 16 months old may routinely do so. An adult was recorded climbing up a smooth pipal tree.\nSocial spacing.\nAdult tigers lead largely solitary lives within home ranges or territories, the size of which mainly depends on prey abundance, geographic area and sex of the individual. Males and females defend their home ranges from those of the same sex and the home range of a male encompasses that of multiple females. Two females in the Sundarbans had home ranges of .\nIn Panna Tiger Reserve, the home ranges of five reintroduced females varied from in winter to in summer and to during the monsoon; three males had large home ranges in winter, in summer and during monsoon seasons.\nIn Sikhote-Alin Biosphere Reserve, 14 females had home ranges and five resident males of that overlapped with those of up to five females. When tigresses in the same reserve had cubs of up to four months of age, they reduced their home ranges to stay near their young and steadily enlarged them until their offspring were 13\u201318 months old.\n Bengal tigers spraying urine (above) and rubbing against a tree to mark territory\nThe tiger is a long-ranging species and individuals disperse over distances of up to to reach tiger populations in other areas. Young tigresses establish their first home ranges close to their mothers' while males migrate further than their female counterparts. Four radio-collared females in Chitwan dispersed between and 10 males between . A subadult male lives as a transient in another male's home range until he is older and strong enough to challenge the resident male. Tigers mark their home ranges by spraying urine on vegetation and rocks, clawing or scent rubbing trees and marking trails with faeces, anal gland secretions and ground scrapings. Scent markings also allow an individual to pick up information on another's identity. Unclaimed home ranges, particularly those that belonged to a deceased individual, can be taken over in days or weeks.\nMale tigers are generally less tolerant of other males within their home ranges than females are of other females. Disputes are usually solved by intimidation rather than fighting. Once dominance has been established, a male may tolerate a subordinate within his range, as long as they do not come near him. The most serious disputes tend to occur between two males competing for a female in oestrus. Though tigers mostly live alone, relationships between individuals can be complex. Tigers are particularly social at kills and a male tiger will sometimes share a carcass with the females and cubs within this home range and unlike male lions, will allow them to feed on the kill before he is finished with it. However, a female is more tense when encountering another female at a kill.\nCommunication.\nDuring friendly encounters and bonding, tigers rub against each other's bodies. Facial expressions include the \"defence threat\", which involves a wrinkled face, bared teeth, pulled-back ears and widened pupils. Both males and females show a flehmen response, a characteristic curled-lip grimace, when smelling urine markings. Males also use the flehmen to detect the markings made by tigresses in oestrus. Tigers will move their ears around to display the white spots, particularly during aggressive encounters and between mothers and cubs. They also use their tails to signal their mood. To show cordiality, the tail sticks up and sways slowly, while an apprehensive tiger lowers its tail or wags it side-to-side. When calm, the tail hangs low.\nTigers are normally silent but can produce numerous vocalisations. They roar to signal their presence to other individuals over long distances. This vocalisation is forced through an open mouth as it closes and can be heard away. They roar multiple times in a row and others respond in kind. Tigers also roar during mating and a mother will roar to call her cubs to her. When tense, tigers moan, a sound similar to a roar but softer and made when the mouth is at least partially closed. Moaning can be heard away. Aggressive encounters involve growling, snarling and hissing. An explosive \"coughing roar\" or \"coughing snarl\" is emitted through an open mouth and exposed teeth. In friendlier situations, tigers prusten, a soft, low-frequency snorting sound similar to purring in smaller cats. Tiger mothers communicate with their cubs by grunting, while cubs call back with miaows. When startled, they \"woof\". They produce a deer-like \"pok\" sound for unknown reasons, but most often at kills.\nHunting and diet.\nThe tiger is a carnivore and an apex predator. Abundance and body weight of prey species are assumed to be the main criteria for the tiger's prey selection, both inside and outside protected areas. It feeds mainly on large and medium-sized ungulates such as sambar deer, Manchurian wapiti, barasingha, gaur and wild boar. It also preys opportunistically on smaller species like monkeys, peafowl and other ground-based birds, porcupines and fish. Occasional attacks on Asian elephants and Indian rhinoceroses have also been reported.\nMore often, tigers take the more vulnerable calves.\nThey sometimes prey on livestock and dogs in close proximity to settlements. Tigers occasionally consume vegetation, fruit and minerals for dietary fibre and supplements.\nTigers learn to hunt from their mothers, though the ability to hunt may be partially inborn. Depending on the size of the prey, they typically kill weekly though mothers must kill more often. Families hunt together when cubs are old enough. They search for prey using vision and hearing. A tiger will also wait at a watering hole for prey to come by, particularly during hot summer days. It is an ambush predator and when approaching potential prey, it crouches with the head lowered and hides in foliage. It switches between creeping forward and staying still. A tiger may even doze off and can stay in the same spot for as long as a day, waiting for prey and launch an attack when the prey is close enough, usually within . If the prey spots it before then, the cat does not pursue further. A tiger can sprint and leap ; it is not a long-distance runner and gives up a chase if prey outpaces it over a certain distance.\nThe tiger attacks from behind or at the sides and tries to knock the target off balance. It latches onto prey with its forelimbs, twisting and turning during the struggle and tries to pull it to the ground. The tiger generally applies a bite to the throat until its victim dies of strangulation. It has an average bite force at the canine tips of 1234.3 newtons. Holding onto the throat puts the cat out of reach of horns, antlers, tusks and hooves. Tigers are adaptable killers and may use other methods, including ripping the throat or breaking the neck. Large prey may be disabled by a bite to the back of the hock, severing the tendon. Swipes from the large paws are capable of stunning or breaking the skull of a water buffalo. They kill small prey with a bite to the back of the neck or head. Estimates of the success rate for hunting tigers range from a low of 5% to a high of 50%. They are sometimes killed or injured by large or dangerous prey like gaur, buffalo and boar.\nTigers typically move kills to a private, usually vegetated spot no further than , though they have been recorded dragging them . They are strong enough to drag the carcass of a fully grown buffalo for some distance. They rest for a while before eating and can consume as much as of meat in one session, but feed on a carcass for several days, leaving little for scavengers.\nCompetitors.\nIn much of their range, tigers share habitat with leopards and dholes. They typically dominate both of them, though with dholes it depends on their pack size. Interactions between the three predators involve chasing, stealing kills and direct killing. Large dhole packs may kill tigers. Tigers, leopards and dholes coexist by hunting different sized prey. In Nagarhole National Park, the average weight for tiger kills was found to be , compared to for leopards and for dholes. In Kui Buri National Park, following a reduction in prey numbers, tigers continued to kill favoured prey while leopards and dholes increased their consumption of small prey.\nBoth leopards and dholes can live successfully in tiger habitat when there is abundant food and vegetation cover. Otherwise, they appear to be less common where tigers are numerous. The recovery of the tiger population in Rajaji National Park during the 2000s led to a reduction in leopard population densities. Similarly, at two sites in central India the size of dhole packs was negatively correlated with tiger densities. Leopard and dhole distribution in Kui Buri correlated with both prey access and tiger scarcity. In Jigme Dorji National Park, tigers were found to inhabit the deeper parts of forests while the smaller predators were pushed closer to the fringes.\nReproduction and life cycle.\nThe tiger generally mates all year round, particularly between November and April. A tigress is in oestrus for three to six days at a time, separated by three to nine week intervals. A resident male mates with all the females within his home range, who signal their receptiveness by roaring and marking. Younger, transient males are also attracted, leading to a fight in which the more dominant, resident male drives the usurper off. During courtship, the male is cautious with the female until she shows readiness to mate by positioning herself in lordosis with her tail to the side. Copulation typically lasts no more than 20 seconds, with the male biting the female by the scruff of her neck. After it is finished, the male quickly pulls away as the female may turn and slap him. Tiger pairs may stay together for up to four days and mate multiple times. Gestation lasts around or over three months.\nA tigress gives birth in a secluded location, be it in dense vegetation, in a cave or under a rocky shelter. Litters consist of as many as seven cubs, but two or three are more typical. Newborn cubs weigh and are blind and altricial. The mother licks and cleans her cubs, suckles them and viciously defends them from any potential threat. Cubs open their eyes at the age of three to 14 days and their vision becomes clear after a few more weeks. They can leave the denning site after two months and around the same time they start eating meat. The mother only leaves them alone to hunt and even then she does not travel far. When she suspects an area is no longer safe, she moves her cubs to a new spot, transporting them one by one by grabbing them by the scruff of the neck with her mouth.\nA tigress in Sikhote-Alin Biosphere Reserve maximised the time spent with her cubs by reducing her home range, killing larger prey and returning to her den more rapidly than without cubs; when the cubs started to eat meat, she took them to kill sites, thereby optimising their protection and access to food.\nIn the same reserve, one of 21 cubs died in over eight years of monitoring and mortality did not differ between male and female juveniles.\nTiger monitoring over six years in Ranthambore Tiger Reserve indicated an average annual survival rate of around 85 percent for 74 male and female cubs; survival rate increased to 97 percent for both males and female juveniles of one to two years of age.\nCauses of cub mortality include predators, floods, fires, death of the mother and fatal injuries.\nAfter around two months, the cubs are able to follow their mother. They still hide in vegetation when she goes hunting. Young bond through play fighting and practice stalking. A hierarchy develops in the litter, with the biggest cub, often a male, being the most dominant and the first to eat its fill at a kill. Around the age of six months, cubs are fully weaned and have more freedom to explore their environment. Between eight and ten months, they accompany their mother on hunts. A cub can make a kill as early as 11 months and reach independence as a juvenile of 18 to 24 months of age; males become independent earlier than females. Radio-collared tigers in Chitwan started leaving their natal areas at the age of 19 months. Young females are sexually mature at three to four years, whereas males are at four to five years. Generation length of the tiger is about 7\u201310 years.\nWild Bengal tigers live 12\u201315 years. Data from the International Tiger Studbook 1938\u20132018 indicate that captive tigers lived up to 19 years.\nThe father does not play a role in raising the young, but he encounters and interacts with them. The resident male appears to visit the female\u2013cub families within his home range. They socialise and even share kills. One male was recorded looking after cubs whose mother had died. By defending his home range, the male protects the females and cubs from other males. When a new male takes over, dependent cubs are at risk of infanticide as the male attempts to sire his own young with the females. A seven-year long study in Chitwan National Park revealed that 12 of 56 detected cubs and juveniles were killed by new males taking over home ranges.\nHealth and diseases.\nTigers are recorded as hosts for various parasites including tapeworms like \"Diphyllobothrium erinacei\", \"Taenia pisiformis\" in India and nematodes like \"Toxocara\" species in India and \"Physaloptera preputialis\", \"Dirofilaria ursi\" and \"Uiteinarta\" species in Siberia. Canine distemper is known to occur in Siberian tigers. A morbillivirus infection was the likely cause of death of a tigress in the Russian Far East that was also tested positive for feline panleukopenia and feline coronavirus.\nBlood samples from 11 adult tigers in Nepal showed antibodies for canine parvovirus-2, feline herpesvirus, feline coronavirus, leptospirosis and \"Toxoplasma gondii\".\nThreats.\nThe tiger has been listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List since 1986 and the global tiger population is thought to have continuously declined from an estimated population of 5,000\u20138,262 tigers in the late 1990s to 3,726\u20135,578 individuals estimated as of 2022. During 2001\u20132020, landscapes where tigers live declined from to . Habitat destruction, habitat fragmentation and poaching for fur and body parts are the major threats that contributed to the decrease of tiger populations in all range countries.\nProtected areas in central India are highly fragmented due to linear infrastructure like roads, railway lines, transmission lines, irrigation channels and mining activities in their vicinity.\nIn the Tanintharyi Region of southern Myanmar, deforestation coupled with mining activities and high hunting pressure threatens the tiger population.\nIn Thailand, nine of 15 protected areas hosting tigers are isolated and fragmented, offering a low probability for dispersal between them; four of these have not harboured tigers since about 2013.\nIn Peninsular Malaysia, of tiger habitat was cleared during 1988\u20132012, most of it for industrial plantations.\nLarge-scale land acquisitions of about for commercial agriculture and timber extraction in Cambodia contributed to the fragmentation of potential tiger habitat, especially in the Eastern Plains.\nInbreeding depression coupled with habitat destruction, insufficient prey resources and poaching is a threat to the small and isolated tiger population in the Changbai Mountains along the China\u2013Russia border.\nIn China, tigers became the target of large-scale 'anti-pest' campaigns in the early 1950s, where suitable habitats were fragmented following deforestation and resettlement of people to rural areas, who hunted tigers and prey species. Though tiger hunting was prohibited in 1977, the population continued to decline and is considered extinct in South China since 2001.\nTiger populations in India have been targeted by poachers since the 1990s and were extirpated in two tiger reserves in 2005 and 2009.\nBetween March 2017 and January 2020, 630 activities of hunters using snares, drift nets, hunting platforms and hunting dogs were discovered in a reserve forest of about in southern Myanmar. Nam Et-Phou Louey National Park was considered the last important site for the tiger in Laos, but it has not been recorded there at least since 2013; this population likely fell victim to indiscriminate snaring. Anti-poaching units in Sumatra's Kerinci Seblat landscape removed 362 tiger snare traps and seized 91 tiger skins during 2005\u20132016; annual poaching rates increased with rising skin prices.\nPoaching is also the main threat to the tiger population in far eastern Russia, where logging roads facilitate access for poachers and people harvesting forest products that are important for prey species to survive in winter.\nBody parts of 207 tigers were detected during 21 surveys in 1991\u20132014 in two wildlife markets in Myanmar catering to customers in Thailand and China.\nDuring the years 2000\u20132022, at least 3,377 tigers were confiscated in 2,205 seizures in 28 countries; seizures encompassed 665 live and 654 dead individuals, 1,313 whole tiger skins, 16,214 body parts like bones, teeth, paws, claws, whiskers and of meat; 759 seizures in India encompassed body parts of 893 tigers; and 403 seizures in Thailand involved mostly captive-bred tigers. Seizures in Nepal between January 2011 and December 2015 obtained 585 pieces of tiger body parts and two whole carcasses in 19 districts. Seizure data from India during 2001\u20132021 indicate that tiger skins were the most often traded body parts, followed by claws, bones and teeth; trafficking routes mainly passed through the states of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Assam.\nA total of 292 illegal tiger parts were confiscated at US ports of entry from personal baggage, air cargo and mail between 2003 and 2012.\nDemand for tiger parts for use in traditional Chinese medicine has also been cited as a major threat to tiger populations.\nInterviews with local people in the Bangladeshi Sundarbans revealed that they kill tigers for local consumption and trade of skins, bones and meat, in retaliation for attacks by tigers and for excitement.\nTiger body parts like skins, bones, teeth and hair are consumed locally by wealthy Bangladeshis and are illegally trafficked from Bangladesh to 15 countries including India, China, Malaysia, Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Japan and the United Kingdom via land borders, airports and seaports.\nTiger bone glue is the prevailing tiger product purchased for medicinal purposes in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. \"Tiger farm\" facilities in China and Southeast Asia breed tigers for their parts, but these appear to make the threat to wild populations worse by increasing the demand for tiger products.\nLocal people killing tigers in retaliation for attacking and preying on livestock is a threat in several tiger range countries, as this consequence of human\u2013wildlife conflict also contributes to the decline of the population.\nConservation.\nInternationally, the tiger is protected under CITES Appendix I, banning trade of live tigers and their body parts.\nIn Russia, hunting the tiger has been banned since 1952.\nIn Bhutan, it has been protected since 1969 and enlisted as totally protected since 1995. Since 1972, it has been afforded the highest protection level under India's Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.\nIn Nepal and Bangladesh, it has been protected since 1973.\nSince 1976, it has been totally protected under Malaysia's Protection of Wild Life Act, and the country's Wildlife Conservation Act enacted in 2010 increased punishments for wildlife-related crimes.\nIn Indonesia, it has been protected since 1990.\nIn China, the trade in tiger body parts was banned in 1993.\nThe Thai Wildlife Preservation and Protection Act was enacted in 2019 to combat poaching and trading of body parts.\nIn 1973, the National Tiger Conservation Authority and Project Tiger were founded in India to gain public support for tiger conservation. Since then, 53 tiger reserves covering an area of have been established in the country up to 2022. These efforts contributed to the recovery of India's tiger population between 2006 and 2018 so that it occurs in an area of about .\nMyanmar's national tiger conservation strategy developed in 2003 comprises management tasks such as restoration of degraded habitats, increasing the extent of protected areas and wildlife corridors, protecting tiger prey species, thwarting tiger killing and illegal trade of its body parts and promoting public awareness through wildlife education programmes.\nBhutan's first Tiger Action Plan implemented during 2006\u20132015 revolved around habitat conservation, human\u2013wildlife conflict management, education and awareness; the second Action Plan aimed at increasing the country's tiger population by 20% until 2023 compared to 2015.\nIn 2009, the Bangladesh Tiger Action Plan was initiated to stabilise the country's tiger population, maintain habitat and a sufficient prey base, improve law enforcement and foster cooperation between governmental agencies responsible for tiger conservation.\nThe Thailand Tiger Action Plan ratified in 2010 envisioned increasing the country's tiger populations by 50% in the Western Forest Complex and Dong Phayayen\u2013Khao Yai Forest Complex and reestablish populations in three potential landscapes until 2022.\nThe Indonesian National Tiger Recovery Program ratified in 2010 aimed at increasing the Sumatran tiger population by 2022. The third strategic and action plan for the conservation of the Sumatran tiger for the years 2020\u20132030 revolves around strengthening management of small tiger population units of less than 20 mature individuals and connectivity between 13 forest patches in North Sumatra and West Sumatra provinces.\nIncreases in anti-poaching patrol efforts in four Russian protected areas during 2011\u20132014 contributed to reducing poaching, stabilising the tiger population and improving protection of ungulate populations. Poaching and trafficking were declared to be moderate and serious crimes in 2019.\nAnti-poaching operations were also established in Nepal in 2010, with increased cooperation and intelligence sharing between agencies. These policies have led to many years of \"zero poaching\" and the country's tiger population has doubled in a decade.\nAnti-poaching patrols in the large core area of Taman Negara lead to a decrease of poaching frequency from 34 detected incidents in 2015\u20132016 to 20 incidents during 2018\u20132019; the arrest of seven poaching teams and removal of snares facilitated the survival of three resident female tigers and at least 11 cubs.\nArmy and police officers are deployed for patrolling together with staff of protected areas in Malaysia.\nWildlife corridors are important conservation measures as they facilitate tiger populations to connect between protected areas; tigers use at least nine corridors that were established in the Terai Arc Landscape and Sivalik Hills in both Nepal and India.\nCorridors in forested areas with low human encroachment are highly suitable.\nIn West Sumatra, 12 wildlife corridors were identified as high priority for mitigating human\u2013wildlife conflicts.\nIn 2019, China and Russia signed a memorandum of understanding for transboundary cooperation between two protected areas, Northeast China Tiger and Leopard National Park and Land of the Leopard National Park, that includes the creation of wildlife corridors and bilateral monitoring and patrolling along the Sino-Russian border.\nRescued and rehabilitated problem tigers and orphaned tiger cubs have been released into the wild and monitored in India, Sumatra and Russia.\nIn Kazakhstan, habitat restoration and reintroduction of prey species in have progressed and tiger reintroduction is planned for 2025.\nReintroduction of tigers is considered possible in eastern Cambodia, once management of protected areas is improved and forest loss stabilized. South China tigers are kept and bred in Chinese zoos, with plans to reintroduce their offspring into remote protected areas. Coordinated breeding programs among zoos have led to enough genetic diversity in tigers to act as \"insurance against extinction in the wild\".\nRelationship with humans.\nHunting.\nTigers have been hunted by humans for millennia, as indicated by a painting on the Bhimbetka rock shelters in India that is dated to 5,000\u20136,000 years ago. They were hunted throughout their range in Asia, chased on horseback, elephant-back or even with sled dogs and killed with spears and later firearms. Such hunts were conducted both by Asian governments and empires like the Mughal Empire, as well as European colonists. Tigers were often hunted as trophies and because of their perceived danger. An estimated 80,000 tigers were killed between 1875 and 1925.\nAttacks.\nIn most areas, tigers avoid humans, but attacks are a risk wherever people coexist with them. Dangerous encounters are more likely to occur in edge habitats between wild and agricultural areas. Most attacks on humans are defensive, including protection of young; however, tigers do sometimes see people as prey. Man-eating tigers tend to be old and disabled. Tigers driven from their home ranges are also at risk of turning to man-eating.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the Champawat Tiger was responsible for over 430 human deaths in Nepal and India before she was shot by Jim Corbett. This tigress suffered from broken teeth and was unable to kill normal prey. Modern authors speculate that sustaining on meagre human flesh forced the cat to kill more and more. Tiger attacks were particularly high in Singapore during the mid-19th century, when plantations expanded into the tiger's habitat. In the 1840s, the number of deaths in the area ranged from 200 to 300 annually. Tiger attacks in the Sundarbans caused 1,396 human deaths in the period 1935\u20132006 according to official records of the Bangladesh Forest Department. Victims of these attacks are local villagers who enter the tiger's domain to collect resources like wood and honey. Fishermen have been particularly common targets. Methods to counter tiger attacks have included face masks worn backwards, protective clothes, sticks and carefully stationed electric dummies.\nCaptivity.\nTigers have been kept in captivity since ancient times. In ancient Rome, tigers were displayed in amphitheatres; they were slaughtered in venatio hunts and used to kill criminals. The Mongol ruler Kublai Khan is reported to have kept tigers in the 13th century. Starting in the Middle Ages, tigers were being kept in European menageries. Tigers and other exotic animals were mainly used for the entertainment of elites but from the 19th century onward, they were exhibited more to the public. Tigers were particularly big attractions and their captive population soared. In 2020, there were over 8,000 captive tigers in Asia, over 5,000 in the US and no less than 850 in Europe. There are more tigers in captivity than in the wild. Captive tigers may display stereotypical behaviours such as pacing or inactivity. Modern zoos are able to reduce such behaviours with exhibits designed so the animals can move between separate but connected enclosures. Enrichment items are also important for the cat's welfare and the stimulation of its natural behaviours.\nTigers have played prominent roles in circuses and other live performances. Ringling Bros included many tiger tamers in the 20th century including Mabel Stark, who became a big draw and had a long career. She was well known for being able to control the tigers despite being a small woman; using \"manly\" tools like whips and guns. Another trainer was Clyde Beatty, who used chairs, whips and guns to provoke tigers and other beasts into acting fierce and allowed him to appear courageous. He would perform with as many as 40 tigers and lions in one act. From the 1960s onward, trainers like Gunther Gebel-Williams would use gentler methods to control their animals. Sara Houcke was dubbed \"the Tiger Whisperer\" as she trained the cats to obey her by whispering to them. Siegfried &amp; Roy became famous for performing with white tigers in Las Vegas. The act ended in 2003 when a tiger attacked Roy during a performance. In 2009, tigers were the most traded circus animals. The use of tigers and other animals in shows eventually declined in many countries due to pressure from animal rights groups and greater desires from the public to see them in more natural settings. Several countries restrict or ban such acts.\nTigers have become popular in the exotic pet trade, particularly in the United States where only 6% of the captive tiger population in 2020 were being housed in zoos and other facilities approved by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums. Private collectors are thought to be ill-equipped to provide proper care for tigers, which compromises their welfare. They can also threaten public safety by allowing people to interact with them. The keeping of tigers and other big cats by private people was banned in the US in 2022. Most countries in the European Union have banned breeding and keeping tigers outside of licensed zoos and rescue centres, but some still allow private holdings.\nCultural significance.\nThe tiger is among the most famous of the charismatic megafauna. Kailash Sankhala has called it \"a rare combination of courage, ferocity and brilliant colour\", while Candy d'Sa calls it \"fierce and commanding on the outside, but noble and discerning on the inside\". In a 2004 online poll involving more than 50,000 people from 73 countries, the tiger was voted the world's favourite animal with 21% of the vote, narrowly beating the dog. Similarly, a 2018 study found the tiger to be the most popular wild animal based on surveys, as well as appearances on websites of major zoos and posters of some animated movies.\nWhile the lion represented royalty and power in Western culture, the tiger played such a role in various Asian cultures. In ancient China, the tiger was seen as the \"king of the forest\" and symbolised the power of the emperor. In Chinese astrology, the tiger is the third out of 12 symbols in the Chinese zodiac and controls the period between 15:00 and 17:00 o'clock in the afternoon. The Year of the Tiger is thought to bring \"dramatic and extreme events\". The White Tiger is one of the Four Symbols of the Chinese constellations, representing the west along with the yin and the season of autumn. It is the counterpart to the Azure Dragon, which conversely symbolises the east, yang and springtime. The tiger is one of the animals displayed on the Pashupati seal of the Indus Valley Civilisation. The big cat was depicted on seals and coins during the Chola dynasty of southern India, as it was the official emblem.\nTigers have had religious and folkloric significance. In Buddhism, the tiger, monkey and deer are the Three Senseless Creatures, with the tiger symbolising anger. In Hinduism, the tiger is the vehicle of Durga, the goddess of feminine power and peace, whom the gods created to fight demons. Similarly, in the Greco-Roman world, the tiger was depicted being ridden by the god Dionysus. In Korean mythology, tigers are messengers of the Mountain Gods. In both Chinese and Korean culture, tigers are seen as protectors against evil spirits and their image was used to decorate homes, tombs and articles of clothing. In the folklore of Malaysia and Indonesia, \"tiger shamans\" heal the sick by invoking the big cat. People turning into tigers and the inverse has also been widespread; in particular weretigers are people who could change into tigers and back again. The Mnong people of Indochina believed that tigers could shapeshift into humans. Among some indigenous peoples of Siberia, it was believed that men would seduce women by transforming into tigers.\nWilliam Blake's 1794 poem \"The Tyger\" portrays the animal as the duality of beauty and ferocity. It is the sister poem to \"The Lamb\" in Blake's \"Songs of Innocence and of Experience\" and he ponders how God could create such different creatures. The tiger is featured in the mediaeval Chinese novel \"Water Margin\", where the cat battles and is slain by the bandit Wu Song, while the tiger Shere Khan in Rudyard Kipling's \"The Jungle Book\" (1894) is the mortal enemy of the human protagonist Mowgli. Friendly tame tigers have also existed in culture, notably Tigger, the Winnie-the-Pooh character and Tony the Tiger, the Kellogg's cereal mascot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30077", "revid": "45069909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30077", "title": "Talk radio", "text": "Radio format\nTalk radio is a radio format containing discussion about topical issues and consisting entirely or almost entirely of original spoken word content rather than outside music. They may feature monologues, dialogues between the hosts, interviews with guests, and/or listener participation which may be live conversations between the host and listeners who \"call in\" (usually via telephone) or via voice mail. Listener contributions are usually screened by a show's producers to maximize audience interest and, in the case of commercial talk radio, to attract advertisers.\nTalk shows on commercial stations are organized into segments, each separated by a pause for advertisements; however, in public or non-commercial radio, music is sometimes played in place of commercials to separate the program segments.\nVariations of talk radio include conservative talk, hot talk, progressive talk, and sports talk.\nTalk radio has historically been associated with broadcast radio; however, starting around 2005, the technology for Internet-based talk-radio shows became cost-effective in the form of live internet website streaming and podcasts.\nAfrica.\nSW Radio Africa was a pro-democracy station that broadcast out of London from 2001 to 2014.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, talk radio is known as \"talkback radio\".\nThe most popular talkback radio station historically was Sydney's 2UE, whose populist programs like \"The John Laws Morning Show\", were widely syndicated across the continent. In recent years though, 2UE has been eclipsed by its Sydney rival 2GB after the defection of 2UE most popular talkback host, Alan Jones.\nAs a result, 2UE and owned by the same company as 2GB) abandoned most of its rigid political and hot topic-driven talkback programming in 2016, moving to a less-serious lifestyle and branded content format, although still maintaining a talkback element.\nIn Melbourne, 3AW is the highest rating talkback radio station and has also been the highest rating Melbourne radio station for several decades in a row.\n6PR personality Garry Meadows was the first announcer to use talkback radio in early 1967. 'Talkback' radio, using a seven-second time-lapse mechanism, began in Australia in April 1967, simultaneously on 2SM, Sydney (with Mike Walsh) and 3DB, Melbourne (with Barry Jones). \nFemale radio personality, 'Andrea', also began talk-back radio, in 1967, on 2GB in Sydney.\nIn the 1990s and 2000s, \"talkback\" on FM was attempted. \"The Spoonman\" was a program hosted by Brian Carlton on the triple m network in the late 1990s and returned in 2005 for three and a half years, the show wrapping up in 2008. It was a show that covered many topics, but the \"hot talk\" format in the U.S. would probably be the best way to describe the program.\nTalkback radio has historically been an important political forum in Australia and functions much like cable news television in the United States, with live and \"saturated\" coverage of political issues.\nBrazil.\nThe most important talk radios in Brazil are CBN, Band News and Jovem Pan, which has also sports and news broadcasts.\nCanada.\nIn contrast to talk radio stations in the United States, where syndicated programs tend to make up a significant part of most schedules, privately owned Canadian talk radio stations tend to be predominantly local in programming and focus. There is no Canadian content requirement for talk radio, or \"spoken word\", programming unless the individual station's license expressly stipulates such a requirement; most do not. (In Canada, prospective radio stations may propose certain restrictions on their license to gain favor with the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission and have an easier time obtaining a license.)\nThe most recent nationally syndicated, politically oriented weekday talk radio show in Canada was \"Charles Adler Tonight\", hosted by Charles Adler and heard on eleven stations across the country. After 5 years, the show ended in August 2021. Until 2006, Peter Warren's \"Warren on the Weekend\" was heard Saturdays and Sundays. Both programs are or were distributed by the Corus Radio Network and, coincidentally, both hosts had hosted different morning call-in programs in the same time slot on Winnipeg, Manitoba's CJOB 680 before they became nationally syndicated (Adler's show originated from CJOB and retained its original title, while Warren was based in Victoria, British Columbia.) before \"Charles Adler Tonight\", Corus had syndicated \"Rutherford\", hosted by conservative Dave Rutherford and originating from its Calgary station, CHQR. \"Rutherford\" is no longer syndicated nationally but continues to air in Calgary, Edmonton, and London.\nOther Canadian talk radio programs which have been syndicated to different markets include:\nPrivately owned talk radio syndication networks in Canada are generally formed to share programs across a group of stations with common ownership, although some are formed to distribute their one or two talk radio programs to several stations regardless of ownership. The largest of these is the Corus Radio Network. TSN Radio, the successor to the long-defunct the Team, is one of the newest national networks in Canada, with operations in several major markets.\nSyndicated programs from the United States which air on Canadian radio stations are typically non-political shows such as \"The Kim Komando Show\" and \"Coast to Coast AM\", as well as sports radio shows from the 24-hour networks in the U.S. Traditionally, politically driven talk radio from the United States does not air on Canadian stations, with a few scattered exceptions (e.g. the now-defunct CFBN, which carried political programming such as the \"Glenn Beck Program\" and Dennis Miller, and the also-discontinued talk format of CHAM, which carried Miller). Top political programs such as \"The Rush Limbaugh Show\" are never broadcast on Canadian stations, mainly due to high rights fees compared to their relevance to non-American audiences. American stations near the Canadian border can provide many Canadians with access to American talk programs (the signals of Limbaugh affiliates WJR, WBEN, and WHAM, for example, cover almost all of Southern Ontario).\nLocal talk radio plays a significant role in the politics of Newfoundland and Labrador. Political parties have systematically coordinated call-ins by Members of the House of Assembly when public opinion pollsters are known to be in the field. The provincial government routinely purchases transcripts of calls.\nFinland.\nA state-owned public channel called YLE Puhe. is broadcast throughout the whole country in the Finnish language. The programs include sports and news broadcasts. Its weekly listenership is about 550,000. Finland's first commercial talk station, Radio Rapu, started operations on March 1, 2014.\nFrance.\nTalk radio is a popular form of radio entertainment in France, exemplified by Europe 1, RTL, and RMC, plus state-owned France Inter. A premier English language talk radio in France is the Gascony Show. Launched in early 2011, this show is broadcast weekly to the Gascony region of the southwest of France, as well as to the rest of France via Internet streaming.\nGermany.\nRadio talk shows are popular in Germany and have a long tradition. The first talk show on public radio was Werner H\u00f6fer's Der Internationale Fr\u00fchschoppen, a political talk begun in 1952. The talk show on wheels Hallo \u00dc-Wagen ran from 1974 to 2010, begun by Carmen Thomas for WDR.\nItaly.\nTalk radio in Italy is popular. Radio 24, part of the group Il Sole 24 Ore privately owned by Confindustria, is the most important commercial \"news/talk\" talk radio station in the country. Its focus is mainly on independent news about the Italian and European economy, finance, culture, and politics, but it also hosts programs focusing on sports, personal finance, music, health, science, technology, and crowdsourced storytelling. State-owned Rai Radio 3 is mainly dedicated to literature, the arts, classical music, and general cultural issues. Several regional stations use a format combining that of all-news and talk radio.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, the talk radio format is popularly known as talkback radio. The major radio network broadcasting in the talk radio format is Newstalk ZB. Sport Nation also largely broadcast in a talk format with Sport Coverage\n. Other stations such as Radio New Zealand National have a large component of talk-based content but do not have talk-back (i.e. listener phone-ins). Previous Stations Included Radio Live, Today FM Radio Sport and Live Sport, All now Defunct.\nNewstalk ZB is the New Zealand market leader, but Radio tried to establish itself with a greater presence in the talk radio market since its inception in 2005, then changing to Magic Talk before closing in 2023.\nPhilippines.\nAlmost all AM radio stations are talk stations. A few stations from Radio Mindanao Network and Bombo Radyo are on FM. Radyo 5 News FM (now True FM) is the first talk radio station in the Philippines.\nPoland.\nThere is two talk radio station in Poland, called TOK FM, which is owned by Agora SA, a Polish media company. Its programmes are broadcast in 10 large cities including Warsaw, Krak\u00f3w, Gda\u0144sk, Pozna\u0144, and Katowice. The programme is also available via the Internet and transmitted by the Hot Bird constellation. It was founded in 1998 as \"Inforadio\"\nSecond talk radio station called Radio Wnet, which is owned by Radio Wnet sp. z o.o., a Polish media company. Its programmes are broadcast in two large cities including Warsaw (87.8\u00a0MHz), Krak\u00f3w (95,2\u00a0MHz). The programme is available via Internet. It was founded on 25 May 2009 by Krzysztof Skowro\u0144ski, Grzegorz Wasowski, Katarzyna Adamiak-Sroczy\u0144ska and Monika Makowska-Wasowska, Wojciech Cejrowski and Jerzy Jachowicz.\nSpain.\nTalk radio in Spain is very popular, where the most important radio stations are exclusively dedicated to talk shows, such as Cadena Ser, Cadena Cope, Onda Cero, Radio Nacional, or Punto Radio. There is a very wide variety of topics, such as politics, sport, comedy, and culture.\nSport talk shows are particularly relevant, since football attracts a massive interest in Spain, with a special focus on FC Barcelona and Real Madrid CF, and the men's national football team. Typically the programming of main talk radio stations is modified whenever there is a major football event, such as a La Liga or a national team match. Daily late-night sport (football) talk shows are also very relevant, with a very intense competition of the radio stations in this time slot which typically starts around midnight.\nComedy morning talk shows are also very popular in music radio stations (40 principales, M80 radio, Europa FM, and others), where there is strong competition since it is also a very important time slot, when typically people going to the workplace listen to the radio in their cars early in the morning (around 7am to 8am).\nAs Spain has large English-speaking communities from many different countries, it is a natural place for English language talk radio broadcasting.\nThe first Talk radio station in English was Coastline Radio broadcasting from Nerja, Costa del Sol. It is now a music station. A group of English expats set up OCI International in the early 1990s. Based in Marbella on the Costa del Sol, it was owned by the ONCE National Spanish Network. It provided a link for the English-speaking expats living on the coast, as well as some content for Scandinavian expats. OCI was closed down in 2007 to make way for Radio Europa music. In 2004 REM FM began broadcasting, with shows mostly fronted by former OCI presenters. The station closed in 2008.\nIn 2008, Talk Radio Europe began broadcasting. It offers a 24-hour schedule of news, interviews, discussion, and debate and is a World Media Partner with BBC World Service and is affiliated to IRN/SKY News. Talk Radio Europe broadcasts in FM on the Costa del Sol, Costa Almeria, Costa Blanca, and across the island of Mallorca in English. It is available on the Internet and all smartphone platforms.\nUnited Kingdom.\nTalk radio in the United Kingdom is popular, though not as much as music radio. Nationwide talk stations include BBC Radio 4, BBC Radio 5 Live, BBC Radio 4 Extra, Talkradio, Talksport and Times Radio. Regional stations include BBC Radio Scotland and BBC Radio Wales. Many BBC Local Radio stations and some commercial stations offer a talk format, for example, BBC Radio London, the BBC's flagship local station. Other notable commercial talk stations include London's LBC which pioneered the newstalk format in Europe. LBC currently operates two services \u2013 LBC, a newstalk station on FM (London) and via several digital platforms nationally including DAB and Freeview; and LBC News, a rolling news station on AM in London and DAB+ nationally. There are many specialised talk services such as Bloomberg, a financial news station, and Asian Radio Live.\nTalk radio expanded dramatically when the BBC's monopoly on radio broadcasting was ended in the 1970s with the launch of Independent Local Radio.\nSome notable British talk radio presenters include Jenni Murray, John Humphrys, Martha Kearney, Jonathan Dimbleby, Libby Purves, Laurie Taylor, Pam Ayres, Melvyn Bragg, Tommy Boyd, James Whale, Steve Allen, Nick Abbot, Iain Lee, James Stannage, George Galloway, Julia Hartley-Brewer, Ian Collins, John Nicoll, Brian Hayes, Scottie McClue, James O'Brien, Nicky Campbell, and Simon Mayo. Pete Price on CityTalk is also known as the DJ who rushed to the aid of a regular caller who died live on air during a call. Previously, he had kept a teenager talking for 45 minutes before meeting him to convince him not to commit suicide.\nUnited States.\nTalk radio is most popular on the AM band. \"Non-commercial\", usually referred to as \"public radio\", which is mainly located in a reserved spectrum of the FM band, also broadcasts talk programs. Commercial all-talk stations can also be found on the FM band in many cities across the US. These shows often rely less on political discussion and analysis than their AM counterparts and often employ the use of pranks and \"bits\" for entertainment purposes. In the United States and Canada, satellite radio services offer uncensored \"free-wheeling\" original programming. ABC News &amp; Talk is an example of \"repackaging\" for the digital airwaves shows featured on their terrestrial radio stations.\nHistory.\nExpressing and debating political opinions has been a staple of radio since the medium's infancy. Aimee Semple McPherson began her radio broadcasts in the early 1920s and even purchased her station, KFSG which went on the air in February 1924; by the mid-1930s, controversial radio priest Father Charles Coughlin's radio broadcasts were reaching millions per week. There was also a national current events forum called America's Town Meeting of the Air which broadcast once a week starting in 1935. It featured panel discussions from some of the biggest newsmakers and was among the first shows to allow audience participation: members of the studio audience could question the guests or even heckle them.\nTalk radio as a listener-participation format has existed since the 1930s. John J. Anthony (1902\u20131970) was an announcer and DJ on New York's WMRJ. It was located in the Merrick Radio Store at 12 New York Boulevard in Jamaica, Long Island. After some marital troubles, refusing to pay alimony and child support, he sought professional help and began his radio series where listeners would call in with their problems in 1930. Radio historians consider this the first instance of talk radio.\nWhile working for New York's WMCA in 1945, Barry Gray was bored with playing music and put a telephone receiver up to his microphone to talk with bandleader Woody Herman. This was soon followed by listener call-ins and Gray is often billed as \"the hot mama of talk radio\". Herb Jepko was another pioneer.\nAuthor Bill Cherry proposed George Roy Clough as the first to invite listeners to argue politics on a call-in radio show at KLUF, his station in Galveston, Texas, as a way to bring his political views into listeners' homes. (He later became Mayor of Galveston). Cherry gives no specific date, but the context of events and history of the station would seem to place it also in the 1940s, perhaps earlier. The format was the classic mode in which the announcer gave the topic for that day, and listeners called in to debate the issue.\nIn 1948, Alan Courtney \u2013 New York disk jockey and co-composer of the popular song \"Joltin' Joe DiMaggio\" \u2013 began a call-in program for the Storer station in Miami, Florida (WGBS) and then on Miami's WQAM, WINZ and WCKR. The \"Alan Courtney Open Phone Forum\" flourished as an avowedly conservative and anti-communist political forum with a coverage area over the Southeastern U.S. and Cuba.\nJoe Pyne, John Nebel, Jean Shepherd, and Jerry Williams (WMEX-Boston) were among the first to explore the medium in the 1950s.\nA breakthrough in talk radio occurred in 1960 at KLAC in Los Angeles. Alan Henry, a broadcaster in his early thirties, had been hired by John Kluge, president of Metromedia in 1963. Henry had previously worked in such diverse markets as Miami, Florida; Waterloo, Iowa; Hartford, Connecticut; and St. Louis, Missouri. KLAC was dead last in the ratings but Kluge wanted a big Metromedia presence in Los Angeles. He sent Henry from New York to Los Angeles to turn KLAC into a success. The first thing that Henry did was hire the legendary morning team of Lohman and Barkley. Henry had built a strong relationship with programmer Jim Lightfoot, who had joined Henry in Miami. A unique opportunity presented itself when Joe Pyne, who had begun his career as a radio talk personality in Pennsylvania, was fired by KABC in Los Angeles. The speculation was that Pyne was too controversial and confrontational for the ABC corporate culture. Henry hired Pyne on the spot and paid him $25,000 a year, which was then a huge salary for a radio personality. Pyne was given the night show on KLAC. Part of the agreement with Pyne was that Henry and Lightfoot would give him broad control of his program content.\nThe show was an immediate success. Henry encouraged the confrontation with listeners and guests for which Pyne became famous. Pyne coined the line \"Go gargle with razor blades,\" for guests with whom he disagreed. The Pyne show was the beginning of the confrontational talk format that later spread across the radio spectrum. At one point in the 1960s, the Joe Pyne show was syndicated on over 250 radio stations in the United States.\nIn an odd turn of events, Pyne's radio show led him to television. Henry suggested to John Kluge that Joe Pyne should be put on Metromedia's newly acquired TV station in Los Angeles, KTTV-TV. Kluge told Henry to speak to KTTV-TV general manager Al Kriven, but Henry had already done that, and Kriven had adamantly refused. Kluge telephoned Kriven, and Pyne soon became the nation's first controversial late-night talk television host. \"The Joe Pyne Show\" on KTTV-TV quickly shot to the top of the ratings. The format later proliferated on cable television with a variety of new hosts, many of them taking on a similar persona to Joe Pyne. Joe Pyne and Alan Henry were major factors in establishing a new trend in radio and television programming. Alan Henry elaborates on the launching of Joe Pyne on KLAC radio and KTTV-TV in his memoir \"A Man and His Medium\".\nTwo radio stations \u2013 KMOX, 1120 AM in St. Louis, Missouri, and KABC, 790 AM in Los Angeles \u2013 adopted an all-talk show format in 1960, and both claim to be the first to have done so. KABC station manager Ben Hoberman and KMOX station manager Robert Hyland independently developed the all-talk format. KTKK, 630 AM in Salt Lake City, then known as KSXX, adopted a full-time talk schedule in 1965 and is the third station in the country to have done so. KSXX started with all local talent, and KTKK, which now airs on 1640 AM, has a larger portion of its schedule featuring local talent than most other stations that run a full schedule of talk.\nIn the 1970s and early 1980s, as many listeners abandoned AM music formats for the high fidelity sound of FM radio, the talk radio format began to catch on in more large cities. Former music stations such as KLIF (Dallas, Texas), WLW (Cincinnati, Ohio), WHAS (Louisville, Kentucky), WHAM (Rochester, New York), WLS (Chicago, Illinois), KFI (Los Angeles, California), WRKO (Boston, Massachusetts), WKBW (Buffalo, New York), and WABC (New York, New York) made the switch to all-talk as their ratings slumped due to listener migration to the FM band. Since the turn of the 21st century, with many music listeners now migrating to digital platforms such as Pandora Radio, Sirius XM Radio, and the numerous variations of the iPod, talk radio has been expanding on the FM side of the dial as well.\nShock.\nHot talk, also called FM talk or shock talk, is a talk radio format geared predominantly to a male demographic between the ages of 18 and 49. It generally consists of pop culture subjects on FM radio rather than the political talk found on AM radio. Hosts of hot talk shows are usually known as \"shock jocks\".\nClear Channel Communications (which became iHeartMedia in 2015) has a select few hot talk stations under the moniker \"Real Radio\", while CBS Radio once had a larger chain of hot talkers known as Free FM, though the brand was abandoned after a post-Howard Stern attempt to network the format failed within a year. It is usually found on FM radio active rock, classic rock, and country stations in morning drive, as the actual hot talk formatted stations have only achieved mediocre success as a whole compared to AM or conservative talk radio, or even FM music radio. It is also effectively a format that is unviable during an average workday in North America, due to the format's tendency to discuss topics wholly inappropriate for a workplace setting, and outside of discussions of attractiveness, largely repels women as regular listeners.\nIn March 2018, CBS Radio's corporate successor Entercom (now Audacy, Inc.) attempted a hot talk format in San Diego with KEGY \"97.3 The Machine\". It featured a weekday lineup devoted to hot talk programs, blocks of classic rock interspersed with comedy bits during off-peak hours, and coverage of San Diego Padres baseball. However, the station attracted controversy later that month, when an advertisement for the station's forthcoming morning show \"Kevin Klein Live\" (which invited listeners to \"jump ... to a new morning show\", accompanied by a picture of the Coronado Bridge) was criticized for glorifying suicide by bridge jumping. The ensuing controversy prompted the Padres to scrutinize KEGY's direction; executive Ron Fowler voiced concerns over the team being associated with KEGY's \"shock jock\" content, threatening to possibly cut ties with the station and Entercom. Kevin Klein's program never premiered, and the hot talk format was ultimately dropped on April 12, 2018, in favor of a conventional sports format as \"97.3 The Fan\".\nIn 2019, JVC Media began to establish a hot talk network in Florida branded as \"Florida Man Radio\" (in reference to the \"Florida Man\" internet meme), beginning with WDYZ in Orlando. The network has picked up personalities such as Shannon Burke and Ed Tyll, with the syndicated \"Bubba the Love Sponge\" serving as its morning show. In 2022, after receiving the station in a trade from Audacy, Beasley Broadcast Group's KXTE in Las Vegas shifted to a hot talk format for its weekday lineup, which consists primarily of syndicated morning shows (including \"Dave and Mahoney\", for which it is the flagship station, as well as \"Free Beer and Hot Wings\", and \"Dave &amp; Chuck the Freak\" from sister WRIF in Detroit).\nThe genre has also shown up on satellite radio and in podcasting, which typically have more creative freedom due to the lack of indecency rules and lower reliance on corporate advertising.\nOther U.S. hosts specialize in talk radio comedy, such as Phil Hendrie, who voices his fictional guests and occasionally does parodies of other programs.\nPolitical.\nThe United States saw dramatic growth in the popularity of talk radio during the 1990s due to the repeal of the Federal Communications Commission's post-war Fairness Doctrine of 1949, in 1987. The mandate of the Fairness Doctrine was to require that audiences were exposed to a diversity of viewpoints.\nIt had required the holders of broadcast licenses to \"present controversial issues of public importance\" and to do so in a manner that was, in the commission's view, \"honest, equitable and balanced\". Its repeal provided an opportunity for a kind of partisan political programming with commercial appeal that had not previously existed.\nThe most successful pioneer in the early 1990s' talk radio movement in the US was the politically conservative commentator Rush Limbaugh. Limbaugh's success demonstrated that there was a nationwide market for a passionately delivered conservative polemic on contemporary news, events, and social trends, and changed the face of how the talk radio business was conducted. Unrestrained (by the Fairness Doctrine), cheering for one's political party, and especially against the other, had become popular entertainment which rapidly changed the way politics nationally was discussed, perceived, and conducted.\nOther radio talk show hosts (who describe themselves as either conservative or libertarian) have also had success as nationally syndicated hosts, including Hugh Hewitt, Sean Hannity, Jon Arthur, Glenn Beck, Michael Medved, Laura Ingraham, Neal Boortz, Michael Savage, Bill O'Reilly, Larry Gaiters, and Mark Levin.\nThe Salem Radio Network syndicates a group of religiously oriented Republican activists, including evangelical Christian Hugh Hewitt and Jewish conservatives Dennis Prager and Michael Medved; these are mostly distributed in a 24-hour network format among Salem's stations, and they generally earn ratings much less than their syndicated counterparts.\nIn the summer of 2007, conservative talk show hosts mobilized public opposition to the McCain-Kennedy immigration reform bill, which eventually failed. Conservative hosts Limbaugh, Ingraham, Bennett, Prager, Hannity, Beck, Levin, and Hewitt coalesced around endorsing former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney for president at the end of January 2008 (after Fred Thompson, the described favorite of some of the hosts, dropped out), to oppose the nomination of Senator John McCain; however, Romney suspended his campaign in February of the same year and endorsed McCain. During the primaries, Limbaugh in particular had endorsed a plan to do whatever it took to prolong the Democrats' nomination by encouraging political conservatives to cross over to the Democrats and voting for the trailing candidate, a plan he called \"Operation Chaos\".\nConservative talk show hosts also lent their unified support for congressional candidate Doug Hoffman, a conservative third-party candidate who was running in New York's 23rd congressional district special election, 2009, against a liberal Republican (Dierdre Scozzafava) and a mainstream Democrat (Bill Owens). The unified support from the conservative base helped propel Hoffman to frontrunner status and effectively killed Scozzafava's campaign, forcing her to drop out of the race several days before the election. This effort backfired on the conservative hosts, as the Democratic candidate Owens won in part thanks to Scozzafava's endorsement of Owens. Local hosts, such as Los Angeles's John and Ken, have also proven effective in influencing the political landscape.\nLibertarians such as Dennis Miller (based in Los Angeles), Jon Arthur, host of \"Jon Arthur Live!\" (based in Florida), Patti Brooks KGMI (based in the Pacific Northwest), Free Talk Live (based in New Hampshire), Penn Jillette (based in Las Vegas), Jay Severin (based in Boston, Massachusetts), and Mark Davis (based in Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas) have also achieved some success. Many of these hosts also publish books, write newspaper columns, appear on television, and give public lectures.\nPolitically liberal talk radio aimed at a national audience also emerged in the mid-2000s. Air America, a network featuring \"The Al Franken Show\", was founded in 2004. It billed itself as a \"progressive alternative\" to the conservative talk radio shows.\nSome prominent examples of liberal talk radio shows either previously or currently in national syndication include: Dial Global talk show hosts Ed Schultz (who moved on to hosting on MSNBC and later on RT America), Stephanie Miller, Thom Hartmann, and Bill Press; Norman Goldman (not with Dial Global and is a self-described independent) is still included on syndication stations \u2013 see WCPT (AM). Goldman began as the high-rating fill-in host and \"Senior Legal Analyst\" for Ed Schultz before launching his show; The Young Turks; Fox former co-host of Hannity and Colmes, Alan Colmes, First Amendment Radio Network libertarian host Jon Arthur, and Mike Malloy, progressive radio WFTE FM's Dorothy And Dick, and Premiere's Randi Rhodes (not on radio 2015).\nIn some markets, local liberal hosts have existed for years, such as the British talk host Michael Jackson (who was on the air at KABC in Los Angeles beginning in 1968 and is currently at KMZT); Bernie Ward in San Francisco; Jack Ellery in New Jersey and Tampa; Dave Ross in Seattle, and Marc Germain in Los Angeles. A few earlier syndicated programs were hosted by prominent Democrats who were not experienced broadcasters, such as Jim Hightower, Jerry Brown, Mario Cuomo, and Alan Dershowitz; these met with limited success, and Air America has been faced with various legal and financial problems.\nAir America was sold to a new owner in March 2007, hired well-known programmer David Bernstein, and began its \"re-birth.\" Bernstein subsequently left in early 2008, but the struggling network remained on the air with a revamped line-up.\nOn January 21, 2010, Air America radio ceased live programming citing a difficulty with the current economic environment and announced that it would file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy production and liquidate itself. The network ended operations on January 25, 2010.\nClear Channel/iHeartMedia, with nearly 1,300 radio stations under its ownership \u2013 along with other owners \u2013 has in recent years added more liberal talk stations to their portfolio. These have primarily come from the conversion of AM facilities, most of which formerly had adult standards formats. Many complaints (all radio stations are required by the FCC to maintain, in their public files, copies of all correspondence from the public relating to station operations \u2013 for a period of three years from receipt) have been received from fans of this musical genre (Tony Bennett, Frank Sinatra, big band music,\" etc.) \u2013 but the left-leaning talk programming leans toward a much younger demographic, a group that advertisers covet. More recently, however, Clear Channel has been dropping liberal formats in favor of their own Fox Sports Radio network. By 2014, most liberal talk stations had abandoned the format, forcing hosts to find other ways to distribute their programming.\nLiberal opinion radio has long existed on the Pacifica network, though only available in a small number of major cities, and in formats that more often act as a volunteer-run community forum than as a platform for charismatic hosts who would be likely to attract a large audience. The one major host to become popular on the network is Amy Goodman, whose \"Democracy Now!\" interview and journalism program is broadcast nationwide.\nConservative critics have long complained that the long-format news programming on National Public Radio (NPR) shows a liberal bias, although this was disputed once in 2004 by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR), a \"progressive\" media criticism organization, which found that, for example, \"representatives of think tanks to the right of center outnumbered those to the left of center by more than four to one: 62 appearances to 15.\"\nNational Public Radio itself denies any partisan agenda. Politically oriented talk programs on the network are in the mold of \"Talk of the Nation\", which was designed to be a soundboard for the varied opinions of listeners.\nWhile politically oriented talk is still heard on the AM dial (mostly the conservative format), it has seen some expanding onto the FM dial. One notable example was WPGB in Pittsburgh, which switched to a talk format in 2004 after years of having several different music formats, branding itself as \"FM News Talk 104.7\" due to the relative uncommonness of politically oriented talk on the FM side of the dial even in 2013 while FM talk, in general, has expanded. Owned by Clear Channel and stylized as one of Clear Channel's typical conservative-leaning AM talk stations, WPGB's ratings were steadily high during its time as a talk station, whereas the station's numerous music formats were among the lowest in the Pittsburgh market before switching. Clear Channel, which owns WPGB, has shifted some of their talk stations from full-power FM signals to lower-range translator stations which use AM or HD Radio subchannel stations to originate those broadcasts; WPGB fired its morning show in December 2013 and switched back to music in August 2014, selling the format rights to AM station WJAS.\nInsults, advice and mystery.\nThere had been some precursors for talk radio show stars, such as the Los Angeles-area controversialist Joe Pyne, who would attack callers on his program in the early 1960s \u2013 one of his famous insults was \"gargle with razor blades\"; the similar Bob Grant in New York City; and Wally George in Southern California.\nTalk radio also included personal relationship consultants such as Laura Schlessinger and Barbara De Angelis both heard on KFI AM in Los Angeles. Host Larry Elder on KABC (AM) was a lawyer before entering the talk radio market. Leo Laporte offers consumers computer advice. Business and real estate advice shows, paid health supplement presentations and religious programs are widely available.\nParanormal radio shows have had a place on radio for several decades; while the format has never been successful on a full-time basis, it has proven popular in the overnight graveyard slot. Long John Nebel's program was one of the first to devote itself to the concept before it was further fleshed out by Art Bell, whose \"Coast to Coast AM\" went on to have comparable popularity to daytime talk hosts of his era. Bell had a long-running, on-and-off relationship with the show he founded, often leaving the show and returning on an erratic basis, also starting up new shows such as \"Dreamland\", \"Art Bell's Dark Matter,\" and \"Midnight in the Desert\" only to quit them a few weeks into their run; Bell died in 2018. \"Coast to Coast AM\" continues with George Noory as the permanent lead host, with a rotating host on weekends. Clyde Lewis and Jason Hawes also host nationally syndicated paranormal shows.\nSports.\nSports talk radio can be found locally and nationally in the US; as of 2013, five national full-time sports talk networks exist. The oldest existing network, dating to 1991, is SportsMap (although it has only been branded as such since 2020 and has rebranded frequently over the years). Market leader ESPN Radio followed shortly thereafter in 1992, followed by Fox Sports Radio c. 2000 and the near-concurrent entries of CBS Sports Radio (now Infinity Sports Network) and NBC Sports Radio in late 2012 and early 2013. Most of these, however, air on weak, low-budget AM stations; the most successful sports talk stations operate primarily with local programs and supplement their programming with the broadcasting of sports events, usually involving the local teams in the major professional sports leagues. This adds significant expenses to the station's operations, and must be balanced carefully with the regular talk schedule, as an incendiary view about the team by a host can lead to that team pulling their broadcasts from the station.\nLocal stations may also hire personalities with polarizing opinions about sports topics and athletes to make some kind of national impact that might turn off listeners, and in large markets, sports talk stations may be made up of personalities who pay stations for their show time and their advertising, disallowing any natural flow between each program, along with in-station competitions about whose show has the most impact.\nRatings.\nPew researchers found in 2004 that 17% of the public regularly listens to talk radio. This audience is mostly male, middle-aged, and conservative. Among those who regularly listen to talk radio, 41% are Republican and 28% are Democrats. Furthermore, 45% describe themselves as conservatives, compared with 18% who say they are progressive/liberals. In 2011, the Arbitron portable people meter ratings system, compiled data suggesting that out of 11 nationally rated radio formats, talk radio had lost nearly the most market share and ratings continue to slide. In 2013, Arbitron's executive summary noted that \" 92% of consumers aged 12 years and older listen to the radio each week\" and \"news-talk-information and talk-personality remained number one in PPM markets and number two in the rest of the U.S.\"\nSome of the most-listened-to radio programs in the United States are talk radio shows or have talk radio elements like \"The Sean Hannity Show\" and \"All Things Considered\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30078", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30078", "title": "Thyroid", "text": "Endocrine gland in the neck\nThe thyroid, or thyroid gland, is an endocrine gland in vertebrates. In humans, it is a butterfly-shaped gland located in the neck below the Adam's apple. It consists of two connected lobes. The lower two thirds of the lobes are connected by a thin band of tissue called the isthmus (pl.: isthmi). Microscopically, the functional unit of the thyroid gland is the spherical thyroid follicle, lined with follicular cells (thyrocytes), and occasional parafollicular cells that surround a lumen containing colloid. \nThe thyroid gland secretes three hormones: the two thyroid hormones\u00a0\u2013 triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4)\u00a0\u2013 and a peptide hormone, calcitonin. The thyroid hormones influence the metabolic rate and protein synthesis and growth and development in children. Calcitonin plays a role in calcium homeostasis. \nSecretion of the two thyroid hormones is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which is secreted from the anterior pituitary gland. TSH is regulated by thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), which is produced by the hypothalamus.\nThyroid disorders include hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, thyroid inflammation (thyroiditis), thyroid enlargement (goitre), thyroid nodules, and thyroid cancer. Hyperthyroidism is characterized by excessive secretion of thyroid hormones: the most common cause is the autoimmune disorder Graves' disease. Hypothyroidism is characterized by a deficient secretion of thyroid hormones: the most common cause is iodine deficiency. In iodine-deficient regions, hypothyroidism (due to iodine deficiency) is the leading cause of preventable intellectual disability in children. In iodine-sufficient regions, the most common cause of hypothyroidism is the autoimmune disorder Hashimoto's thyroiditis. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStructure.\nFeatures.\nThe thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped organ composed of two lobes, left and right, connected by a narrow tissue band, called an \"isthmus\". It weighs 25 grams in adults, with each lobe being about 5\u00a0cm long, 3\u00a0cm wide, and 2\u00a0cm thick and the isthmus about 1.25\u00a0cm in height and width. The gland is usually larger in women than in men, and increases in size during pregnancy.\nThe thyroid is near the front of the neck, lying against and around the front of the larynx and trachea. The thyroid cartilage and cricoid cartilage lie just above the gland, below the Adam's apple. The isthmus extends from the second to third rings of the trachea, with the uppermost part of the lobes extending to the thyroid cartilage and the lowermost around the fourth to sixth tracheal rings. The infrahyoid muscles lie in front of the gland and the sternocleidomastoid muscle to the side. Behind the outer wings of the thyroid lie the two carotid arteries. The trachea, larynx, lower pharynx and esophagus all lie behind the thyroid. In this region, the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery pass next to or in the ligament. Typically, four parathyroid glands, two on each side, lie on each side between the two layers of the thyroid capsule, at the back of the thyroid lobes.\nThe thyroid gland is covered by a thin fibrous capsule, which has an inner and an outer layer. The inner layer extrudes into the gland and forms the septa that divide the thyroid tissue into microscopic lobules. The outer layer is continuous with the pretracheal fascia, attaching the gland to the cricoid and thyroid cartilages via a thickening of the fascia to form the posterior suspensory ligament of thyroid gland, also known as Berry's ligament. This causes the thyroid to move up and down with the movement of these cartilages when swallowing occurs.\nBlood, lymph and nerve supply.\nThe thyroid is supplied with arterial blood from the superior thyroid artery, a branch of the external carotid artery, and the inferior thyroid artery, a branch of the thyrocervical trunk, and sometimes by an anatomical variant the thyroid ima artery, which has a variable origin. The superior thyroid artery splits into anterior and posterior branches supplying the thyroid, and the inferior thyroid artery splits into superior and inferior branches. The superior and inferior thyroid arteries join behind the outer part of the thyroid lobes. The venous blood is drained via superior and middle thyroid veins, which drain to the internal jugular vein, and via the inferior thyroid veins. The inferior thyroid veins originate in a network of veins and drain into the left and right brachiocephalic veins. Both arteries and veins form a plexus between the two layers of the capsule of the thyroid gland.\nLymphatic drainage frequently passes the prelaryngeal lymph nodes (located just above the isthmus) and the pretracheal and paratracheal lymph nodes. The gland receives sympathetic nerve supply from the superior, middle and inferior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic trunk. The gland receives parasympathetic nerve supply from the superior laryngeal nerve and the recurrent laryngeal nerve.\nVariation.\nThere are many variants in the size and shape of the thyroid gland, and in the position of the embedded parathyroid glands.\nSometimes there is a third lobe present called the \"pyramidal lobe\". When present, this lobe often stretches up to the hyoid bone from the thyroid isthmus and may be one to several divided lobes. The presence of this lobe ranges in reported studies from 18.3% to 44.6%. It was shown to more often arise from the left side and occasionally separated. The pyramidal lobe is also known as Lalouette's pyramid. The pyramidal lobe is a remnant of the thyroglossal duct, which usually wastes away during the thyroid gland's descent. Small accessory thyroid glands may in fact occur anywhere along the thyroglossal duct, from the foramen cecum of the tongue to the position of the thyroid in the adult. A small horn at the back of the thyroid lobes, usually close to the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery, is called Zuckerkandl's tubercle.\nOther variants include a levator muscle of thyroid gland, connecting the isthmus to the body of the hyoid bone, and the presence of the small thyroid ima artery.\nMicroanatomy.\nAt the microscopic level, there are three primary features of the thyroid\u2014thyroid follicles, thyroid follicular cells, and parafollicular cells, first discovered by Geoffery Websterson in 1664.\nThyroid follicles are small spherical groupings of cells 0.02\u20130.9mm in diameter that play the main role in thyroid function. They consist of a rim that has a rich blood supply, nerve and lymphatic presence, that surrounds a core of colloid that consists mostly of thyroid hormone precursor proteins called thyroglobulin, an iodinated glycoprotein.\nThe core of a follicle is surrounded by a single layer of follicular cells. When stimulated by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), these secrete the thyroid hormones T3 and T4. They do this by transporting and metabolising the thyroglobulin contained in the colloid. Follicular cells vary in shape from flat to cuboid to columnar, depending on how active they are.\nThe \"follicular lumen\" is the fluid-filled space within a follicle of the thyroid gland. There are hundreds of follicles within the thyroid gland. A follicle is formed by a spherical arrangement of follicular cells. The follicular lumen is filled with \"colloid\", a concentrated solution of thyroglobulin and is the site of synthesis of the thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3).\nScattered among follicular cells and in spaces between the spherical follicles are another type of thyroid cell, parafollicular cells. These cells secrete calcitonin and so are also called C cells.\nDevelopment.\nIn the development of the embryo, at 3\u20134 weeks gestational age, the thyroid gland appears as an epithelial proliferation in the floor of the pharynx at the base of the tongue between the \"tuberculum impar\" and the \"copula linguae\". The copula soon becomes covered over by the hypopharyngeal eminence at a point later indicated by the foramen cecum. The thyroid then descends in front of the pharyngeal gut as a bilobed diverticulum through the thyroglossal duct. Over the next few weeks, it migrates to the base of the neck, passing in front of the hyoid bone. During migration, the thyroid remains connected to the tongue by a narrow canal, the thyroglossal duct. At the end of the fifth week the thyroglossal duct degenerates, and over the following two weeks the detached thyroid migrates to its final position.\nThe fetal hypothalamus and pituitary start to secrete thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). TSH is first measurable at 11 weeks. By 18\u201320 weeks, the production of thyroxine (T4) reaches a clinically significant and self-sufficient level. Fetal triiodothyronine (T3) remains low, less than 15\u00a0ng/dL until 30 weeks, and increases to 50\u00a0ng/dL at full-term. The fetus needs to be self-sufficient in thyroid hormones in order to guard against neurodevelopmental disorders that would arise from maternal hypothyroidism. The presence of sufficient iodine is essential for healthy neurodevelopment.\nThe neuroendocrine parafollicular cells, also known as C cells, responsible for the production of calcitonin, are derived from foregut endoderm. This part of the thyroid then first forms as the ultimopharyngeal body, which begins in the ventral fourth pharyngeal pouch and joins the primordial thyroid gland during its descent to its final location.\nAberrations in prenatal development can result in various forms of thyroid dysgenesis which can cause congenital hypothyroidism, and if untreated this can lead to cretinism.\nFunction.\nThyroid hormones.\nThe primary function of the thyroid is the production of the iodine-containing thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine or tetraiodothyronine (T4) and the peptide hormone calcitonin. The thyroid hormones are created from iodine and tyrosine. T3 is so named because it contains three atoms of iodine per molecule and T4 contains four atoms of iodine per molecule. The thyroid hormones have a wide range of effects on the human body. These include:\nAfter secretion, only a very small proportion of the thyroid hormones travel freely in the blood. Most are bound to thyroxine-binding globulin (about 70%), transthyretin (10%), and albumin (15%). Only the 0.03% of T4 and 0.3% of T3 traveling freely have hormonal activity. In addition, up to 85% of the T3 in blood is produced following conversion from T4 by iodothyronine deiodinases in organs around the body.\nThyroid hormones act by crossing the cell membrane and binding to intracellular nuclear thyroid hormone receptors TR-\u03b11, TR-\u03b12, TR-\u03b21, and TR-\u03b22, which bind with hormone response elements and transcription factors to modulate DNA transcription. In addition to these actions on DNA, the thyroid hormones also act within the cell membrane or within cytoplasm via reactions with enzymes, including calcium ATPase, adenylyl cyclase, and glucose transporters.\nHormone production.\nThe thyroid hormones are created from thyroglobulin. This is a protein within the colloid in the follicular lumen that is originally created within the rough endoplasmic reticulum of follicular cells and then transported into the follicular lumen. Thyroglobulin contains 123 units of tyrosine, which reacts with iodine within the follicular lumen.\nIodine is essential for the production of the thyroid hormones. Iodine (I0) travels in the blood as iodide (I\u2212), which is taken up into the follicular cells by a sodium-iodide symporter. This is an ion channel on the cell membrane which in the same action transports two sodium ions and an iodide ion into the cell. Iodide then travels from within the cell into the lumen, through the action of pendrin, an iodide-chloride antiporter. In the follicular lumen, the iodide is then oxidized to iodine. This makes it more reactive, and the iodine is attached to the active tyrosine units in thyroglobulin by the enzyme thyroid peroxidase. This forms the precursors of thyroid hormones monoiodotyrosine (MIT), and diiodotyrosine (DIT).\nWhen the follicular cells are stimulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone, the follicular cells reabsorb thyroglobulin from the follicular lumen. The iodinated tyrosines are cleaved, forming the thyroid hormones T4, T3, DIT, MIT, and traces of reverse triiodothyronine. T3 and T4 are released into the blood. The hormones secreted from the gland are about 80\u201390% T4 and about 10\u201320% T3. Deiodinase enzymes in peripheral tissues remove the iodine from MIT and DIT and convert T4 to T3 and RT3. This is a major source of both RT3 (95%) and T3 (87%) in peripheral tissues.\nRegulation.\nThe production of thyroxine and triiodothyronine is primarily regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), released by the anterior pituitary gland. TSH release in turn is stimulated by thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH), released in a pulsatile manner from the hypothalamus. The thyroid hormones provide negative feedback to the thyrotropes TSH and TRH: when the thyroid hormones are high, TSH production is suppressed. This negative feedback also occurs when levels of TSH are high, causing TRH production to be suppressed.\nTRH is secreted at an increased rate in situations such as cold exposure in order to stimulate thermogenesis. In addition to being suppressed by the presence of thyroid hormones, TSH production is blunted by dopamine, somatostatin, and glucocorticoids.\nCalcitonin.\nThe thyroid gland also produces the hormone calcitonin, which helps regulate blood calcium levels. Parafollicular cells produce calcitonin in response to high blood calcium. Calcitonin decreases the release of calcium from bone, by decreasing the activity of osteoclasts, cells which break down bone. Bone is constantly reabsorbed by osteoclasts and created by osteoblasts, so calcitonin effectively stimulates movement of calcium into bone. The effects of calcitonin are opposite those of the parathyroid hormone (PTH) produced in the parathyroid glands. However, calcitonin seems far less essential than PTH, since calcium metabolism remains clinically normal after removal of the thyroid (thyroidectomy), but not the parathyroid glands.\nGene and protein expression.\nAbout 20,000 protein-coding genes are expressed in human cells: 70% of these genes are expressed in thyroid cells. Two-hundred and fifty of these genes are more specifically expressed in the thyroid, and about 20 genes are highly thyroid specific. In the follicular cells, the proteins synthesized by these genes direct thyroid hormone synthesis\u2014thyroglobulin, TPO, and IYD; while in the parafollicular c-cells, they direct calcitonin synthesis\u2014CALCA, and CALCB.\nClinical significance.\nGeneral practitioners, and internal medicine specialists play a role in identifying and monitoring the treatment of thyroid disease. Endocrinologists and thyroidologists are thyroid specialists. Thyroid surgeons or otolaryngologists are responsible for the surgical management of thyroid disease.\nFunctional disorders.\nHyperthyroidism.\nExcessive production of the thyroid hormones is called hyperthyroidism. Causes include Graves' disease, toxic multinodular goitre, solitary thyroid adenoma, inflammation, and a pituitary adenoma which secretes excess TSH. Another cause is excess iodine availability, either from excess ingestion, induced by the drug amiodarone, or following iodinated contrast imaging.\nHyperthyroidism often causes a variety of non-specific symptoms including weight loss, increased appetite, insomnia, decreased tolerance of heat, tremor, palpitations, anxiety and nervousness. In some cases it can cause chest pain, diarrhoea, hair loss and muscle weakness. Such symptoms may be managed temporarily with drugs such as beta blockers.\nLong-term management of hyperthyroidism may include drugs that suppress thyroid function such as propylthiouracil, carbimazole and methimazole. Alternatively, radioactive iodine-131 can be used to destroy thyroid tissue: radioactive iodine is selectively taken up by thyroid cells, which over time destroys them. The chosen first-line treatment will depend on the individual and on the country where being treated. Surgery to remove the thyroid can sometimes be performed as a transoral thyroidectomy, a minimally invasive procedure. Surgery does however carry a risk of damage to the parathyroid glands and the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which innervates the vocal cords. If the entire thyroid gland is removed, hypothyroidism will inevitably result, and thyroid hormone substitutes will be needed.\nHypothyroidism.\nAn underactive thyroid gland results in hypothyroidism. Typical symptoms are abnormal weight gain, tiredness, constipation, heavy menstrual bleeding, hair loss, cold intolerance, and a slow heart rate. Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of hypothyroidism worldwide, and the autoimmune disease Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the most common cause in the developed world. Other causes include congenital abnormalities, diseases causing transient inflammation, surgical removal or radioablation of the thyroid, the drugs amiodarone and lithium, amyloidosis, and sarcoidosis. Some forms of hypothyroidism can result in myxedema and severe cases can result in myxedema coma.\nHypothyroidism is managed with replacement of the thyroid hormones. This is usually given daily as an oral supplement, and may take a few weeks to become effective. Some causes of hypothyroidism, such as Postpartum thyroiditis and Subacute thyroiditis may be transient and pass over time, and other causes such as iodine deficiency may be able to be rectified with dietary supplementation.\nDiseases.\nGraves' disease.\nGraves' disease is an autoimmune disorder that is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. In Graves' disease, for an unknown reason autoantibodies develop against the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor. These antibodies activate the receptor, leading to development of a goitre and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, such as heat intolerance, weight loss, diarrhoea and palpitations. Occasionally such antibodies block but do not activate the receptor, leading to symptoms associated with hypothyroidism. In addition, gradual protrusion of the eyes may occur, called Graves' ophthalmopathy, as may swelling of the front of the shins. Graves' disease can be diagnosed by the presence of pathognomonic features such as involvement of the eyes and shins, or isolation of autoantibodies, or by results of a radiolabelled uptake scan. Graves' disease is treated with anti-thyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil, which decrease the production of thyroid hormones, but hold a high rate of relapse. If there is no involvement of the eyes, then use of radioactive isotopes to ablate the gland may be considered. Surgical removal of the gland with subsequent thyroid hormone replacement may be considered, however this will not control symptoms associated with the eye or skin.\nNodules.\nThyroid nodules are often found on the gland, with a prevalence of 4\u20137%. The majority of nodules do not cause any symptoms, thyroid hormone secretion is normal, and they are non-cancerous. Non-cancerous cases include simple cysts, colloid nodules, and thyroid adenomas. Malignant nodules, which only occur in about 5% of nodules, include follicular, papillary, medullary carcinomas and metastasis from other sites. Nodules are more likely in females, those who are exposed to radiation, and in those who are iodine deficient.\nWhen a nodule is present, thyroid function tests determine whether the nodule is secreting excess thyroid hormones, causing hyperthyroidism. When the thyroid function tests are normal, an ultrasound is often used to investigate the nodule, and provide information such as whether the nodule is fluid-filled or a solid mass, and whether the appearance is suggestive of a benign or malignant cancer. A needle aspiration biopsy may then be performed, and the sample undergoes cytology, in which the appearance of cells is viewed to determine whether they resemble normal or cancerous cells.\nThe presence of multiple nodules is called a multinodular goitre; and if it is associated with hyperthyroidism, it is called a toxic multinodular goitre.\nGoitre.\nAn enlarged thyroid gland is called a goitre. Goitres are present in some form in about 5% of people, and are the result of a large number of causes, including iodine deficiency, autoimmune disease (both Graves' disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis), infection, inflammation, and infiltrative disease such as sarcoidosis and amyloidosis. Sometimes no cause can be found, a state called \"simple goitre\".\nSome forms of goitre are associated with pain, whereas many do not cause any symptoms. Enlarged goitres may extend beyond the normal position of the thyroid gland to below the sternum, around the airway or esophagus. Goitres may be associated with hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, relating to the underlying cause of the goitre. Thyroid function tests may be done to investigate the cause and effects of the goitre. The underlying cause of the goitre may be treated, however many goitres with no associated symptoms are simply monitored.\nInflammation.\nInflammation of the thyroid is called thyroiditis, and may cause symptoms of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism. Two types of thyroiditis initially present with hyperthyroidism and are sometimes followed by a period of hypothyroidism \u2013 Hashimoto's thyroiditis and postpartum thyroiditis. There are other disorders that cause inflammation of the thyroid, and these include subacute thyroiditis, acute thyroiditis, silent thyroiditis, Riedel's thyroiditis and traumatic injury, including palpation thyroiditis.\nHashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune disorder in which the thyroid gland is infiltrated by the lymphocytes B cell and T cells. These progressively destroy the thyroid gland. In this way, Hasimoto's thyroiditis may have occurred insidiously, and only be noticed when thyroid hormone production decreases, causing symptoms of hypothyroidism. Hashimoto's is more common in females than males, much more common after the age of 60, and has known genetic risk factors. Also more common in individuals with Hashimoto's thyroiditis are Type 1 diabetes, pernicious anaemia, Addison's disease, and vitiligo.\nPostpartum thyroiditis occurs sometimes following childbirth. After delivery, the thyroid becomes inflamed and the condition initially presents with a period of hyperthyroidism followed by hypothyroidism and, usually, a return to normal function. The course of the illness takes place over several months, and is characterised by a painless goitre. Antibodies against thyroid peroxidase can be found on testing. The inflammation usually resolves without treatment, although thyroid hormone replacement may be needed during the period of hypothyroidism.\nCancer.\nThe most common tumor affecting the thyroid is a benign adenoma, usually presenting as a painless mass in the neck. Thyroid cancers are most often carcinomas, although cancer can occur in any tissue that the thyroid consists of, including cancer of C-cells and lymphomas. Cancers from other sites also rarely lodge in the thyroid. Radiation of the head and neck presents a risk factor for thyroid cancer, and cancer is more common in women than men, occurring at a rate of about 2:1.\nIn most cases, thyroid cancer presents as a painless mass in the neck. It is very unusual for thyroid cancers to present with other symptoms, although in some cases cancer may cause hyperthyroidism. Most thyroid cancers are papillary, followed by follicular, medullary, and thyroid lymphoma. Because of the prominence of the thyroid gland, cancer is often detected earlier in the course of disease as the cause of a nodule, which may undergo fine-needle aspiration. Thyroid function tests will help reveal whether the nodule produces excess thyroid hormones. A radioactive iodine uptake test can help reveal the activity and location of the cancer and metastases.\nThyroid cancers are treated by removing the whole or part of thyroid gland. Radioactive Iodine-131 may be given to radioablate the thyroid. Thyroxine is given to replace the hormones lost and to suppress TSH production, as TSH may stimulate recurrence. With the exception of the rare anaplastic thyroid cancer, which carries a very poor prognosis, most thyroid cancers carry an excellent prognosis and can even be considered curable.\nCongenital.\nA persistent thyroglossal duct is the most common clinically significant birth defect of the thyroid gland. A persistent sinus tract may remain as a vestigial remnant of the tubular development of the thyroid gland. Parts of this tube may be obliterated, leaving small segments to form thyroglossal cysts. Preterm neonates are at risk of hypothyroidism as their thyroid glands are insufficiently developed to meet their postnatal needs. In order to detect hypothyroidism in newborn babies, to prevent growth and development abnormalities in later life, many countries have newborn screening programs at birth.\nInfants with thyroid hormone deficiency (congenital hypothyroidism) can manifest problems of physical growth and development as well as brain development, termed cretinism. Children with congenital hypothyroidism are treated supplementally with levothyroxine, which facilitates normal growth and development.\nMucinous, clear secretions may collect within these cysts to form either spherical masses or fusiform swellings, rarely larger than 2 to 3\u00a0cm in diameter. These are present in the midline of the neck anterior to the trachea. Segments of the duct and cysts that occur high in the neck are lined by stratified squamous epithelium, which is essentially identical to that covering the posterior portion of the tongue in the region of the foramen cecum. The disorders that occur in the lower neck more proximal to the thyroid gland are lined by epithelium resembling the thyroidal acinar epithelium. Characteristically, next to the lining epithelium, there is an intense lymphocytic infiltrate. Superimposed infection may convert these lesions into abscess cavities, and rarely, give rise to cancers.\nAnother disorder is that of thyroid dysgenesis which can result in various presentations of one or more misplaced accessory thyroid glands. These can be asymptomatic.\nIodine.\nIodine deficiency, most common in inland and mountainous areas, can predispose to goitre \u2013 if widespread, known as endemic goitre. Pregnant women deficient of iodine can give birth to infants with thyroid hormone deficiency. The use of iodised salt to add iodine to the diet has eliminated endemic cretinism in most developed countries, and over 120 countries have made the iodination of salt mandatory.\nBecause the thyroid concentrates iodine, it also concentrates the various radioactive isotopes of iodine produced by nuclear fission. In the event of large accidental releases of such material into the environment, the uptake of radioactive iodine isotopes by the thyroid can, in theory, be blocked by saturating the uptake mechanism with a large surplus of non-radioactive iodine, taken in the form of potassium iodide tablets. One consequence of the Chernobyl disaster was an increase in thyroid cancers in children in the years following the accident.\nExcessive iodine intake is uncommon and usually has no effect on the thyroid function. Sometimes though it may cause hyperthyroidism, and sometimes hypothyroidism with a resulting goitre.\nEvaluation.\nThe thyroid is examined by observation of the gland and surrounding neck for swelling or enlargement. It is then felt, usually from behind, and a person is often asked to swallow to better feel the gland against the fingers of the examiner. The gland moves up and down with swallowing because of its attachments to the thyroid and cricoid cartilages. In a healthy person the gland is not visible yet is palpable as a soft mass. Examination of the thyroid gland includes the search for abnormal masses and the assessment of overall thyroid size. The character of the thyroid, swellings, nodules, and their consistency may all be able to be felt. If a goitre is present, an examiner may also feel down the neck consider tapping the upper part of the chest to check for extension. Further tests may include raising the arms (Pemberton's sign), listening to the gland with a stethoscope for bruits, testing of reflexes, and palpation of the lymph nodes in the head and neck. \nAn examination of the thyroid will also include observation of the person as a whole, to look for systemic signs such as weight gain or loss, hair loss, and signs in other locations \u2013 such as protrusion of the eyes or swelling of the calves in Graves' disease.\nTests.\nThyroid function tests include a battery of blood tests, including the measurement of the thyroid hormones, as well as the measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). They may reveal hyperthyroidism (high T3 and T4), hypothyroidism (low T3, T4), or subclinical hyperthyroidism (normal T3 and T4 with a low TSH).\nTSH levels are considered the most sensitive marker of thyroid dysfunction. They are however not always accurate, particularly if the cause of hypothyroidism is thought to be related to insufficient thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) secretion, in which case it may be low or falsely normal. In such a case a TRH stimulation test, in which TRH is given and TSH levels are measured at 30 and 60-minutes after, may be conducted.\nT3 and T4 can be measured directly. However, as the two thyroid hormones travel bound to other molecules, and it is the \"free\" component that is biologically active, free T3 and free T4 levels can be measured. T3 is preferred, because in hypothyroidism T3 levels may be normal. The ratio of bound to unbound thyroid hormones is known as the thyroid hormone binding ratio (THBR). It is also possible to measure directly the main carriers of the thyroid hormones, thyroglobulin and throxine-binding globulin. Thyroglobulin will also be measurable in a healthy thyroid, and will increase with inflammation, and may also be used to measure the success of thyroid removal or ablation. If successful, thyroglobulin should be undetectable. Lastly, antibodies against components of the thyroid, particularly anti-TPO and anti-thyroglobulin, can be measured. These may be present in normal individuals but are highly sensitive for autoimmune-related disease.\nImaging.\nUltrasound of the thyroid may be used to reveal whether structures are solid or filled with fluid, helping to differentiate between nodules and goitres and cysts. It may also help differentiate between malignant and benign lesions. \nWhen further imaging is required, a radiolabelled iodine-123 or technetium-99 uptake scan may take place. This can determine the size and shape of lesions, reveal whether nodules or goitres are metabolically active, and reveal and monitor sites of thyroid disease or cancer deposits outside the thyroid.\nA fine needle aspiration of a sample of thyroid tissue may be taken in order to evaluate a lesion seen on ultrasound which is then sent for histopathology and cytology.\nComputed tomography of the thyroid plays an important role in the evaluation of thyroid cancer. CT scans often incidentally find thyroid abnormalities, and thereby practically becomes the first investigation modality.\nHistory.\nThe thyroid gland received its modern name in the 1600s, when the anatomist Thomas Wharton likened its shape to that of an Ancient Greek shield or . However, the existence of the gland, and of the diseases associated with it, was known long before then.\nAntiquity.\nThe presence and diseases of the thyroid have been noted and treated for thousands of years. In 1600 BCE burnt sponge and seaweed (which contain iodine) were used within China for the treatment of goitres, a practice which has developed in many parts of the world. In Ayurvedic medicine, the book Sushruta Samhita written about 1400 BCE described hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism and goitre. Aristotle and Xenophon in the fifth century BCE describe cases of diffuse toxic goitre. Hippocrates and Plato in the fourth century BCE provided some of the first descriptions of the gland itself, proposing its function as a salivary gland. Pliny the Elder in the first century BCE referred to epidemics of goitre in the Alps and proposed treatment with burnt seaweed, a practice also referred to by Galen in the second century, referred to burnt sponge for the treatment of goitre. The Chinese pharmacology text \"Shennong Ben Cao Jing\", written ca. 200\u2013250, also refers to goitre.\nScientific era.\nIn 1500 polymath Leonardo da Vinci provided the first illustration of the thyroid. In 1543 anatomist Andreas Vesalius gave the first anatomic description and illustration of the gland. In 1656 the thyroid received its modern name, by the anatomist Thomas Wharton. The gland was named thyroid, meaning shield, as its shape resembled the shields commonly used in Ancient Greece. The English name \"thyroid gland\" is derived from the medical Latin used by Wharton \u2013 . means 'gland' in Latin, and can be traced back to the Ancient Greek word , meaning 'shield-like/shield-shaped'.\nFrench chemist Bernard Courtois discovered iodine in 1811, and in 1896 Eugen Baumann documented it as the central ingredient in the thyroid gland. He did this by boiling the thyroid glands of a thousand sheep, and named the precipitate, a combination of the thyroid hormones, 'iodothyrin'. David Marine in 1907 proved that iodine is necessary for thyroid function. \nGraves' disease was described by Robert James Graves in 1834. The role of the thyroid gland in metabolism was demonstrated in 1895 by Adolf Magnus-Levy. Thyroxine was first isolated in 1914 and synthesized in 1927, and triiodothyroxine in 1952. The conversion of T4 to T3 was discovered in 1970. The process of discovering TSH took place over the early to mid twentieth century. TRH was discovered by Polish endocrinologist Andrew Schally in 1970, contributing in part to his Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1977.\nIn the nineteenth century numerous authors described both cretinism and myxedema, and their relationship to the thyroid. Charles Mayo coined the term hyperthyroidism in 1910. Hakaru Hashimoto documented a case of Hashimoto's thyroiditis in 1912, antibodies in this disease were demonstrated in 1956. Knowledge of the thyroid and its conditions developed throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, with many modern treatments and investigative modalities evolving throughout the mid twentieth century, including the use of radioactive iodine, thiouracil and fine needle aspiration.\nSurgery.\nEither Aetius in the sixth century CE or Persian Ali ibn Abbas al-Magusi in 990 CE conducted the first recorded thyroidectomy as a treatment for goitre. Operations remained risky and generally were not successful until the 19th century, when descriptions emerged from a number of authors including Prussian surgeon Theodor Billroth, Swiss surgeon and physiologist Theodor Kocher, American physician Charles Mayo, American surgeons William Halsted and George Crile. These descriptions provided the basis for modern thyroid surgery. Theodor Kocher went on to win the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1909 \"for his work on the physiology, pathology and surgery of the thyroid gland\".\nOther animals.\nThe thyroid gland is found in all vertebrates. In fish, it is usually located below the gills and is not always divided into distinct lobes. However, in some teleosts, patches of thyroid tissue are found elsewhere in the body, associated with the kidneys, spleen, heart, or eyes.\nIn tetrapods, the thyroid is always found somewhere in the neck region. In most tetrapod species, there are two paired thyroid glands \u2013 that is, the right and left lobes are not joined. However, there is only ever a single thyroid gland in most mammals, and the shape found in humans is common to many other species.\nIn larval lampreys, the thyroid originates as an exocrine gland, secreting its hormones into the gut, and associated with the larva's filter-feeding apparatus. In the adult lamprey, the gland separates from the gut, and becomes endocrine, but this path of development may reflect the evolutionary origin of the thyroid. For instance, the closest living relatives of vertebrates, the tunicates and amphioxi (lancelets), have a structure very similar to that of larval lampreys (the endostyle), and this also secretes iodine-containing compounds, though not thyroxine.\nThyroxine is critical to metabolic regulation, and growth throughout the vertebrate clade. Iodine and T4 trigger the change from a plant-eating water-dwelling tadpole into a meat-eating land-dwelling frog, with better neurological, visuospatial, smell and cognitive abilities for hunting, as seen in other predatory animals. A similar phenomenon happens in the neotenic amphibian salamanders, which, without introducing iodine, do not transform into land-dwelling adults, and live and reproduce in the larval form of aquatic axolotl. Among amphibians, administering a thyroid-blocking agent such as propylthiouracil (PTU) can prevent tadpoles from metamorphosing into frogs; in contrast, administering thyroxine will trigger metamorphosis. In amphibian metamorphosis, thyroxine and iodine also exert a well-studied experimental model of apoptosis on the cells of gills, tail, and fins of tadpoles. Iodine, via iodolipids, has favored the evolution of terrestrial animal species and has likely played a crucial role in the evolution of the human brain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30081", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30081", "title": "Theory of Relativity", "text": ""}
{"id": "30084", "revid": "45135203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30084", "title": "The Singularity (Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.)", "text": "\"The Singularity\" is the eighteenth episode of the third season of the American television series \"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.\" Based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D., it follows Phil Coulson and his team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents as they attempt to defeat Hive. It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) and acknowledges the franchise's films. The episode was written by Lauren LeFranc, and directed by Garry A. Brown.\nClark Gregg reprises his role as Coulson from the film series, and is joined by series regulars Ming-Na Wen, Brett Dalton, Chloe Bennet, Iain De Caestecker, Elizabeth Henstridge, Henry Simmons, and Luke Mitchell.\n\"The Singularity\" originally aired on ABC on April 26, 2016, and according to Nielsen Media Research, was watched by 3.22 million viewers.\nPlot.\nS.H.I.E.L.D. scrambles to repair the damage Daisy Johnson did to the base, while Phil Coulson, who sustained a leg injury, resolves to defeat Hive and save Daisy. Leo Fitz, Jemma Simmons and Lincoln Campbell determine that the effect of Hive's infection will prevent those Inhumans he controls from being sedated. Realizing Alisha Whitley would be a powerful asset to Hive, Coulson, Melinda May and Lincoln visit her, where Coulson orders Lincoln to wear a vest that will self-destruct if he is infected, after which May chastises him for his hypocrisy. Lincoln speaks with Alisha, only to find she has already been infected and has gone with Hive, leaving her duplicates to attack them. After he unintentionally causes Alisha's duplicates to die, Coulson orders Lincoln to stay out of the field until they have a cure for Hive's infection.\nHive and Daisy approach James, revealing they know he has another Kree artifact connected to the orb, which Hive describes as the only thing that can destroy him. They induce his Terrigenesis, giving him the ability to explosively charge objects (in a similar manner to an Extremis combustion), and Hive enthralls him, learning he buried the companion artifact beneath his home. Daisy's use of her seismokinetic powers to unearth the artifact attracts the attention of S.H.I.E.L.D., and Coulson and May arrive to find the Inhumans already gone, along with the artifact. The hut is destroyed by a planted bomb, but Coulson protects himself and May with an energy shield projected from his robotic hand.\nMeanwhile, Fitz, Simmons and Alphonso \"Mack\" Mackenzie decide to seek out Holden Radcliffe, who was in charge of Transia's work against invasive organisms, before he was fired for his transhumanist beliefs. While continuing to discuss how to proceed with their relationship, Fitz and Simmons infiltrate a transhumanist social club to find Radcliffe, under the guise of geneticists wanting to sell him eye prosthetic technology based on those used for Project Deathlok. Upon meeting Radcliffe they reveal their true intentions and ask for his help to devise a cure for Hive's infection, but they are interrupted by the arrival of Hive himself and his Inhuman allies. Alisha abducts Radcliffe, while Daisy subdues Fitz with her powers and warns him of her vision of an agent's death, wanting S.H.I.E.L.D. to stop trying to combat Hive, and avoid that future from coming to pass. Mack narrowly escapes James, and Hive approaches Simmons, speaking to her as Will Daniels, using his memories, only for her to shoot him and escape, after deriding him for trying to be someone he murdered. The three agents reconvene at a hotel, where Fitz and Simmons finally consummate their relationship.\nUnder Coulson's direction, Glenn Talbot and the Advanced Threat Containment Unit (ATCU) use information Gideon Malick provided before his death to neutralize what is left of Hydra, with the exception of the forces commanded by Hive.\nIn an end tag, Hive brings Daisy, Radcliffe, Alisha, and James (who has chosen the moniker \"Hellfire\") to a town he bought with Malick's money. Seeking to make Earth \"the home Inhumans deserve\", he reveals his intention to recreate the original Kree experiments and convert the entire human race into Inhumans, with Radcliffe's medical and scientific help.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn April 2016, Marvel announced that the eighteenth episode of the season would be titled \"The Singularity\", to be written by Lauren LeFranc, with Garry A. Brown directing.\nCasting.\nIn April 2016, Marvel revealed that main cast members Clark Gregg, Ming-Na Wen, Brett Dalton, Chloe Bennet, Iain De Caestecker, Elizabeth Henstridge, Nick Blood, Adrianne Palicki, Henry Simmons, and Luke Mitchell would star as Phil Coulson, Melinda May, Hive, Daisy Johnson, Leo Fitz, Jemma Simmons, Lance Hunter, Bobbi Morse, Alphonso \"Mack\" Mackenzie, and Lincoln Campbell, respectively. It was also revealed that the guest cast for the episode would include Axle Whitehead as James, John Hannah as Holden Radcliffe, Alicia Vela-Bailey as Alisha, Adrian Pasdar as Brigadier General Glenn Talbot, Alexander Wraith as Agent Anderson, Camille De Pazzis as Anon and Rudy Dobrev as bartender. Vela-Bailey, Wraith, and Dobrev did not receive guest star credit in the episode. Whitehead, Vela-Bailey, Pasdar, and Wraith reprise their roles from earlier in the series. Blood and Palicki do not ultimately appear.\nFilming.\nFor the episode's opening long take shot, the cameraman wore a wire rig usually reserved for actors and stunt doubles so he could be maneuvered around and above the set.\nBroadcast.\n\"The Singularity\" was first aired in the United States on ABC on April 26, 2016.\nReception.\nRatings.\nIn the United States the episode received a 1.0/3 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49, meaning that it was seen by 1.0 percent of all households, and 3 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast. It was watched by 3.22 million viewers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30085", "revid": "32589484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30085", "title": "Thomas Mann", "text": "German novelist and Nobel Prize laureate (1875\u20131955)\nPaul Thomas Mann ( , ; ; 6 June 1875 \u2013 12 August 1955) was a German novelist, short story writer, social critic, philanthropist, essayist, and the 1929 Nobel Prize in Literature laureate. His highly symbolic and ironic epic novels and novellas are noted for their insight into the psychology of the artist and the intellectual. His analysis and critique of the European and German soul used modernized versions of German and Biblical stories, as well as the ideas of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Friedrich Nietzsche, and Arthur Schopenhauer.\nMann was a member of the hanseatic Mann family and portrayed his family and class in his first novel, \"Buddenbrooks\" (1901). Late major novels include \"The Magic Mountain\" (1924), the tetralogy \"Joseph and His Brothers\" (1933\u20131943), and \"Doctor Faustus\" (1947); he also wrote short stories and novellas, including \"Death in Venice\" (1912).\nHis older brother was the novelist Heinrich Mann, and three of Mann's six children \u2013 Erika Mann, Klaus Mann and Golo Mann \u2013 also became significant German writers. When Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933, Mann fled to Switzerland. When World War II broke out in 1939, he moved to the United States, then returned to Switzerland in 1952. Mann is one of the best-known exponents of the so-called \"Exilliteratur\", German literature written in exile by those who opposed the Hitler regime.\nLife.\nPaul Thomas Mann was born to a hanseatic family in L\u00fcbeck, the second son of Thomas Johann Heinrich Mann (a senator and a grain merchant) and his wife J\u00falia da Silva Bruhns, a Brazilian woman of German, Portuguese and Native Brazilian ancestry, who emigrated to Germany with her family when she was seven years old. His mother was Roman Catholic but Mann was baptised into his father's Lutheran religion. Mann's father died in 1891, and after that his trading firm was liquidated. The family subsequently moved to Munich. Mann first studied science at a L\u00fcbeck \"Gymnasium\" (secondary school), then attended the Ludwig Maximillians University of Munich as well as the Technical University of Munich, where, in preparation for a journalism career, he studied history, economics, art history and literature.\nMann lived in Munich from 1891 until 1933, with the exception of a year spent in Palestrina, Italy, with his elder brother, the novelist Heinrich. Thomas worked at the South German Fire Insurance Company in 1894\u201395. His career as a writer began when he wrote for the magazine \"Simplicissimus\". Mann's first short story, \"Little Herr Friedemann\" (\"Der Kleine Herr Friedemann\"), was published in 1898.\nIn 1905, Mann married Katia Pringsheim, who came from a wealthy, secular Jewish industrialist family. She later joined the Lutheran church. The couple had six children: Erika (b. 1905), Klaus (b. 1906), Golo (b. 1909), Monika (b. 1910), Elisabeth (b. 1918) and Michael (b. 1919).\nDue to the Pringsheim family's wealth, Katia Mann was able to purchase a summer property in Bad T\u00f6lz in 1908, on which they built a country house the following year, which they kept until 1917. In 1914 they also purchased a villa in Munich (at Poschinger Str in the borough of Bogenhausen, today 10 Thomas-Mann-Allee) where they lived until 1933.\nPre-war and Second World War period.\nIn 1912, Katia was treated for what was incorrectly diagnosed as tuberculosis for a few months in a sanatorium in Davos, Switzerland, where Thomas Mann visited her for a few weeks. This inspired him to write his 1924 novel \"The Magic Mountain\". He was also appalled by the risk of international confrontation between Germany and France, following the Agadir Crisis in Morocco, and later by the outbreak of the First World War. The novel ends with the outbreak of this war, in which the hero enlists, with his survival uncertain.\nAs a \"German patriot\", Mann had the proceeds from their summer house used in 1917 to subscribe to war bonds, which lost their face value after the war was lost. His father-in-law did the same, which caused a loss of a major part of the Pringsheim family's wealth. The disastrous inflation of 1923 and 1924 resulted in additional high losses. The sales success of his novel \"The Magic Mountain\", published in 1924, improved his financial situation again, as did the award of the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1929. He used the prize money to build a in the fishing village of Nida, Lithuania on the Curonian Spit, where there was a German art colony and where he spent the summers of 1930\u20131932 working on \"Joseph and His Brothers\". Today, the cottage is a cultural center dedicated to him, with a small memorial exhibition.\nIn February 1933, having finished a book tour to Amsterdam, Brussels and Paris, Thomas Mann moved to Arosa (Switzerland) when Hitler took power, and Mann heard from his eldest children, Klaus and Erika in Munich, that it would not be safe for him to return to Germany. His political views (see chapter below) had made him an enemy of the Nazis. He was doubtful at first, because, with a certain na\u00efvet\u00e9, he could not imagine the violence of the overthrow and the persecution of opponents of the regime, but the children insisted, and their advice later turned out to be accurate when it emerged that even their driver-caretaker had become an informant and that Mann's immediate arrest would have been very likely. The family (except these two children, who went to Amsterdam) emigrated to K\u00fcsnacht, near Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland, after a stopover in Sanary-sur-Mer, France. The son Golo managed, at great risk, to smuggle the already completed chapters of the \"Joseph\" novel and the (sensitive) diaries into Switzerland. The Bavarian Political Police searched Mann's house in Munich and confiscated the house, its inventory and the bank accounts. At the same time, an arrest warrant was issued. Mann was also no longer able to use his holiday home in Lithuania because it was only a few hundred yards from the German border and he seemed to be at risk there. When all members of the Poetry Section at the Prussian Academy of Arts were asked to make a declaration of loyalty to the National Socialist government, Mann declared his resignation on 17 March 1933.\nThe writer's freedom of movement was reduced when his German passport expired. The Manns traveled to the United States for the first two times in 1934 and 1935. There was great interest in the prominent writer; the authorities allowed him entry without a valid passport. He received Czechoslovak citizenship and a passport in 1936, even though he had never lived there. A few weeks later the German citizenship of Mann, his wife Katia, and their children Golo, Elisabeth and Michael were revoked, and the Nazi government expropriated the family home in Munich, which Reinhard Heydrich in particular insisted on. It had already been confiscated and forcibly rented out in 1933. In December 1936, the University of Bonn withdrew the honorary doctorate awarded to Mann in 1919; on 13 December 1946, after the defeat of Nazi Germany, it was reinstated.\nIn 1939, following the German occupation of Czechoslovakia, Mann emigrated to the United States, while his in-laws only managed, thanks to high-ranking connections, to leave Germany for Zurich in October 1939. The Manns moved to Princeton, New Jersey, where they lived on 65 Stockton Street and he began to teach at Princeton University. In 1941 he was designated consultant in German Literature, later Fellow in Germanic Literature, at the Library of Congress. In 1942, the Mann family moved to 1550 San Remo Drive in the Pacific Palisades neighborhood of Los Angeles, California. The Manns were prominent members of the German expatriate community of Los Angeles and frequently met other \u00e9migr\u00e9s at the house of Salka and Bertold Viertel in Santa Monica, and at the Villa Aurora, the home of fellow German exile Lion Feuchtwanger. Thomas Mann's always difficult relationship with his brother Heinrich, who envied Thomas's success and wealth and also differed politically, hardly improved when the latter arrived in California, poor and sickly, in need of support. On 23 June 1944, Thomas Mann was naturalized as a citizen of the United States. The Manns lived in Los Angeles until 1952.\nAnti-Nazi broadcasts.\nThe outbreak of World War II, on 1 September 1939, prompted Mann to offer anti-Nazi speeches in German to the German people via the BBC. In October 1940, he began monthly broadcasts, recorded in the U.S. and flown to London, where the BBC German Service broadcast them to Germany on the longwave band. In these eight-minute addresses, Mann condemned Hitler and his \"paladins\" as crude philistines completely out of touch with European culture. In one noted speech, he said: \"The war is horrible, but it has the advantage of keeping Hitler from making speeches about culture.\"\nMann was one of the few publicly active opponents of Nazism among German expatriates in the U.S. In a BBC broadcast of 30 December 1945, after the defeat of Germany, Mann said he understood why those peoples that had suffered from the Nazi regime would embrace the idea of German collective guilt. But he also thought that many enemies might now have second thoughts about \"revenge\". And he expressed regret that such judgement cannot be based on the individual:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those, whose world became grey a long time ago when they realized what mountains of hate towered over Germany; those, who a long time ago imagined during sleepless nights how terrible would be the revenge on Germany for the inhuman deeds of the Nazis, cannot help but view with wretchedness all that is being done to Germans by the Russians, Poles, or Czechs as nothing other than a mechanical and inevitable reaction to the crimes that the people have committed as a nation, in which unfortunately individual justice, or the guilt or innocence of the individual, can play no part.\nLast years.\nWith the start of the Cold War, he was increasingly frustrated by rising McCarthyism. As a \"suspected communist\", he was required to testify to the House Un-American Activities Committee, where he was termed \"one of the world's foremost apologists for Stalin and company\". He was listed by HUAC as being \"affiliated with various peace organizations or Communist fronts\". Being in his own words a non-communist, rather than an anti-communist, Mann openly opposed the allegations: \"As an American citizen of German birth, I finally testify that I am painfully familiar with certain political trends. Spiritual intolerance, political inquisitions, and declining legal security, and all this in the name of an alleged 'state of emergency'. ... That is how it started in Germany.\" As Mann joined protests against the jailing of the Hollywood Ten and the firing of schoolteachers suspected of being Communists, he found \"the media had been closed to him\". Finally, he was forced to quit his position as Consultant in Germanic Literature at the Library of Congress, and in 1952, he returned to Europe, to live in Kilchberg, near Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland. Here he initially lived in a rented house and bought his last house there in 1954 (which later his widow and then their son Golo lived in until their deaths). He never again lived in Germany, though he regularly traveled there. His most important German visit was in 1949, at the 200th birthday of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, attending celebrations in Frankfurt am Main (then West Germany) and Weimar (then East Germany), as a statement that German culture extended beyond the new political borders. He also visited L\u00fcbeck, where he saw his parents' house, which was partially destroyed by the bombing of L\u00fcbeck in World War II (and only later rebuilt). The city welcomed him warmly, but the patrician hanseatic families gave him a reserved welcome, since the publication of \"Buddenbrooks\" they had resented him for daring to describe their caste with some mockery, as they at least felt about it.\nAlong with Albert Einstein, Mann was one of the sponsors of the Peoples' World Convention (PWC), also known as Peoples' World Constituent Assembly (PWCA), which took place in 1950\u201351 at Palais Electoral, Geneva, Switzerland.\nDeath.\nFollowing his 80th birthday, Mann went on vacation to Noordwijk in the Netherlands. On 18 July 1955, he began to experience pain and unilateral swelling in his left leg. The condition of thrombophlebitis was diagnosed by Dr. Mulders from Leiden and confirmed by Dr. Wilhelm L\u00f6ffler. Mann was transported to a Z\u00fcrich hospital, but soon developed a state of shock. On 12 August 1955, he died. Postmortem, his condition was found to have been misdiagnosed. The pathologic diagnosis, made by Christoph Hedinger, showed he had actually suffered a perforated iliac artery aneurysm resulting in a retroperitoneal hematoma, compression and thrombosis of the iliac vein. (At that time, lifesaving vascular surgery had not been developed.) On 16 August 1955, Thomas Mann was buried in the Kilchberg village cemetery.\nLegacy.\nMann's work influenced many later authors, such as Yukio Mishima. Joseph Campbell also stated in an interview with Bill Moyers that Mann was one of his mentors. Many institutions are named in his honour, for instance the Thomas Mann Gymnasium of Budapest.\nCareer.\nBlanche Knopf of Alfred A. Knopf publishing house was introduced to Mann by H.L. Mencken while on a book-buying trip to Europe. Knopf became Mann's American publisher, and Blanche hired scholar Helen Tracy Lowe-Porter to translate Mann's books in 1924. Lowe-Porter subsequently translated Mann's complete works. Blanche Knopf continued to look after Mann. After \"Buddenbrooks\" proved successful in its first year, the Knopfs sent him an unexpected bonus. Later in the 1930s, Blanche helped arrange for Mann and his family to emigrate to America.\nNobel Prize in Literature.\nMann was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1929, after he had been nominated by Anders \u00d6sterling, member of the Swedish Academy, principally in recognition of his popular achievements with \"Buddenbrooks\" (1901), \"The Magic Mountain\" (\"Der Zauberberg\", 1924), and his numerous short stories. (Due to the personal taste of an influential committee member, only\" Buddenbrooks\" was cited at any great length.) Based on Mann's own family, \"Buddenbrooks\" relates the decline of a merchant family in L\u00fcbeck over the course of four generations. \"The Magic Mountain\" (\"Der Zauberberg\", 1924) follows an engineering student who, planning to visit his tubercular cousin at a Swiss sanatorium for only three weeks, finds his departure from the sanatorium delayed. During that time, he confronts medicine and the way it looks at the body and encounters a variety of characters, who play out ideological conflicts and discontents of contemporary European civilization. The tetralogy \"Joseph and His Brothers\" is an epic novel written over a period of sixteen years and is one of the largest and most significant works in Mann's oeuvre. Later novels included \"\" (1939), in which Mann returned to the world of Goethe's novel \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" (1774); \"Doctor Faustus\" (1947), the story of the fictitious composer Adrian Leverk\u00fchn and the corruption of German culture in the years before and during World War II; and \"Confessions of Felix Krull\" (\"Bekenntnisse des Hochstaplers Felix Krull\", 1954), which was unfinished at Mann's death. These later works prompted two members of the Swedish Academy to nominate Mann for the Nobel Prize in Literature a second time, in 1948.\nInfluence.\nThe writer Theodor Fontane, who died in 1898, had a particular stylistic influence on Thomas Mann. Of course, Mann always admired and emulated Goethe, the German \"poet prince\". The Danish author Herman Bang, with whom he felt a kindred spirit, had a certain influence, especially on the novellas. The pessimistic philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer provided philosophical inspiration for the \"Buddenbrooks\"' narrative of decline, especially with his two-volume work \"The World as Will and Representation\", which Mann studied closely while writing the novel. Russian narrators should also be mentioned, he admired the Russian Literature's ability for self-criticism, at least during the 19th century, in Nikolai Gogol, Ivan Goncharov and Ivan Turgenev. Mann believed that in order to make a bourgeois revolution, the Russians had to forget Dostoevsky. He particularly loved Leo Tolstoy, whom he considered an anarchist and whom he lovingly and mockingly admired for his \"courage to be boring.\"\nThroughout Mann's Dostoevsky essay, he finds parallels between the Russian and the sufferings of Friedrich Nietzsche. Speaking of Nietzsche, he says, \"his personal feelings initiate him into those of the criminal ... in general all creative originality, all artist nature in the broadest sense of the word, does the same. It was the French painter and sculptor Degas who said that an artist must approach his work in the spirit of the criminal about to commit a crime.\" Nietzsche's influence on Mann runs deep in his work, especially in Nietzsche's views on decay and the proposed fundamental connection between sickness and creativity. Mann believed that disease should not be regarded as wholly negative. In his essay on Dostoevsky, we find: \"but after all and above all it depends on who is diseased, who mad, who epileptic or paralytic: an average dull-witted man, in whose illness any intellectual or cultural aspect is non-existent; or a Nietzsche or Dostoyevsky. In their case something comes out in illness that is more important and conducive to life and growth than any medical guaranteed health or sanity... [I]n other words: certain conquests made by the soul and the mind are impossible without disease, madness, crime of the spirit.\"\nThematic and stylistic focuses.\nMany of Thomas Mann's works have the following similarities:\nPolitical views.\nDuring World War I, Mann supported the conservatism of Kaiser Wilhelm II, attacked liberalism, and supported the war effort, calling the Great War \"a purification, a liberation, an enormous hope\". In his 600-page-long work \"Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man\" (1918), Mann presented his conservative, anti-modernist philosophy: spiritual tradition over material progress, German patriotism over egalitarian internationalism, and rooted culture over rootless civilisation.\nIn \"On the German Republic\" (, 1922), Mann called upon German intellectuals to support the new Weimar Republic. The work was delivered at the Beethovensaal in Berlin on 13 October 1922, and published in \"Die neue Rundschau\" in November 1922. In the work, Mann developed his eccentric defence of the Republic based on extensive close readings of Novalis and Walt Whitman. Also in 1921, he wrote an essay \"Mind and Money\" in which he made a very open assessment of his family background: \"In any case, I am personally indebted to the capitalist world order from the past, which is why it will never be appropriate for me to spit on it as it is \"\u00e0 la mode\" these days.\" Thereafter, his political views gradually shifted toward liberal-left. He especially embraced democratic principles when the Weimar Republic was established.\nMann initially gave his support to the left-liberal German Democratic Party before urging unity behind the Social Democrats, probably less for ideological reasons, but because he only trusted the political party of the workers to provide sufficient mass and resistance to the growing Nazism. In 1930, he gave a public address in Berlin titled \"An Appeal to Reason\", in which he strongly denounced Nazism and encouraged resistance by the working class. This was followed by numerous essays and lectures in which he attacked the Nazis. At the same time, he expressed increasing sympathy for socialist ideas. When the Nazis came to power in 1933, Mann and his wife were on holiday in Switzerland. Due to his strident denunciations of Nazi policies, his son Klaus advised him not to return. In contrast to those of his brother Heinrich and his son Klaus, Mann's books were not among those burnt publicly by Hitler's regime in May 1933, possibly since he had been the Nobel laureate in literature for 1929. In 1936, the Nazi government officially revoked his German citizenship.\nDuring the war, Mann made a series of anti-Nazi radio-speeches, published as \"Listen, Germany!\" in 1943. They were recorded on tape in the United States and then sent to the United Kingdom, where the British Broadcasting Corporation transmitted them, hoping to reach German listeners.\nViews on Soviet communism and German Nazism.\nMann expressed his belief in the collection of letters written in exile, \"Listen, Germany!\" (\"Deutsche H\u00f6rer!\"), that equating Soviet communism with Nazi fascism on the basis that both are totalitarian systems was either superficial or insincere in showing a preference for Nazism. He clarified this view during a German press interview in July 1949, declaring that he was not a communist but that communism at least had some relation to ideals of humanity and of a better future. He said that the transition of the communist revolution into an autocratic regime was a tragedy while Nazism was only \"devilish nihilism\".\nSexuality and literary work.\nMann's diaries reveal his struggles with his bisexuality and paedophilia, his attraction to men and young boys finding frequent reflection in his works, most prominently through the obsession of the elderly Aschenbach for the 14-year-old Polish boy Tadzio in the novella \"Death in Venice\" (\"Der Tod in Venedig\", 1912). Anthony Heilbut's biography \"Thomas Mann: Eros and Literature\" (1997) uncovered the centrality of Mann's sexuality to his oeuvre. Gilbert Adair's work \"The Real Tadzio\" (2001) describes how, in 1911, Mann had stayed at the Grand H\u00f4tel des Bains on the Venice Lido with his wife and brother, when he became enraptured by the angelic figure of W\u0142adys\u0142aw (W\u0142adzio) Moes, a 10-year-old Polish boy (the real Tadzio). While the story found acclaim, his wife would later recall that her own uncle was disgusted to hear of this attraction: \u201cI still remember that my uncle, Privy Counsellor Friedberg, a famous professor of canon law in Leipzig, was outraged: \u2018What a story! And a married man with a family!\u2019\u201d\nIn the autobiographical novella \"Tonio Kr\u00f6ger\" from 1901, the young hero has a crush on a handsome male classmate (modeled after real-life L\u00fcbeck classmate Armin Martens). In the novella \"With the prophet\" (1904) Mann mocks the believing disciples of a neo-Romantic \"prophet\" who preaches asceticism and has a strong resemblance to the real contemporary poet Stefan George and his \"George-Kreis\" (\"George-Circle\"). In 1902, George had met the fourteen-year-old boy Maximilian Kronberger; He made an idol of him and after his early death in 1904 transfigured him into a kind of Antinous-style \"god\".\nMann had also started planning a novel about Frederick the Great in 1905/1906, which ultimately did not come to fruition. The sexuality of Frederick the Great would have played a significant role in this, its impact on his life, his political decisions and wars. In late 1914, at the start of World War I, Mann used the notes and excerpts already collected for this project to write his essay \"Frederick and the grand coalition\" in which he contrasted Frederick's soldierly, male drive and his literary, female connotations consisting of \"decomposing\" skepticism. A similar \"decomposing skepticism\" had already estranged the barely concealed gay novel characters \"Tonio Kr\u00f6ger\" and \"Hanno Buddenbrook\" (1901) from their traditional upper class family environments and hometown (which in both cases is L\u00fcbeck). The \"Confessions of Felix Krull\", written from 1910 onwards, describes a self-absorbed young dandyish imposter who, if not explicitly, fits into the gay typology, at one point considering, but ultimately refusing, the advances of a Scottish lord to accept him as his sugar daddy and in return be adopted and named as heir. The 1909 novel \"Royal Highness\", which describes a young unworldly and dreamy prince who forces himself into a marriage of convenience that ultimately becomes happy, was modeled after Mann's own romance and marriage to Katia Mann in February 1905. \nIn \"The Magic Mountain\", Hans Castorp, in love with Clawdia Chauchat, recalls his schooltime when, as a fourteen-year-old, he adored a classmate, Pribislav Hippe, whom he asked, with his heart pounding, if he could lend him his pencil, of which he keeps a few scraps like a relic. Borrowing and returning were interpreted as poetic masks for a sexual act. But it is not just a poetic symbol. In his diary entry from 15 September 1950, Mann remembers \"Williram Timpe's scraps from his pencil\", referring to a classmate from L\u00fcbeck. The novella \"Mario and the Magician\" (1929) ends with a murder due to a male-male kiss.\nNumerous homoerotic crushes are documented in his letters and diaries, both before and after his marriage. Mann's diary records his incestuous attraction to his own 13-year-old son, \"Eissi\" \u2013 Klaus Mann: \"Klaus to whom recently I feel very drawn\" (22 June). In the background conversations about man-to-man eroticism take place; a long letter is written to Carl Maria Weber on this topic, while the diary reveals: \"In love with Klaus during these days\" (5 June). \"Eissi, who enchants me right now\" (11 July). \"Delight over Eissi, who in his bath is terribly handsome. Find it very natural that I am in love with my son ... Eissi lay reading in bed with his brown torso naked, which disconcerted me\" (25 July). \"I heard noise in the boys' room and surprised Eissi completely naked in front of Golo's bed acting foolish. Strong impression of his premasculine, gleaming body. Disquiet\" (17 October 1920). His younger son Golo, homosexual like Klaus, suffered lifelong from the lower esteem his father showed him, the less handsome and somewhat clumsy \u2013 but ultimately he inherited more of his father's literary talent than the older one.\nMann was a friend of the painter and violinist Paul Ehrenberg, for whom he had feelings as a young man (from 1899 to 1904, at least until around 1903 when there is evidence that those feelings had cooled). The attraction that he felt for Ehrenberg, which is corroborated by notebook entries, caused Mann difficulty and discomfort and may have been an obstacle to his marrying an English woman, Mary Smith, whom he met in 1901. In 1927, while on summer vacation in Kampen (Sylt), the 52-year-old Mann fell in love with 17-year-old Klaus Heuser, to whom he dedicated the introduction to his essay \"Kleist's Amphitryon, a Reconquest\" in the fall of the same year, which he read publicly in Munich in the presence of Heuser. Jupiter, who has transformed himself into the form of the general Amphitryon, tries to seduce his wife Alcmene when the real Amphitryon returns home and Alcmene rejects the god. Mann understands Jupiter as the \"lonely artistic spirit\" who courts life, is rejected and, \"a triumphant renouncer\", learns to be content with his divinity. In 1950, Mann met the 19-year-old waiter Franz Westermeier, confiding to his diary \"Once again this, once again love\". He immediately processed the experience in his essay \"Michelangelo in his poems\" (1950) and was also inspired to write \"The Black Swan\" (1954). In 1975, when Mann's diaries were published, creating a national sensation in Germany, the retired Westermeier was tracked down in the United States: he was flattered to learn he had been the object of Mann's obsession, but also shocked at its depth.\nMann's infatuations probably remained largely platonic. Katia Mann tolerated these love affairs, as did the children, because they knew that it did not go too far. He exchanged letters with Klaus Heuser for a while and met him again in 1935. He wrote about the Heuser experience in his diary on 6 May 1934: \"In comparison, the early experiences with Armin Martens and Williram Timpe recede far into the childlike, and that with Klaus Heuser was a late happiness with the character of life-relevant fulfillment... That's probably how it is humanly, and because of this normality I can feel my life is more canonical than through marriage and children.\" In the entry from 20 February 1942, he spoke again about Klaus Heuser: \"Well, yes \u2212 lived and loved. Black eyes that shed tears for me, beloved lips that I kissed \u2212 it was there, I had it too, I'll be able to tell myself when I die.\" He was partly delighted, partly ashamed of the depth of his own emotions in these cases and mostly made them productive at some earlier or later date, but the experiences themselves were not yet literary. Only in retrospective, he converted them into literary production and sublimated his shame into the theory that \"a writer experiences in order to express himself\", that his life is just material. Mann even went so far as to accuse his brother Heinrich of his \"aestheticism being a gesture-rich, highly gifted impotence for life and love.\" When Mann met the aging bachelor Heuser, who had worked in China for 18 years, for the last time in 1954, his daughter Erika scoffed: \"Since he (Heuser) couldn't have the magician (= Thomas Mann's nickname with his children), he preferred to give it up completely.\"\nAlthough Mann had always denied his novels had autobiographical components, the unsealing of his diaries revealing how consumed his life had been with unrequited and sublimated passion resulted in a reappraisal of his work. Thomas Mann had burned all of his diaries from before March 1933 in the garden of his home in Pacific Palisades in May 1945. Only the booklets from September 1918 to December 1921 were preserved because the author needed them for his work on \"Doctor Faustus\". He later decided to have them \u2212 and his diaries from 1933 onwards \u2013 published 20 years after his death and predicted \"surprise and cheerful astonishment\". They were published by Peter von Mendelssohn and Inge Jens in 10 volumes.\nFrom the very beginning, Thomas' son Klaus Mann openly dealt with his own homosexuality in his literary work and open lifestyle and referred critically to his father's \"sublimation\" in his diary. On the other hand, Thomas's daughter Erika Mann and his son Golo Mann came out only later in their lives. Thomas Mann reacted cautiously to Klaus's first novel \"The Pious Dance, Adventure Book of a Youth\" (1926), which is openly set in Berlin's homosexual milieu. Although he embraced male-male eroticism, he disapproved of gay lifestyle. The Eulenburg affair, which broke out two years after Mann's marriage, had strengthened him in his renunciation of a gay life and he supported the journalist Maximilian Harden, who was friends with Katia Mann's family, in his denunciatory trial against the gay Prince of Eulenburg, a close friend of Emperor Wilhelm II. Thomas Mann was always concerned about his dignity, reputation and respectability; the \"poet king\" Goethe was his role model. His horror at a possible collapse of these attributes found expression in the character of Aschenbach in \"Death in Venice\". Cases like that of the industrialist Friedrich Alfred Krupp, who felt driven to suicide after a homosexual affair became public, were not uncommon and had a deterrent effect. But as time went on Mann became more open. He tolerated his son Klaus bringing his various lovers to lunch in Pacific Palisades, and was only appalled when these \u2013 navy sailors and the like \u2013 had never heard of him or his works, which, unfortunately, was mostly the case, leading to short, surly diary entries about their lack of culture. When the twenty-two-year-old novelist Gore Vidal published his third novel \"The City and the Pillar\" in 1948, a love-story between small-town American boys and a portrait of homosexual life in New York and Hollywood in the forties, a highly controversial book even among the publishers, not to mention the press, he sent a copy to Thomas Mann who responded politely, calling it a \"noble work\".\nWhen the physician and pioneer of gay liberation Magnus Hirschfeld sent another petition to the Reichstag in 1922 to abolish Section 175 of the German Criminal Code, under which many homosexuals were imprisoned simply because of their inclinations, Thomas Mann also signed. However, criminal liability among adults was only abolished through a change in the law on 25 June 1969 \u2212 fourteen years after Mann's death and just three days before the Stonewall riots. This legal situation certainly had an impact throughout his life; the man whom the Nazis labeled a traitor never had any desire to be incarcerated for \"criminal acts\".\nCultural references.\n\"The Magic Mountain\".\nSeveral literary and other works make reference to Mann's book \"The Magic Mountain\", including:\n\"Death in Venice\".\nMany literary and other works make reference to \"Death in Venice\", including:\nResearch.\nDatabases.\nTMI Research.\nThe metadatabase TMI-Research brings together archival materials and library holdings of the network \"Thomas Mann International\". The network was founded in 2017 by the five houses Buddenbrookhaus/Heinrich-und-Thomas-Mann-Zentrum (L\u00fcbeck), the Monacensia im Hildebrandhaus (Munich), the Thomas Mann Archive of the ETH Zurich (Zurich/Switzerland), the Thomas Mann House (Los Angeles/USA) and the Thomo Manno kult\u016bros centras/Thomas Mann Culture Centre (Nida/Lithuania). The houses stand for the main stations of Thomas Mann's life. The platform, which is hosted by ETH Zurich, allows research in the collections of the network partners across all houses. The database is freely accessible and contains over 165,000 records on letters, original editions, photographs, monographs and essays on Thomas Mann and the Mann family. Further links take you to the respective source databases with contact options and further information.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30086", "revid": "1719098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30086", "title": "The Incredible Shrinking Man", "text": "1957 film by Jack Arnold\nThe Incredible Shrinking Man is a 1957 American science fiction film directed by Jack Arnold, based on Richard Matheson's 1956 novel, \"The Shrinking Man\". The film stars Grant Williams as Scott and Randy Stuart as Scott's wife, Louise. While relaxing on a boat, Scott is enveloped by a strange fog. Months later, he discovers that he appears to be shrinking. By the time Scott has reached the height of a small boy, his condition becomes known to the public. When he learns there is no cure for his condition, he lashes out at his wife. As Scott shrinks to the point where he can fit into a dollhouse, he has a battle with his family cat, leaving him lost and alone in his basement, where he is now smaller than the average insect.\nThe film's storyline was expanded by Matheson after he had sold the story to Universal-International Pictures Co., Inc. He also completed the novel upon which the film is based while production was underway. Matheson's script was initially written in flashbacks, and Richard Alan Simmons rewrote it using a more conventional narrative structure. Director Jack Arnold initially wanted Dan O'Herlihy to play Scott, but O'Herlihy turned down the role, leading Universal to sign Williams as the lead. Filming began on May 31, 1956. Scenes involving special effects were shot throughout production, while others used the large sets of Universal's backlot. Production went over budget, and filming had to be extended; certain special effects shots required reshooting. Williams was constantly being injured on set.\nBefore the film's release in New York City on February 22, 1957, its ending first went to test audiences who felt the character's fate should be changed. The director's original ending remained in the film. The film grossed $1.43 million in the United States and Canada and was among the highest-grossing science fiction films of the 1950s. A sequel, \"The Fantastic Little Girl\", originally penned by Matheson, never went into production. A remake was developed years later, eventually becoming the comedy \"The Incredible Shrinking Woman\" (1981). Other remakes were planned in the early 2000s, one of which was to star Eddie Murphy in a more comedic variation on the film. A new adaptation was announced in 2013, with Matheson writing the screenplay with his son Richard Christian Matheson. In 2009, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nRobert Scott Carey, known as \"Scott,\" is on vacation with his wife, Louise, when a strange mist envelops him. Six months later, he observes that his clothes are too large, suspects he is shrinking, and seeks medical advice. Initially, his doctor denies that Carey is shrinking. Later, the doctor confirms the shrinking through X-rays and refers him to a medical research institute. The institute determines that Carey's exposure to the mist, combined with earlier exposure to a pesticide, rearranged his molecular structure, causing him to shrink. Carey informs Louise that, given his predicament, she is free to leave him. Louise promises to stay, and as she does, Carey's wedding ring slips off his finger.\nCarey's condition turns him into a national curiosity. Media attention forces him into seclusion within his home. Advised to sell his story, Carey starts a journal detailing his experiences. An antidote is discovered, halting his shrinking, but doctors caution that he will remain three feet tall for the rest of his life unless a solution is found to reverse his condition. Emotionally shattered, Carey meets Clarice, a carnival worker and dwarf, who is exactly his height. Clarice encourages Carey, inspiring him to continue his journal. Later, he notices he is now shorter than Clarice and dejectedly runs home.\nCarey shrinks small enough to live in a dollhouse and becomes more tyrannical. When Louise leaves home on an errand, he falls into his basement after Butch, the family cat, attacks him. Louise returns and assumes Butch ate Carey after finding a bloody scrap of Carey's clothing. Louise prepares to move out, with Carey's brother, Charlie, assisting.\nCarey faces significant challenges navigating his basement and is unable to climb the stairs back up, deciding to wait for Louise to come down. The water heater bursts, but when Charlie and Louise come to investigate, Carey is too small for them to hear his screams for help. He battles a large spider while searching for food and shelter. He ultimately kills the spider with a straight pin and collapses in exhaustion. He awakens, small enough to escape the basement through one of the netting squares of a window screen. Carey accepts his fate of shrinking to microscopic size. He is no longer afraid, concluding that no matter how small he becomes, he will still matter in the universe because God will know he exists.\nCast.\nCast adapted from the American Film Institute.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Grant Williams as Robert Scott Carey\nProduction.\nDevelopment and pre-production.\nRichard Matheson's idea for the original novel was inspired by a scene in the film \"Let's Do It Again\", where Ray Milland's character leaves an apartment with the wrong hat. It is much too large for Milland and sinks down around his head and ears. Matheson sold the rights to Universal on the condition that he write the screenplay. It was Matheson's first screenplay, a writing format he felt he adapted to quickly. Matheson's initial script followed Scott Carey already shrunken and battling a spider in his basement. His rewrite is told in flashback form: scenes of Carey and the spider are interspersed with scenes telling the story of Carey's gradual loss in height.\nThe film was already into its second month of production before the novel was published in May 1956 by Gold Medal Books. Producer Albert Zugsmith added the word \"Incredible\" to Matheson's title and passed the script to Richard Alan Simmons, who removed the script's flashback structure. Matheson later discussed working with Universal, finding that the producer had a \"very commercial mind\" which made the script weaker in terms of character. In an interview in \"Cinefantastique\" magazine, Matheson stated he protested sharing a screen credit with Simmons. The screen credits list Matheson as the writer, while the shooting script lists both Matheson and Simmons.\nPre-production was originally set to begin on April 20, 1956, but it started officially on April 24. The cast consisted of mostly unknown actors. Director Jack Arnold phoned Randy Stuart, who was a personal friend, asking if she would be interested in doing the film. Zugsmith initially wanted Dan O'Herlihy to play the role of Scott Carey. O'Herlihy had just been nominated for an Academy Award for his role in \"Robinson Crusoe\". After reading the script, he refused to play another isolated character, not wanting to be typecast in that kind of role. Grant Williams was cast because Universal had him pegged to become a star. On April 4, 1956, Williams and Stuart were screen tested and deemed acceptable for the roles of Scott and Louise Carey.\nFilming.\nOn the first day of production, May 31, Universal's operating committee decided that because of the type of special photography involved in the making of the film, the publicity department would cooperate by publicizing a closed-door policy on the set. On-set photography would not be allowed while the film was shot to stimulate public and trade interest. Shooting took either five or six weeks, including the special effects sequences. The budget ranged between $700,000 and $800,000. Film critic Kim Newman said the budget was \"not expensive\", with most of it used for special effects.\nSome special effects shots were the earliest taken for the picture. For example, shots with Randy Stuart were taken against a black velvet backdrop and then composited with shots of Williams on an enlarged living room set. Their movements were synchronized using negatives from the first exposed scene in the camera gate, with the opposite done for the other scene. Sound production began on May 31. An oversized dollhouse was built for Williams on Stage 28. It had previously been used for \"The Phantom of the Opera\" and \"Dracula\". Arnold said he filmed scenes with the cat in a normal studio with an animal trainer who had about 40 identical cats. To coax the cat to approach the dollhouse, Arnold hid food in it so the cat would find a way into the house. Later he timed the cat's reactions and directed Williams accordingly to react to the cat. Arnold first attempted to follow the novel and use a black widow spider. After preliminary tests, he found black widows were too small to use properly in the film. In an interview with Tom Weaver, Randy Stuart said the spiders presented problems. The overhead lamps on the set had to be turned up high, leading to the deaths of 24 tarantulas. They were directed with little puffs of air, a technique which had been used previously in Arnold's film \"Tarantula\". Despite sources suggesting otherwise, the films did not use the same tarantulas.\nMany of the basement scenes were shot on Stage 12 of Universal Studios which, according to Tom Weaver, was one of the largest sound stages in the world at the time. While trying to find a way to simulate giant drops of water landing, Arnold recalled a time when he was a child and found condoms in his father's drawer. Not knowing what they were, he filled them with water and dropped them. Arnold ordered about 100 condoms and placed them on a treadmill so they would drop in sequence. The flood scene was shot on July 2 and 3. There was a 20-minute delay in filming because of a bad camera cable. There was a further delay from 11:05\u00a0am to 11:25\u00a0am to allow water to drain so a crane could be used properly. These scenes involved nine-hour workdays. When the actors were not filming, they were sent to have publicity shots taken.\nThe film was originally shot in the standard 4:3 aspect ratio, but midway through filming, on June 22, it was decided that the remaining footage would be shot in 1.75:1. The belief was this would give the film a better look, as a shorter frame would allow the production department to scale down the height of certain props for the special effects. During this period, Grant Williams suffered the first of many injuries on set. On June 22, he reported to the studio hospital with a scratched leg; on June 29, he had to leave the set to be treated for an eye condition; and on July 2 he both had to be driven to the hospital for further treatment for his eyes and was sent to the studio hospital with blisters and scratches from climbing sets. Due to Williams' injuries and some special effects shots being too bright, the film was four days behind schedule and $25,000 over budget.\nPost-production.\nSpecial effects shots using black velvet trick photography took three weeks of post-production and were scheduled after the film completed production on July 13, 1956. Warren described the special effects as \"hard to assign correctly.\" Clifford Stine, whose field was process work and rear screen projection, is credited with \"special photography\". The boat scene at the beginning of the film was shot on Universal's process stage, which allowed for rear screen projection. Shots of Scott in certain scenes, such as his encounter with the mist, were shot with him against a black velvet back drop.\nAccording to Randy Stuart, the film's ending had Williams return to his original size, which Matheson felt was the wrong ending for the story. Arnold argued with Universal over the ending. The studio wanted a happy ending, while he wanted the original ending that had been shot. To decide on which ending to use, a test screening was held to judge the audience's reaction. Lucas said audience review cards from a December 7 preview screening in California included comments reacting to the ending such as: \"Should've had a different ending, should've grown again.\" and \"What happened at the end?\". On the overall quality of the film, comments included, \"Can't you do any better? This is pretty sad.\" \"You scared my son to death.\" and \"This is an insult to the brain power of my two-year old son\". The film was released with Arnold's original ending intact. After its release, Mel Danner, manager of the Circle Theater in Waynoka, Oklahoma, noted audiences felt it was a good film, but that Carey should have returned to his original size at the end.\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's title theme was composed by Fred Carling and Ed Lawrence and played by Ray Anthony and his Orchestra.\nRelease.\n\"The Incredible Shrinking Man\" premiered at the Globe Theatre in New York City on February 22, 1957. This was followed by a screening in Los Angeles on March 27, 1957, and a wider release in April. Actress Randy Stuart recalled the film was either \"second or third, I think third, after \"The Ten Commandments\"\" in terms of how much money it made against what it cost. \"Variety\" reported that by the end of the year it had grossed $1.43 million, making it one of the highest grossing science fiction films of the decade (for comparison, \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" grossed $8 million, \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" grossed $4.8 million, \"The Thing from Another World\" grossed $1.95 million, and \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\" grossed $1.2 million).\nThe film was reissued theatrically in 1964, but otherwise was rarely shown on television and screened only occasionally at science fiction conventions. It was released on laser disc in 1978 and 1991, on VHS in 1992, and on DVD in 2006 (as part of a box set containing a collection of Universal-International's science fiction films). Arrow Video released the film on Blu-ray in 2017. In July 2021, The Criterion Collection announced a blu-ray of the film with a new 4K digital restoration; its bonus material includes audio commentary from Tom Weaver and David Schecter.\nReception.\nArnold's biographer Dana M. Reemes described \"The Incredible Shrinking Man\" as initially being received as a routine to above average film; its reception has steadily grown ever since. Philip K. Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called the film \"a fascinating exercise in imagination, as terrifying as it is funny [...] Science-fiction admirers who are accustomed to finding food for thought as well as vicarious thrills in such flights of fancy will not be disappointed, either.\"\nThe \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" praised the film, and declared it a \"horrifying story that grips the imagination throughout\", one that \"straightforward, macabre, and as startlingly original as a vintage Ray Bradbury short story, for all its peaceful and resigned conclusion\u2014opens new vistas of cosmic terror\". Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" panned the film, writing that \"unless a viewer is addicted to freakish ironies, the unlikely spectacle of Mr. Williams losing an inch of height each week, while his wife, Randy Stuart, looks on helplessly, will become tiresome before Universal has emptied its lab of science-fiction clich\u00e9s.\" William Brogdon of \"Variety\" commented that the film was not thoroughly satisfactory, but had enough good qualities, specifically declaring \"unfoldment is inclined to slow down on occasion, resulting in flagging interest here and there\". The review noted the special effects and cinematography were \"visually effective\", but that \"portions of the background score are overworked\", which distracted from the plot. The film was the winner of the first Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation in 1958.\nMartin Rubin discussed the film in a 1974 issue of \"Film Comment\" and compared it to its contemporaries in the genre. He found it did not have the \"schoolboy cynicism and moralizing of a Roger Corman film, nor any of the hysteria common to the Red-scare science-fictioners of the Fifties\". He felt the story was well-suited to Jack Arnold, noting a \"WeIlesian director would have overinflated this film and compromised its sense of the ordinary with shadows and angles, while a more accomplished stylist of almost any other order would have softened it too much\u2014such attitudes are better off in the horror film.\" Rubin also compared it the other science fiction films Arnold made in the 1950s\u2014\"The Creature From the Black Lagoon\", \"It Came From Outer Space\", \"Tarantula\", \"Revenge of the Creature\", and \"The Space Children\"\u2014finding them competitively \"interesting in patches\", but lacking in comparison to the \"unity and clarity\" of \"The Incredible Shrinking Man\", which \"totally fulfills its central metaphor without being unduly constricted by it\".\nIan Nathan of \"Empire\" referred to the film as a classic of 1950s science fiction films, and noted how the everyday objects found at home are \"transformed into a terrifying vertiginous world fraught with peril. A confrontation with a 'giant' spider, impressively realised, as are all the effects, for its day, has become one of the iconic image[s] of the entire era.\" Tim Lucas declared that the film \"remains one of the perfectly realized science fiction films\", noting it was \"less about science than a masterful example of the 'what if' branch of speculative human drama\".\nAftermath.\nArnold commented on science films made after \"The Incredible Shrinking Man\", saying that since his films were financially successful, AIP and Japanese studios developed similar productions, which he felt lacked in atmosphere or morals and were just stories about monsters. These included \"The Amazing Colossal Man\" and \"Attack of the 50 Foot Woman\". Arnold was unable to sell a sci-fi story after these films began appearing and went to England to create \"The Mouse That Roared\", which he felt was a fantasy film that still had a deeper meaning to it. Arnold later declared \"Mouse\" as his favorite picture and that he thought \"almost as much of\" it as \"The Incredible Shrinking Man\".\nArnold spoke about the film later in life after watching a revival screening, saying he was happy that audiences enjoyed the film and that they \"got all the nuances that I put in. It was a joy to me, just to watch their reaction to the film.\" Matheson discussed the film in an interview in John Bronsan's \"Horror People\", where he declared he only enjoyed the film after his son pointed out the film's story structure, specifically that \"it didn't have the usual story line, the usual happy ending. Actually it had no particular story line, it was very picaresque, it just wandered on.\" Matheson re-iterated his enjoyment in \"Cinefantastique\", finding himself able to appreciate the film with subsequent watches, finding the visuals as \"truly remarkable\" and that Arnold created \"quite a mood in the film.\" The film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2009.\nProposed sequels and remakes.\nMatheson scripted a sequel, titled \"The Fantastic Little Girl\". The film has Louise Carey certain that Scott is still alive. She returns home and finds herself shrinking and is injected with a new cure. The script also featured Scott in his microscopic world where he encounters strange eel-like creatures. The script was 43 pages long and described as inferior compared to the original film by author Bill Warren. Matheson said that, since the original film made \"a lot of money\", he was unsure why the sequel was not developed past the script stage. The script in its entirety was published in the 2005 book \"Unrealized Dreams\". The reluctance for a home media re-release was due to Universal's intention for a pseudo-sequel. This included John Landis developing, writing and directing \"The Incredible Shrinking Woman\", which was cancelled after the budget was found to be too high. It was later revived by Jane Wagner. Arnold said he \"hated\" \"The Incredible Shrinking Woman\", declaring the special effects weak and adding there was \"no point of view...the major fault is that it's not a comedy even though they tried so hard to make it funny\".\nIn 2003, Universal and Imagine Entertainment attempted a remake, with Eddie Murphy to star and Keenen Ivory Wayans to direct. Following this, other directors were attached, including Peter Segal and Brett Ratner, with Murphy still slated to star in a comedic remake.\nThe source material rights lapsed by 2012 and were purchased by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. A new adaptation of \"The Shrinking Man\" was announced in 2013, with Matheson writing the screenplay with his son Richard Christian Matheson. The Mathesons commented that the new adaptation would modernise the story and reflect on advancements such as nanotechnology. The elder Matheson died on June 23, 2013.\nThe Los Angeles-based producer Patrick Wachsberger of Picture Perfect Federation was in France developing a French remake in 2023 starring Jean Dujardin. This new adaptation, titled \"L'Homme qui r\u00e9tr\u00e9cit\" (lit. The Shrinking Man) was released in October 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30089", "revid": "48803042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30089", "title": "Geography of Taiwan", "text": "Taiwan, officially the Republic of China (ROC), is a country in East Asia. The island of Taiwan, formerly known to Westerners as Formosa, has an area of and makes up 99% of the land under ROC control. It lies about across the Taiwan Strait from the southeastern coast of the Mainland China. The East China Sea is to the north of the island, the Philippine Sea to its east, the Luzon Strait directly to its south, and the South China Sea to its southwest. The ROC also controls a number of smaller islands, including the Penghu archipelago in the Taiwan Strait, Kinmen and Matsu in Fuchien near the Mainland coast, as well as Pratas and Taiping in the South China Sea.\nGeologically, the main island comprises a tilted fault block, characterized by the contrast between the eastern two-thirds, consisting mostly of five rugged mountain ranges running parallel to the east coast, and the flat to gently rolling plains of the western third, where the majority of the population resides. Several peaks exceed 3,500\u00a0m in height \u2013 the highest, Yu Shan at , makes Taiwan the world's fourth-highest island. The tectonic boundary that formed these ranges remains active, and the island experiences many earthquakes, some of them highly destructive. There are also many active submarine volcanoes in the Taiwan Straits.\nThe climate ranges from tropical in the south to subtropical in the north, and is governed by the East Asian Monsoon. On average, four typhoons strike the main island each year. The heavily forested eastern mountains provide a habitat for a diverse range of wildlife, while human land use in the western and northern lowlands is intensive.\nPhysical boundaries.\nThe total land area of Taiwan is , slightly larger than Belgium. It has a coastline of . The ROC claims an exclusive economic zone of with and a territorial sea of .\nThe island of Taiwan, the largest of the archipelago, was known in the West until after World War II as \"Formosa\", from the Portuguese (), \"beautiful island\". It is long and wide, and has an area of . The northernmost point of the island is Cape Fugui in New Taipei's Shimen District. The central point of the island is in Puli Township, Nantou County. The southernmost point on the island is Cape Eluanbi in Hengchun Township, Pingtung County.\nThe main island is separated from the southeast coast of mainland China by the Taiwan Strait, which ranges from at its widest point to at its narrowest. Part of the continental shelf, the Strait is no more than deep, and has become a land bridge during glacial periods. Niushan Island in Nanlai village, Aoqian town, Pingtan County, Fuzhou, Fujian is the closest China (PRC)-administered island to the main island.\nTo the south, the main island is separated from the Philippine island of Luzon by the -wide Luzon Strait. The South China Sea lies to the southwest, the East China Sea to the north, and the Philippine Sea to the east.\nSmaller islands of the archipelago include the Penghu islands in the Taiwan Strait west of the main island, with an area of , the tiny islet of Xiaoliuqiu off the southwest coast, and Orchid Island and Green Island to the southeast, separated from the northernmost islands of the Philippines by the Bashi Channel. The islands of Kinmen and Matsu near the coast of Fujian across the Taiwan Strait have a total area of ; the Pratas and Taiping islets in the South China Sea are also administered by the ROC, but are not part of the Taiwanese archipelago.\nGeology.\nThe island of Taiwan was formed approximately 4 to 5\u00a0million years ago at a complex convergent boundary between the Philippine Sea Plate and the Eurasian Plate. In a boundary running the length of the island and continuing southwards in the Luzon Volcanic Arc (including Green Island and Orchid Island), the Eurasian Plate is sliding under the Philippine Sea Plate.\nMost of the island comprises a huge fault block tilted to the west.\nThe western part of the island, and much of the central range, consists of sedimentary deposits scraped from the descending edge of the Eurasian Plate. In the northeast of the island, and continuing eastwards in the Ryukyu Volcanic Arc, the Philippine Sea Plate slides under the Eurasian Plate.\nThe tectonic boundary remains active, and Taiwan experiences 15,000 to 18,000 earthquakes each year, of which 800 to 1,000 are noticed by people. The most catastrophic recent earthquake was the magnitude-7.3 Chi-Chi earthquake, which occurred in the centre of Taiwan on 21 September 1999, killing more than 2,400 people. On 4 March 2010 at about 01:20 UTC, a magnitude 6.4 earthquake hit southwestern Taiwan in the mountainous area of Kaohsiung County.\nAnother major earthquake occurred on 6 February 2016, with a magnitude of 6.4. Tainan was damaged the most, with 117 deaths, most of them caused by the collapse of a 17-story apartment building.\nTerrain.\nThe terrain in Taiwan is divided into two parts: the flat to gently rolling plains in the west, where 90% of the population lives, and the mostly rugged forest-covered mountains in the eastern two-thirds.\nThe eastern part of the island is dominated by five mountain ranges, each running from north-northeast to south-southwest, roughly parallel to the east coast of the island. As a group, they extend from north to south and average about from east to west. They include more than two hundred peaks with elevations of over .\nThe Central Mountain Range extends from Su'ao in the northeast to Eluanbi at the southern tip of the island, forming a ridge of high mountains and serving as the island's principal watershed. The mountains are predominantly composed of hard rock formations resistant to weathering and erosion, although heavy rainfall has deeply scarred the sides with gorges and sharp valleys. The relative relief of the terrain is usually extensive, and the forest-clad mountains with their extreme ruggedness are almost impenetrable. The east side of the Central Mountain Range is the steepest mountain slope in Taiwan, with fault scarps ranging in height from . Taroko National Park, on the steep eastern side of the range, has good examples of mountainous terrain, gorges and erosion caused by a swiftly flowing river.\nThe East Coast Mountain Range extends down the east coast of the island from the mouth of the Hualien River in the north to Taitung County in the south, and chiefly consist of sandstone and shale. It is separated from the Central Range by the narrow Huatung Valley, at an altitude of . Although Hsinkangshan (\u65b0\u6e2f\u5c71), the highest peak, reaches an elevation of , most of the range is composed of large hills. Small streams have developed on the flanks, but only one large river cuts across the range. Badlands are located at the western foot of the range, where the ground water level is the lowest and rock formations are the least resistant to weathering. Raised coral reefs along the east coast and the frequent occurrences of earthquakes in the rift valley indicate that the fault block is still rising.\nThe ranges to the west of the Central range are divided into two groups separated by the Sun Moon Lake Basin in the centre of the island. The Dadu and Zhuoshui Rivers flow from the western slopes of the Central Range through the basin to the west coast of the island.\nThe Xueshan Range lies to the northwest of the Central Mountain Range, beginning at Sandiaojiao, the northeast tip of the island, and gaining elevation as it extends southwest towards Nantou County. Xueshan, the main peak, is high.\nThe Yushan Range runs along the southwestern flank of the Central Range. It includes the island's tallest peak, the Yu Shan ('Jade Mountain') which makes Taiwan the world's fourth-highest island, and is the highest point in the western Pacific region outside of the Kamchatka Peninsula, New Guinea Highlands and Mount Kinabalu.\nThe Alishan Range lies west of the Yushan Range, across the valley of the south-flowing Kaoping River. The range has major elevations between . The main peak, Data Mountain (\u5927\u5854\u5c71), towers .\nBelow the western foothills of the ranges, such as the Hsinchu Hills and the Miaoli Hills, lie raised terraces formed of material eroded from the ranges. These include the Linkou Plateau, the Taoyuan Plateau and the Dadu Plateau. About 23% of Taiwan's land area consists of fertile alluvial plains and basins watered by rivers running from the eastern mountains. Over half of this land lies in the Chianan Plain in southwest Taiwan, with lesser areas in the Pingtung Plain, Taichung Basin and Taipei Basin. The only sizable plain on the east coast is the Yilan Plain in the northeast.\nClimate.\nThe island of Taiwan lies across the Tropic of Cancer, and its climate is influenced by the East Asian Monsoon. Northern Taiwan has a humid subtropical climate, with substantial seasonal variation of temperatures, while parts of central and most of southern Taiwan have a tropical monsoon climate where seasonal temperature variations are less noticeable, with temperatures typically varying from warm to hot. During the winter (November to March), the northeast experiences steady rain, while the central and southern parts of the island are mostly sunny. The summer monsoon (from May to October) accounts for 90% of the annual precipitation in the south, but only 60% in the north. The average rainfall is approximately 2,600\u00a0mm per year.\nTyphoons are most likely to strike between July and October, with on average about four direct hits per year. Intensive rain from typhoons often leads to disastrous mudslides.\nClimate change in Taiwan has caused temperatures to rise by 1.4 degrees Celsius in the last 100 years. Sea level rise around Taiwan is occurring at twice the global rate. The government pledged to reduce emissions by 20% in 2030 and 50% in 2050, compared to 2005 levels.\nFlora and fauna.\nBefore extensive human settlement, the vegetation on Taiwan ranged from tropical rainforest in the lowlands through temperate forests, boreal forest and alpine plants with increasing altitude.\nMost of the plains and low-lying hills of the west and north of the island have been cleared for agricultural use since the arrival of the Chinese immigrants during the 17th and 18th century. However the mountain forests are very diverse, with several endemic species such as Formosan cypress (\"Chamaecyparis formosensis\") and Taiwan fir (\"Abies kawakamii\"), while the camphor laurel (\"Cinnamomum camphora\") was once also widespread at lower altitudes.\nOver 4000 species of plants are indigenous to Taiwan, with over 1000 of them found nowhere else in the world.\nBefore the country's industrialization, the mountainous areas held several endemic animal species and subspecies, such as the Swinhoe's pheasant (\"Lophura swinhoii\"), Taiwan blue magpie (\"Urocissa caerulea\"), the Formosan sika deer (\"Cervus nippon taiwanensis\" or \"Cervus nippon taiouanus\") and the Formosan landlocked salmon (\"Oncorhynchus masou formosanus\"). A few of these are now extinct, and many others have been designated endangered species.\nTaiwan had relatively few carnivores, 11 species in total, of which the Formosan clouded leopard is likely extinct and the otter is restricted to Kinmen island. The largest carnivore is the Formosan black bear (\"Selanarctos thibetanus formosanus\"), a rare and endangered species.\nTaiwan is a centre of bird endemism (see List of endemic birds of Taiwan).\nTaiwan has 65 species of fireflies, the third highest density after Jamaica and Costa Rica. Fireflies are protected and their numbers are increasing, but they are threatened by climate change in the long term.\nNine national parks in Taiwan showcase the archipelago's diverse terrain, flora and fauna. Kenting National Park on the southern tip of Taiwan contains uplifted coral reefs, moist tropical forest and marine ecosystems. Yushan National Park has alpine terrain, mountain ecology, forest types that vary with altitude, and remains of ancient roads. Yangmingshan National Park has volcanic geology, hot springs, waterfalls, and forest. Taroko National Park has a marble canyon, cliff, and fold mountains. Shei-Pa National Park has alpine ecosystems, geological terrain, and valley streams. Kinmen National Park has lakes, wetlands, coastal topography, flora and fauna-shaped island. Dongsha Atoll National Park has the Pratas reef atolls for integrity, a unique marine ecology, and biodiversity, and is a key habitat for the marine resources of the South China Sea and Taiwan Strait.\nNatural resources.\nNatural resources on the islands include small deposits of gold, copper, coal, natural gas, limestone, marble, and asbestos. The island is 55% forest and woodland (mostly on the mountains) and 24% arable land (mostly on the plains), with 15% going to other purposes. 5% is permanent pasture and 1% is permanent crops.\nBecause of the intensive exploitation throughout Taiwan's pre-modern and modern history, the island's mineral resources (e.g. coal, gold, marble), as well as wild animal reserves (e.g. deer), have been virtually exhausted. Moreover, much of Taiwan's forestry resources, especially firs were harvested during Japanese rule for the construction of shrines and have only recovered slightly since then. To this day, forests do not contribute to significant timber production mainly because of concerns about production costs and environmental regulations.\nAgriculture.\nThe few natural resources with significant economic value remaining in Taiwan are agriculture-associated. Sugarcane and rice have been cultivated in western Taiwan since the 17th century. Camphor extraction and sugar refining played an important role in Taiwan's exports from the late 19th century through the first half of the 20th century. The importance of these industries declined mainly due to the reduction of international demand rather than the exhaustion of related natural resources.\nDomestic agriculture (rice being the dominant kind of crop) and fisheries retain some importance. Still, they have been greatly challenged by foreign imports since Taiwan's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2002. Consequently, upon the decline of subsistence, Taiwan's agriculture now relies heavily on the marketing and export of specialty crops, such as bananas, guavas, lychees, bell fruits, and high-mountain tea.\nEnergy resources.\nTaiwan has significant coal deposits and some insignificant petroleum and natural gas deposits. As of 2010[ [update]], oil accounts for 49.0% of the total energy consumption. Coal comes next with 32.1%, followed by nuclear energy with 8.3%, natural gas (indigenous and liquefied) with 10.2%, and energy from renewable sources with 0.5%. Taiwan has six nuclear reactors and two under construction. Nearly all oil and gas for transportation and power needs must be imported, making Taiwan particularly sensitive to fluctuations in energy prices. Taiwan is rich in wind energy resources, with wind farms both onshore and offshore, though limited land area favours offshore wind resources. By promoting renewable energy, Taiwan's government hopes to also aid the nascent renewable energy manufacturing industry, and develop it into an export market.\nHuman geography.\nTaiwan has a population of over 23\u00a0million, the vast majority of whom live in the lowlands near the western coast of the island.\nThe island is highly urbanized, with nearly 9\u00a0million people living in the Taipei\u2013Keelung\u2013Taoyuan metropolitan area at the northern end, and over 2\u00a0million each in the urban areas of Kaohsiung and Taichung.\nTaiwanese indigenous peoples comprise approximately 2% of the population, and now mostly live in the mountainous eastern part of the island. Most scholars believe their ancestors arrived in Taiwan by sea between 4000 and 3000 BC, most likely from southeastern China.\nHan Chinese make up over 95% of the population. Immigrants from southern Fujian began to farm the area around modern Tainan and Kaohsiung from the 17th century, later spreading across the western and northern plains and absorbing the indigenous population of those areas. Hakka people from eastern Guangdong arrived later and settled the foothills further inland, but the rugged uplands of the eastern half of the island remained the exclusive preserve of the indigenous peoples until the early 20th century. A further 1.2\u00a0million people from throughout China entered Taiwan at the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1949.\nEnvironmental issues.\nSome areas in Taiwan with high population density and many factories are affected by heavy pollution. The most notable areas are the southern suburbs of Taipei and the western stretch from Tainan to Lin Yuan, south of Kaohsiung. By the late 20th century, Taipei suffered from extensive vehicle and factory air pollution, but after the government required mandatory use of unleaded petrol and established the Environmental Protection Administration in 1987 to regulate air quality, the air quality of Taiwan has improved dramatically. Motor scooters, especially older or cheaper two-stroke versions, which are ubiquitous in Taiwan, contribute disproportionately to urban air pollution. The Taichung Power Plant also contributes significantly to air pollution, producing more CO2 than the country of Switzerland.\nOther environmental issues include water pollution from industrial emissions and raw sewage, contamination of drinking water supplies, trade in endangered species, and low-level radioactive waste disposal. Though regulation of sulfate aerosol emissions from petroleum combustion is becoming stringent, acid rain remains a threat to the health of residents and forests. Atmospheric scientists in Taiwan estimate that more than half of the pollutants causing Taiwan's acid rain are carried from China by monsoon winds.\nTaiwan historically had a serious problem with the illegal dumping of household and industrial waste which became so severe that Taiwan was known as \"garbage island\". This high level of pollution led to civil and government action, by 2022 the recycling rate was one of the highest in the world at 55%. Community activism was key to this change along with innovations such as garbage trucks which play music.\nIllegal extraction by Chinese sand dredging vessels has caused significant damage to the marine environment of Taiwan's outlying areas. The Taiwan Banks are a particularly hard hit target. Bottom trawling is a controversial practice due to the environmental damage it causes. Bottom trawlers with a tonnage under 50 are restricted from trawling within 5\u00a0km of shore and those over 50 tons are restricted from trawling within 12\u00a0km of shore. In 2023 the maximum penalty for ocean pollution was raised from US$48,820 to US$3.25 million.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30091", "revid": "50710870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30091", "title": "Politics of Taiwan", "text": "Political system of the Republic of China\nTaiwan, officially the Republic of China (ROC), is governed in a framework of a representative democratic republic under a five-power system first envisioned by Sun Yat-sen in 1906, whereby under the constitutional amendments, the President is head of state and the Premier (formally president of the Executive Yuan) is head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Executive Yuan. Legislative power is vested primarily in the Legislative Yuan. Taiwan's judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. In addition, the Examination Yuan is in charge of validating the qualification of civil servants, and the Control Yuan inspects, reviews, and audits the policies and operations of the government.\nThe party system is currently dominated by two major parties: the Kuomintang (KMT), which broadly favors maintaining the constitutional framework of the Republic of China Constitution and economic cooperation with mainland China, and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), which broadly favors \"de jure\" Taiwanese independence, and the eventual abolition of the ROC Constitution in favor of creating a \"Taiwanese Republic.\"\nSince the \"de facto\" end of the Chinese Civil War and the retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan, the modern-day ROC, or the \"free area\", has consisted of Taiwan Island, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu and several smaller islands, including Taiping Island in the South China Sea. Taiwan's six major cities, Kaohsiung, New Taipei, Taichung, Tainan, Taipei, and Taoyuan, are special municipalities. The rest of the country is divided into 3 cities and 13 counties.\nPrior to the constitutional reforms in 1991, the political system of Taiwan took place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, where the President served a primarily ceremonial role as head of state. Executive power was exercised by the government. Legislative power is formally vested in both the government and its tricameral parliament: the National Assembly which elects the President and Vice President as well as makes major constitutional amendments, the Control Yuan and the Legislative Yuan.\nUntil the end of the martial law period in 1987, the Taiwanese political system under the KMT \"Dang Guo\" regime and White Terror was authoritarian, whereby political opposition was harshly suppressed, all religious activity controlled by the KMT, dissent not permitted, and civil rights curtailed. After democratization in the 1990s, new political parties became legal, and restrictions on free speech and civil rights were lifted. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Taiwan 8th place as a \"full democracy\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Taiwan was 2023 the second most electoral democratic country in Asia.\nLegal framework.\nTaiwan is governed under the Constitution of the Republic of China, which was drafted in 1947 before the fall of the mainland China to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the full retreat of the ROC government to Taiwan. The Constitution outlined a government intended for Greater China, with territorial considerations encompassing mainland China, Mongolia, Taiwan, and other Qing-ruled areas. Significant amendments were made to the Constitution in 1991, and there have been a number of judicial interpretations made to take into account the fact that the Constitution covers a much smaller area than originally envisioned.\nAs the Kuomintang (KMT) government continued to insist that it was the only legitimate government of Greater China, when the KMT retreated to Taipei in 1949, it re-established the full array of central political bodies which existed in mainland China in the \"de jure\" capital of Nanjing (Nanking). While much of this structure remains in place, in 1991 President Lee Teng-hui unofficially abandoned the government's claim of sovereignty over mainland China by stating that Taiwan does not \"dispute the fact that the Communists control mainland China.\" However, the National Assembly has not officially altered the nominal national borders, since to do so might be viewed as a prelude to formal Taiwanese independence. The People's Republic of China has several times threatened to start a war if the government of Taiwan formalizes independence, as codified in its Anti-Secession Law. Neither the National Assembly nor the Supreme Court has defined the term \"existing national boundaries,\" as stated in the constitution. The latter refused to do so, noting it was a \"significant political question.\"\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe ROC currently administers the island of Taiwan (Formosa), Penghu (Pescadores), Kinmen (Quemoy) and Matsu Islands. The whole country is divided into two streamlined provinces (Taiwan and Fukien) and six special municipalities. Since the provinces are streamlined and the de facto dissolution of the provincial governments, the cities and counties are directly governed by the central government, namely Executive Yuan. The central governed administrative divisions are listed below.\nPolitical history.\nTaiwan under Qing rule.\nAfter the conquest of the Kingdom of Tungning by Qing admiral Shi Lang, Taiwan was brought under Qing rule from 1683 to 1895. The Qing dynasty was a Manchu-led absolute monarchy with the emperor holding absolute authority.\nTaiwan under Japanese rule.\nAfter the First Sino-Japanese War, Qing China ceded Formosa and surrounding islands to Japan. Under Japanese rule, Taiwan had its governor general as its head of government under the constitutional monarchy led by the Emperor. Taiwanese citizens in Formosa and Pescadores were Japanese citizens until the end of World War II in 1945.\nIn the 1920s, activists led by the Taiwanese Cultural Association launched a series of campaigns to petition for a Taiwanese parliament.\nRepublic of China (1945\u2013present).\nPrior to the retreat of the Republic of China to Taiwan in 1949, the Kuomintang (KMT) government of the Republic of China (ROC) took over administration of Taiwan from the Japanese. Escorted by George H. Kerr, KMT official Chen Yi officially accepted Japan's surrender on 25 October 1945 and proclaimed that day to be Retrocession Day.\nIn the early years of KMT rule of Taiwan, rampant corruption in the new administration headed by Chen caused high unemployment rates, widespread disease, and severe inflation, which in turn led to widespread local discontent. These domestic problems culminated in the eruption of an anti-government uprising in 1947. The government imposed military repression in what became one of the longest imposition of martial law by any regime in the world, lasting a total of 38 years.\nAfter the death of Chiang Kai-shek in 1975, Vice President Yen Chia-kan briefly took over from 1975 to 1978, according to the Constitution, but the actual power was in the hands of Premier Chiang Ching-kuo, who was KMT chairman and son of Chang Kai-shek. \nIn 1977, Taiwan experienced its first mass political protest since the 1940s during the Zhongli Incident.75 Protesting election fraud by the KMT, a crowd of ten thousand clashed with soldiers and burned down a police station.75\nIn December 1979, a mass demonstration for democracy led to the Kaohsiung Incident in which police suppressed the demonstrations with violence, arresting dozens including eight opposition leaders known as the Kaohsiung Eight.44\nDuring the presidency of Chiang Ching-kuo from 1978 to 1988, Taiwan's political system began to undergo gradual liberalization.\nAfter the lifting of martial law, the opposition Democratic Progressive Party was formed and allowed to participate overtly in politics. After Chiang Ching-kuo died in 1988, Vice President Lee Teng-hui succeeded him as the first Taiwan-born president and chairman of the KMT. Lee became the first ROC president elected by popular vote in 1996, despite the PRC's missile tests.\nTransition to democracy.\nChanges in the political process were the result of the liberalizing trend that began in the 1980s under President Chiang Ching-kuo. In 1987, he lifted the emergency decree, which had been in place since 1948 and which had granted virtually unlimited powers to the president for use in the anti-communist campaign. This decree provided the basis for nearly four decades of martial law under which individuals and groups expressing dissenting views were dealt with harshly. Expressing views contrary to the authorities' claim to represent all of China or supporting independent Taiwan independence was treated as sedition. Vice-President Lee Teng-hui succeeded Chiang Ching-kuo as president when Chiang died on 13 January 1988. Lee was elected by the National Assembly to a 6-year term in 1990, marking the final time a president was elected by the National Assembly.\nSince ending martial law, the Republic of China has taken dramatic steps to improve respect for human rights and create a democratic political system. Most restrictions on the press have ended, restrictions on personal freedoms have been relaxed, and the prohibition against organizing new political parties has been lifted.\nAs the National Assembly took action in 1994 to allow for the popular election of the president, the LY in 1994 passed legislation to allow for the direct election of the governor of Taiwan Province and the mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung Municipalities. These elections were held in December 1994, with the KMT winning the governor and Kaohsiung mayor posts, and the DPP winning the Taipei mayor's position. In March 1996, Lee Teng-hui was elected president and Lien Chan vice president in the first direct election by Taiwan's voters. In 1998, the KMT's Ma Ying-jeou wrestled back control of the mayorship of Taipei from the opposition DPP's most prominent figure Chen Shui-bian. In the same elections, however, the DPP's Frank Hsieh managed to defeat Kaoshiung's KMT incumbent.\nThe position of elected governor and many other elements of the Taiwan Provincial Government were eliminated at the end of 1998. The stated purpose of this was to streamline administrative efficiency, but some commentators have argued that this was also intended to weaken the power base of Governor James Soong. In November 1997 local elections, the DPP won 12 of the 23 county magistrate and city mayor contests to the KMT's 8, outpolling the KMT for the first time in a major election.\nIn March 2000, Democratic Progressive Party candidate Chen Shui-bian became the first opposition party candidate to win the presidency. His victory resulted in the first-ever transition of the presidential office from one political party to another in the ROC. The election also had the effect of splitting the KMT's support base. James Soong launched an independent bid for the presidency after failing to be nominated by the party. In response the KMT expelled Soong and his supporters. Soong and his supporters blamed then-KMT Chairman Lee Teng-hui of harboring pro-independence sentiments and purposely trying to aid Chen Shui-bian by splitting the KMT's vote by running the less charismatic Lien Chan along with Soong. After losing the vote narrowly to Chen and ahead of Lien, Soong established the People First Party. Lee Teng-hui was soon forced out of the KMT Chairmanship amid popular protests and riots demanding he take responsibility for the KMT's defeat.\nIn the months following the 2000 presidential election, Lee Teng-hui's supporters established the Taiwan Solidarity Union, which advocated a more radical brand of Taiwan independence than the DPP. For this, Lee was expelled from the KMT and the KMT gradually moved itself to a more conservative and pro-unification position. This permitted the formation of two rival coalitions that have since dominated Taiwanese politics: the Pan-Blue Coalition formed by the KMT, People First Party, and New Party and the Pan-Green Coalition formed by the Democratic Progressive Party and Taiwan Solidarity Union.\nIn the 2001 LY elections, the DPP won a plurality of seats for the first time. However, the Pan-Blue Coalition held a small majority over the Pan-Green Coalition, causing much of President Chen's agenda to be derailed. This also gave independents in the legislature more power, some of whom founded the Non-Partisan Solidarity Union in 2004.\nIn election on 20 March 2004, President Chen Shui-bian was re-elected by 50.1% of the popular vote to a second term. The election was marred by a shooting incident the day before the election during which President Chen and his running mate Vice President Annette Lu were slightly wounded. While the opposition contested the results and suggested the shooting was staged to win sympathy (as President Chen had previously been slated to lose narrowly), it was the first time that the DPP has won an outright majority in an island-wide election.\nThe March election also included a \"peace referendum\". Historically, the issue of referendums has been closely tied to the question of Taiwan independence, and thus has been a sensitive issue in cross Strait relations. There were two referendums before the voters on 20 March 2004. The first asked in light of the PRC missile threat whether the ROC should purchase anti-missile systems. The second asked whether Taiwan should adopt a \"peace framework\" for addressing cross Strait differences with the PRC. However both referendums failed to obtain support from over 50% of registered voters, as required to be valid. The Pan-Blue Coalition campaigned against the referendum as unnecessary and urged voters to boycott it.\nPresident Chen Shui-bian has called for major constitutional reforms by 2006 aimed at further reducing layers of government, and making other structural changes aimed at improving governance. The People's Republic of China has accused Chen of using the constitution issue to move Taiwan towards independence. He expressed opposition, however, in his 20 May 2004 inaugural address to using constitutional reform to alter the constitution's definition of Taiwan sovereignty.\nThe Legislative Yuan passed a set of constitutional amendments on 23 August 2004 that halve the number of LY seats and create single-member districts. The revisions also eliminate the role of the National Assembly and permit the public to confirm or reject future revisions passed by the LY. These constitutional amendments were ratified by the National Assembly in 2005.\nPrior to the 11 December 2004 elections to the Legislative Yuan, signs indicated that the DPP would for the first time dominate the Legislative Yuan. Polls projected a huge pan-green victory, and the DPP's election tactics were based on them. This over-reliance on polls resulted in a huge setback. The pan-blue opposition managed to maintain their majority status within the Legislative Yuan, winning 114 seats out of the 225 seats. The Pan-Green only managed to win 101 seats. The remaining 10 seats were won by the independent candidates. Although the Pan-Green coalition increased their seats by one and the DPP remained the largest party, because of raised hopes the election was viewed as a disaster, and President Chen resigned his post as Chairman of DPP as a result.\nOn 3 December 2005, the KMT made major gains in municipal elections, taking 14 of 23 mayor or county magistrate seats, while the DPP retained only six seats of their previous 10. The pan-blue People First Party and New Party each took one seat, and an independent won one seat. The pan-green TSU was completely shut out. DPP chairman Su Tseng-chang had promised to resign to take responsibility for the defeat. This dramatic setback for the DPP and pan-greens was seen as a reaction to recent corruption scandals, and public disapproval of Chen Shui-Bian's apparent refusal to improve cross-strait relations.\nA. M. Rosenthal, former executive editor of \"The New York Times\" accused China of fostering an \"apartheid\" policy toward Taiwan. Dr Tan Sun Chen, Taiwan's Minister of Foreign Affairs, asserts that China's obstruction in the international community has led to a \"political apartheid\" which \"harms the human rights, interests, and dignity of Taiwan's people.\".\nIn 2000, Chen Shui-bian of the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) was elected president, marking the first peaceful democratic shift in governance to an opposition party in ROC history and a decisive end to the KMT's governmenetal monopoly.\nIn the 2004 presidential election, the day after being shot while campaigning, Chen was reelected by a narrow margin of 0.2%. The KMT filed lawsuits to demand a recount, alleged voting fraud and staged huge rallies to demand a new election. The courts ruled that the election was accurate and valid.\nIn both of Chen's terms, the DPP and the independence-leaning Pan-Green Coalition failed to secure a majority in the legislature, losing to the KMT and the pro-unification leaning Pan-Blue Coalition. This has led to many impasses; the president in the ROC system does not have the power of veto, so the legislature is not required to obtain the assent of the executive branch in order to make laws.\nIn January 2008, opposition party Kuomintang won a landslide victory in legislative election. President Chen Shui-bian's Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) lost. In March 2008, Ma Ying-jeou of Kuomintang party was elected as president. In January 2012, President Ma Ying-jeou was re-elected.\nIn January 2016, Democratic Progressive Party candidate Tsai Ing-wen won presidential election. She became the first female president of Republic of China. In January 2020, Tsai was re-elected, and in the simultaneous legislative election, President Tsai's Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won a majority, with 61 out of 113 seats. The Kuomintang (KMT) got 38 seats.\nIn the 21st century, Taiwan's political system has been moving towards digital democracy with increased participation from civil society and greater transparency from the government.\nIn January 2024, William Lai Ching-te of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party won the 2024 Taiwanese presidential election. However, no party won a majority in the simultaneous Taiwan's legislative election for the first time since 2004, meaning 51 seats for the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), 52 seats for the Kuomintang (KMT), and the Taiwan People's Party (TPP) secured eight seats.\nCurrent political issues.\nThe dominant political issue today in Taiwan is its relationship with the Government of the People\u2019s Republic of China (PRC) that has jurisdiction over mainland China. Specifically, many people in Taiwan desire the opening of direct transportation links with mainland China, including direct flights, which would aid many Taiwanese businesses that have opened factories or branches in mainland China. The former DPP administration feared that such links will lead to tighter economic and thus political integration with the PRC, and in the 2006 Lunar New Year Speech, Chen Shui-bian called for managed opening of links.\nMainland China and Taiwan resumed regular direct flights or cross-Strait relations on 4 July 2008, after six decades, as a \"new start\" in their tense relations. Liu Shaoyong, chair of China Southern Airlines, piloted the first flight from Guangzhou to Taipei (Taoyuan International Airport). Simultaneously, a Taiwan-based China Airlines flight flew to Shanghai. Five mainland Chinese cities will be connected with eight Taiwan airports, with 4 days a week, 36 round-trip flights across the Taiwan Strait, thereby eliminating time-consuming Hong Kong stopovers. Other major political issues include the passage of an arms procurement bill that the United States authorized in 2001. In 2008, however, the United States were reluctant to send over more arms to Taiwan out of fear that it would hinder the recent improvement of ties between China and Taiwan. Another major political issue, is the establishment of a National Communications Commission to take over from the Government Information Office, whose advertising budget exercised great control over the media.\nBanking reform, including consumer finance (limiting rates on credit cards) and bank mergers, is also a major issue. Taiwan's financial sector is quite unwieldy, with over 48 banks, none of which have a market share over 10%. In addition, the government controls 50% to 60% of Taiwan's banking assets. The ultimate aim is the creation of large financial institutions that will then have the ability to compete internationally.\nPolitical status.\nOne key issue has been the political status of Taiwan itself. With the diplomatic isolation brought about in the 1970s and 1980s, the notion of \"recovering the mainland\" by force has been dropped and the Taiwanese localization movement strengthened. The relationship with the People's Republic of China and the related issues of Taiwan independence and Chinese unification continue to dominate Taiwanese politics.\nThe political scene in the ROC is divided into two camps, with the pro-unification KMT, People First Party (PFP), and New Party forming the Pan-Blue Coalition; and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and strongly pro-independence Social Democratic Party (SDP), and Taiwan Statebuilding Party (TSP) forming the Pan-Green Coalition. Because of the dominance of the unification-independence issue in Taiwan's political scene, it is difficult to categorise either camp as \"right\" or \"left\" on the conventional basis of economic or social policies.\nSupporters of the Pan-Green camp tend to favor emphasizing the Republic of China as being a distinct country from the People's Republic of China. Many Pan-Green supporters seek formal Taiwan independence and for dropping the title of the Republic of China. However, more progressive members of the coalition, such as former President Chen Shui-bian, have moderated their views and claim that it is unnecessary to proclaim independence because Taiwan is already \"an independent, sovereign country\" and that the Republic of China is the same as Taiwan. Some members take a much more extreme view about Taiwan's status, claiming that the ROC is nonexistent and calling for the establishment of an independent \"Republic of Taiwan\". Supporters of this idea have even gone as far as issuing self-made \"passports\" for their republic. Attempts to use these \"passports\" however, have been stopped by officials at Chang Kai-shek International Airport.\nWhile the Pan-Green camp favors Taiwan having an identity separate from that of China, some Pan-Blue members, especially former leaders from the older generation, seem to be strongly supportive of the concept of the Republic of China, which remains an important symbol of their links with China. During his visit to mainland China in April 2005, former KMT Party Chairman Lien Chan reiterated his party's belief in the \"One China\" policy that states that there is only one China controlled by two governments and that Taiwan is a part of China. PFP Party Chair James Soong expressed the same sentiments during his visit in May. In contrast to the positions of these two leaders of the older generation, the more mainstream Pan-Blue position is to pursue negotiations with the PRC to immediately open direct transportation links with China and to lift investment restrictions. With regards to independence, the mainstream Pan-Blue position is to simply maintain the ROC's current state, and being open to negotiations for unification after China is democratized enough to respect human rights.\nFor its part, the PRC has indicated that it finds a Republic of China far more acceptable than an independent Taiwan. Although it views the ROC as an illegitimate entity, it has stated that any effort on Taiwan to formally abolish the ROC or formally renounce its claim over mainland China would result in a strong and possibly military reaction. However, the defense of Taiwan by the US and Japan is likely, so it is not, in reality, clear what the PRC reaction would be. The US's current position is that the Taiwan issue must be resolved peacefully and that it condemns unilateral action by either side, an unprovoked invasion by China or a declaration of formal independence by Taiwan.\nNational identity.\nRoughly 84% of Taiwan's population descends from Han Chinese who migrated from mainland China between 1661 and 1895. Another significant fraction descends from Han Chinese who immigrated from mainland China in the 1940s and 1950s. But between 1895 and the present, Taiwan and mainland China have shared a common government for only 4 years. The shared cultural origin combined with several hundred years of geographical separation, some hundred years of political separation and foreign influences, as well as hostility between the rival Taiwan and China have resulted in national identity being a contentious issue with political overtones. Since democratization and the lifting of martial law, a distinct Taiwanese identity (as opposed to Taiwanese identity as a subset of a Chinese identity) is often at the heart of political debates. Its acceptance makes the island distinct from mainland China, and therefore may be seen as a step towards forming a consensus for \"de jure\" Taiwan independence. The pan-green camp supports a distinct Taiwanese identity, while the pan-blue camp supports a Chinese identity only. The KMT has downplayed this stance in the recent years and now supports a Taiwanese identity as part of a Chinese identity.\nAccording to a survey conducted in March 2009, 49% of the respondents consider themselves as Taiwanese only, and 44% of the respondents consider themselves as Taiwanese and Chinese. 3% consider themselves as only Chinese. Another survey, conducted in Taiwan in July 2009, showed that 82.8% of respondents consider that Taiwan and China are two separate countries developing each on its own. A recent survey conducted in December 2009 showed that 62% of the respondents consider themselves as Taiwanese only, and 22% of the respondents consider themselves as both Taiwanese and Chinese. 8% consider themselves as only Chinese. The survey also shows that among 18- to 29-year-old respondents, 75% consider themselves as Taiwanese only.\nCross-strait relations.\nDespite the differences between Taiwan and mainland China, contact between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait has grown significantly over the past decade. The ROC has continued to relax restrictions on unofficial contacts with the PRC, and cross-strait interaction has mushroomed. Since 1987, when the ban on travel to mainland China was lifted, Taiwan residents have made more than 10 million trips to mainland China. The ROC Bureau of Foreign Trade estimates that indirect trade with mainland China reached about US$61.639 billion, or 18% of the total trade of the ROC, in 2004. This indirect trade runs heavily in Taiwan's favor, providing another outlet for the island's booming economy. In an attempt to facilitate trade, in 1995 the Executive Yuan approved the construction of an offshore transshipment center at the port of Kaohsiung through which direct shipping with the mainland would be permitted. In April 1997 the first sanctioned direct cross-strait shipping began between selected mainland China ports and Kaohsiung for cargo being transshipped through Taiwan.\nBeijing has expressed a mixed view of these developments. PRC leaders are pleased at the development of economic ties and exchanges, which they believe helps their cause of unification. However, the increase in contacts, combined with domestic political liberalization on Taiwan, also has resulted in more open discussion in Taiwan of the future of Taiwan, including the option of independence, to which Beijing is strongly opposed.\nWhen Lee Teng-hui visited his alma mater in the US in 1995, this caused harsh criticism from the PRC, which ultimately led to the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis. Lee Teng-hui's characterization in 1999 of relations between the ROC and mainland China as \"between two states\" was denounced by the Chinese government; Lee partially changed his earlier statement and referred to the 1992 Consensus between the ROC and the PRC. Taiwan business representatives have concerns about issues such as safety, corruption, and contract disputes, which have led to increased caution and a search for alternative investment venues but not to pulling out from mainland China altogether. President Chen has yet to revise the previous administration's \"no haste, be patient\" policy regarding Taiwan-mainland China investment to prevent over-dependence on the PRC. As a result of this policy the ROC placed restrictions on large-scale infrastructure investments on mainland China in 1997.\nThe development of semi official cross-strait relations has been incremental. Prior to April 1993, when talks were held in Singapore between the heads of two private intermediary organizations\u00a0\u2013 Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and the PRC's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS)\u00a0\u2013 there had been some lower-level exchanges between the two sides of the Strait. The April 1993 SEF-ARATS talks primarily addressed technical issues relating to cross-strait interactions. Lower-level talks continued on a fairly regular basis until they were suspended by Beijing in 1995 after President Lee's U.S. visit. Unofficial exchanges resumed in 1997 through informal meetings between personnel of the two sides' unofficial representative organizations. Direct SEF-ARATS contacts resumed in April 1998, and the SEF Chairman visited mainland China in October 1998. A planned visit by ARATS Chairman Wang Daohan to Taiwan in the fall, however, was postponed following statements made by then-President Lee Teng-hui that relations between mainland China and Taiwan should be conducted as \"state-to-state\" or at least as \"special state-to-state relations.\" Since his 20 May 2000 inauguration, President Chen has called for resuming the cross-strait dialogue without any preconditions. President Chen has stated that such talks should be conducted on the basis of the \"spirit of 1992,\" a reference to the agreement to hold the 1993 Singapore talks. The PRC, however, has insisted that President Chen must recognize the one China principle before talks can be held.\nGovernment.\nPresidency.\nThe President is the head of state of the Republic of China and commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The president has authority over the five administrative branches (Yuan): Executive, Legislative, Control, Judicial, and Examination.\nNational Assembly.\nThe National Assembly of the Republic of China was elected in mainland China in 1947 to officially carry out the duties of choosing the president, to amend the constitution, and to exercise the sovereignty of the citizens, but in actuality, the Assembly's role in Taipei seemed to reconfirm the executive powers of President Chang Kai-shek. The National Assembly was re-established on Taiwan when the government moved. Because it was impossible to hold subsequent elections to represent constituencies in mainland China, representatives elected in 1947\u201348 held these seats \"indefinitely.\" In June 1990, however, the Council of Grand Justices mandated the retirement, effective December 1991, of all remaining \"indefinitely\" elected members of the National Assembly, Legislative Yuan, and other bodies.\nThe second National Assembly, elected in 1991, was composed of 325 members. The majority was elected directly; 100 were chosen from party slates in proportion to the popular vote. This National Assembly amended the constitution in 1994, paving the way for the direct election of the president and vice president that was held in March, 1996. The National Assembly retained the authority to amend the constitution, to recall or to impeach the president or vice president, and to ratify select senior-level presidential appointments. In April 2000, the members of the National Assembly voted to permit their terms of office to expire without holding new elections. They also determined that such an election would be called in the event the National Assembly is needed to decide a presidential recall or a constitutional amendment. In recent years, the National Assembly has handed most of its powers to the Legislative Yuan, including the power of impeachment. In 2005, the National Assembly permanently abolished itself by ratifying a constitution amendment passed by the Legislative Yuan.\nAmending the ROC constitution now requires the approval of three-fourths of the quorum of members of the Legislative Yuan. This quorum requires at least three-fourths of all members of the Legislature. After passing by the legislature, the amendment needs ratification from at least fifty percent of all eligible voters of the ROC regardless of voter turnout.\nExecutive Yuan.\nThe Executive Yuan comprises the premier, vice-premier, and the cabinet members who are responsible for policy and administration. The President of the Republic appoints the Premier, who is officially the President of the Executive Yuan.\nLegislative Yuan.\nThe main lawmaking body, the Legislative Yuan (LY), was originally elected in 1947. The first LY had 773 seats and was viewed as a \"rubber stamp\" institution. Like the National Assembly, representatives elected in 1947\u201348 held these seats \"indefinitely\" until the 1991 ruling. The second LY was elected in 1992. The third LY, elected in 1995, had 157 members serving 3-year terms. The fourth LY, elected in 1998, was expanded to 225 members. The LY has greatly enhanced its standing in relation to the Executive Yuan and has established itself as an important player on the central level. Along with increasing strength and size this body is beginning to reflect the recently liberalized political system. In the 1992 and 1995 elections, the main opposition party\u00a0\u2013 the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP)\u00a0\u2013 challenged the KMT dominance of the Legislature. In both elections the DPP won a significant share of the LY seats, and the KMT held only half the seats in the LY. In 1998, however, the KMT increased its LY majority from 50% to 55% and continued to play a dominant role in the legislature as the leading opposition party. In the 2001 election, the DPP became the largest party after large losses suffered by the KMT. Control of the Yuan swung back to the KMT after the 2008 elections, while in 2016 the DPP regained the status as the largest party and achieved a majority for the first time in history.\nJudicial Yuan.\nThe Judicial Yuan administers the ROC's court system. It includes a 15-member Council of Grand Justices that interprets the constitution. Grand Justices are appointed by the President, with the consent of the Legislative Yuan, to eight-year terms.\nControl Yuan.\nThe Control Yuan (CY) was elected in 1947 by provincial legislatures. The current form since 1993 monitors the efficiency of public service and investigates instances of corruption. The 29 Control Yuan members are appointed by the president and approved by the Legislative Yuan; they serve 6-year terms. In recent years, the Control Yuan has become more active, and it has conducted several major investigations and impeachments. The current president of the Control Yuan is Chen Chu.\nExamination Yuan.\nThe Examination Yuan (ExY) functions as a civil service commission and includes two ministries: the Ministry of Examination, which recruits officials through competitive examination, and the Ministry of Personnel, which manages the civil service. The President appoints the Examination Yuan's President.\nThe current President of the Examination Yuan is Chou Hung-hsien.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nRecent elections.\n2024 presidential election results:\n2024 legislative election results:\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nPolitical parties.\nAs of July 2015, there are 277 officially registered parties in Taiwan. The aftermath of the 2000 Presidential election and the 2001 legislative election left the Taiwanese fragmented among several political parties. These parties can be divided into \"blue\" factions (Pan-Blue Coalition) and \"green\" factions (Pan-Green Coalition), with the \"blue\" faction tending toward unification and a national identity that is linked with China and the \"green\" faction leaning toward a national identity based on Taiwan independence which is separate from the Chinese national identity. The complex structure of the party system in Taiwan was also influenced by the voting system which uses single non-transferable vote for legislative elections and first past the post for executive elections. Starting with the 2008 legislative elections, the SNTV system was discarded in favor of a mixed single member district (SMD) with proportional representation based on national party votes, similar to Japan.\nThe \"blue\" faction comes from the color of the KMT and includes the KMT, the People First Party, and the New Party. The \"green\" faction comes from the color of the Democratic Progressive Party and includes the Democratic Progressive Party, Social Democratic Party, and the Taiwan Statebuilding Party.\nAfter 1986, the KMT's hold on power was challenged by the emergence of competing political parties. Before 1986, candidates opposing the KMT ran in elections as independents or \"nonpartisans.\" Before the 1986 island-wide elections many \"nonpartisans\" grouped together to create Taiwan's first opposition party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). Despite the official ban on forming new political parties, the government authorities did not prohibit the DPP from operating, and in the 1986 elections DPP and independent candidates captured more than 20% of the vote.\nThe Civic Organizations Law passed in 1989 allowed for the formation of new political parties, thereby legalizing the DPP, and its support and influence increased. In the 1992 Legislative Yuan elections, the DPP won 51 seats in the 161-seat body. While this was only half the number of KMT seats, it made the DPP's voice an important factor in legislative decisions. Winning the Taipei mayor's position in December 1994, significantly enhanced the DPP's image. The DPP continued its strong showing in the 1995 LY race, winning 45 of the 157 seats to the KMT's 81. The DPP for the first time succeeded in outpolling the KMT in the November 1997 local elections, gaining 12 of the 23 magistrate and mayoral seats as opposed to the KMT's 8 and winning 43% of the vote versus the KMT's 41%.\nThe DPP membership is made up largely of the Hoklo people, the largest ethnic group in Taiwan. The DPP maintains that Taiwan is an entity separate from mainland China and supports an independent \"Republic of Taiwan\" as part of its platform. The recent downplaying of Taiwan independence by the DPP as a party, however, led to the formation by hard-line advocates of a new political party called the Taiwan Independence Party in December 1996.\nUntil 1986, Taiwan's political system was effectively controlled by one party, the KMT, the leader of which also was the President. Many top political officials were members of the party. The party claimed over 2 million members, and its net assets were reputed to total more than NT $61.2 billion, making it the richest political party in the world.\nThe Taiwan People's Party was formed on August 6, 2019 by Ko Wen-je, who serves as its first and current chairman. It is a center-left party that considers itself as an alternative to both the DPP and the KMT.\nThe New Power Party was formed in early 2015. The party emerged from the Sunflower Student Movement in 2014, and advocates for universal human rights, civil and political liberties, as well as Taiwan independence/nationalism. The NPP currently had 3 members in the LY.\nThe Social Democratic Party was formed in early 2015. The party emerged from the Sunflower Student Movement in 2014, and advocates for a social-democratic and progressive party, calling for a reduction in income inequality, the protection of labour rights, the abolition of the death penalty and the legalisation of same-sex marriage. The SDP currently had 1 members in the Taipei City Council.\nThe Taiwan Statebuilding Party which advocates \"de jure\" Taiwan independence and the party is considered a close ally of the Democratic Progressive Party. The TSP was formed primarily because the DPP had to moderate its stance with regard to Taiwan independence, leaving a hole in the Taiwanese political spectrum. The party first came to national attention when Chen Po-wei won Taichung District 2 to secure the party\u2019s first Legislative Yuan seat.\nA new opposition party was formed in the wake of the March 2000 presidential election by the runner up, a KMT maverick candidate. The People's First Party is composed primarily of former KMT and NP members who supported former KMT Taiwan Provincial Governor James Soong's presidential bid. The PFP currently had 17 members in the LY before the 2001 election, but increased its representation to over 40 in that election.\nThe New Party was formed in August 1993 by a group made up largely of second-generation mainlander KMT members who were unhappy both with corruption in the KMT and with what they saw as the \"Taiwanization\" of KMT ideology and leadership. The NP emphasizes \"clean government\" and the original KMT focus on unification with mainland China. NP influence remains modest and seems on the wane; it won 21 of the 164 LY seats in the 1995 elections but only 11 of 225 seats in 1998. The New Party was almost annihilated in the 2001 election as its members defected to the Peoples First Party.\nIn 2001, supporters of former President Lee founded the Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU). Even though Lee did not join this party, he is named its spiritual leader and most believe he endorsed it. The TSU was formed primarily because, as it took power, the DPP had to moderate its standing as regards to Taiwan independence, leaving a hole in the Taiwanese political spectrum. In a bid to help the \"green\" side achieve control in the Legislative Yuan, the TSU was formed to attract the radical votes left over from DPP and the localist support for KMT. The TSU had often expressed that it wanted to be the \"decisive minority\".\nOther parties than the parties listed above include:\nAlthough some friction between 1949 Chinese immigrants and native Taiwanese still exists, it has abated with time, and there has been a gradual melding of the two communities. In 1972, then-Premier Chiang Ching-kuo began a concentrated effort to bring Taiwanese into more senior position in the central administration and the KMT. Upon his accession to the presidency in January 1988, Lee Teng-hui, who is a native Taiwanese, continued this process. Steps by the government to redress past wrongs such as setting up a memorial to the victims of the February 28 Incident have contributed to this process.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30092", "revid": "48908799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30092", "title": "Economy of Taiwan", "text": "Taiwan is a highly developed free-market economy. It is the 8th largest in Asia and 21st-largest in the world by purchasing power parity, allowing Taiwan to be included in the advanced economies group by the International Monetary Fund. Taiwan is notable for its rapid economic development from an agriculture-based society to an industrialized, high-income country. This economic growth has been described as the Taiwan Miracle. It is gauged in the high-income economies group by the World Bank. Taiwan is one of the leading producers of computer microchip and high-tech electronics.\nHistory.\nTaiwan has transformed itself from a recipient of U.S. aid in the 1950s and early 1960s to an aid donor and major foreign investor, with investments primarily centered in Asia. Private Taiwanese investment in mainland China is estimated to total in excess of US$150 billion, and official tallies cite Taiwan as having invested a comparable amount in Southeast Asia.\nIn 1949, over two million Kuomintang supporters fled to the island following the loss of Mainland China in the Chinese Civil War. The sudden increase in population also affected Taiwan's economy.\nFacing the economic pressure, the Kuomintang regime established several economic plans and policies. The first step towards industrialization was land reforms, a crucial step in modernizing the economy, as it created a class of landowners with the capital they could invest in future economic endeavors. US aid was also important in stabilizing post-war Taiwan, and it constituted more than 30 percent of domestic investment from 1951 to 1962. These factors, together with government planning and universal education, brought rapid advancements in industry and agriculture, and living standards. The economy shifted from an agriculture-based economy (32% of GDP in 1952) to an industry-oriented economy (47% of GDP in 1986). Between 1952 and 1961, the economy grew by an average of 9.21% each year.\nThe transformation of Taiwan's economy has been influenced by broader geopolitical dynamics. Although aid was cut back in the 1970s, it was crucial in its formative years, spurring industrialization, and security and economic links between Taiwan and the United States were maintained. Uncertainty about the US commitment accelerated the country's shift from subsidized import-substitution in the 1950s to export-led growth. The development of foreign trade and exports helped absorb excess labor from a decreased importance of agriculture in the economy. Taiwan moved from cheap, labor-intensive manufactures, such as textiles and toys, into an expansion of heavy industry and infrastructure in the 1970s and then to advanced electronics in the subsequent decade. By the 1980s, the economy was becoming increasingly open, and the government moved towards the privatization of government enterprises. Technological development led to the establishment of the Hsinchu Science Park in 1981. Investments in mainland China spurred cross-strait trade, decreasing Taiwan's dependence on the United States market. From 1981 to 1995, the economy grew at an annual rate of 7.52%, and the service sector became the largest sector at 51.67%, surpassing the industrial sector and becoming a major source of the economy's growth.\nInternational Trade is officially assisted by Taiwan External Trade Development Council. Because of the financial policy by the Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan) and its entrepreneurial strengths, Taiwan suffered little from the 1997 Asian financial crisis compared to other economies in the region.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2021\u20132027). Inflation under 5% is in green.\nEconomic outlook.\nAs of 2021, the three highest-paid sectors in Taiwan include telecommunication service, financial services, and information services. The economy of Taiwan ranked the highest in Asia in the 2015 Global Entrepreneurship Index (GEI). \nWith the technocracy-centered economic planning until 1987, real growth in GDP has averaged about 8% during the past three decades. Exports have grown since World War II, with inflation and unemployment staying low and foreign reserves being the world's fourth largest. Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics and Ministry of Economic Affairs release major economic indicators of the economy of Taiwan.\nTaiwan now faces many of the same economic issues as other developed economies. With the prospect of continued relocation of labor-intensive industries to economies with cheaper workforces, such as in mainland China, the Philippines, and Vietnam, Taiwan's future development will have to rely on further transformation to a high-technology and service-oriented economy. In recent years, Taiwan has successfully diversified its trade markets, cutting its share of exports to the United States from 49% in 1984 to 20% in 2002. Taiwan's dependence on the United States should continue to decrease as its exports to Southeast Asia and mainland China grow, and its efforts to develop European markets produce results. Taiwan's accession to the WTO and its desire to become an Asia-Pacific \"regional operations center\" are spurring further economic liberalization. The economy of Taiwan is facing economic marginalization in the world economy de-internationalization and lower salaries. This results in human resource talents seeking career opportunities elsewhere. Businesses in Taiwan suffer most from being the size of small and medium enterprises, which impedes attempts at economic transformation in Taiwan by the Taiwanese government.\nThe indirect tax system of the economy of Taiwan comprises Gross Business Receipts Tax (GBRT) (gross receipts tax) and value-added tax (VAT). The economy of Taiwan is ranked 15th overall in the Global Top 20 Top Destination Cities by International Overnight Visitors (2014) by the MasterCard 2014 Global Destination Cities Index.\nIn addition, economic inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient, has been on the rise in Taiwan, rising from a value of 0.47 in 1980 to 0.61 in 2022 (before considering taxes and welfare transfers). Post-tax GINI was 0.32, similar to most other developed countries.\n2008 financial crisis.\nTaiwan recovered quickly from the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession, and its economy has been growing steadily since. Its economy faced a downturn in 2009 due to a heavy reliance on exports which in turn made it vulnerable to world markets. Unemployment reached levels not seen since 2003, and the economy fell 8.36% in the fourth quarter of 2008. In response, the government launched a US$5.6 billion economic stimulus package (3% of its GDP), provided financial incentives for businesses, and introduced tax breaks. The stimulus package focused on infrastructure development, small and medium-sized businesses, tax breaks for new investments, and low-income households. Boosting shipments to new overseas markets, such as Russia, Brazil, and the Middle East, was also a main goal of the stimulus. The economy has since slowly recovered; by November 2010, Taiwan's unemployment rate had fallen to a two-year low of 4.73%, and continued dropping to a 40-month low of 4.18% by the end of 2011. The average salary has also been rising steadily for each month in 2010, up 1.92% from the same period in 2009. Industrial output for November 2010 reached another high, up 19.37% from a year earlier, indicating strong exports and a growing local economy. Private consumption is also increasing, with retail sales up 6.4% compared to 2009. After 10.5% economic growth in 2010, the World Bank expected growth to continue and reach 5% for 2011.\nAccording to the National Development Council, Taiwan's economy declined in May 2019 due to the ongoing China\u2013United States trade war.\nForeign trade.\nForeign trade has been the engine of Taiwan's rapid growth during the past 40 years. Taiwan's economy remains export-oriented; thus, it depends on an open world trade regime and remains vulnerable to downturns in the world economy. The total value of trade increased over fivefold in the 1960s, nearly tenfold in the 1970s, and doubled again in the 1980s. The 1990s saw a more modest, slightly less than twofold, growth. Export composition changed from predominantly agricultural commodities to industrial goods (now 98%). The electronics sector is Taiwan's most important industrial export sector and is the largest recipient of United States investment.\nTaiwan is a member of numerous trade agreements, with China, Japan, USA, the European Union, and Hong Kong as top 5 trade partners in 2010. Taiwan has one of the world's lowest fertility rate and high housing prices. Labor shortages, falling domestic demand, and declining tax revenues are concerns as Taiwan's population decline is faster than other advanced economies.\nAs an island economy with a lack of natural resources and comparatively lower domestic aggregate demand, Taiwan's highly educated human resources would contribute greatly to Value added Innovation management for expanding Taiwan's international trade.\nTaiwan, as an independent economy, became a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) as Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu (often shortened to \"Chinese Taipei\" - both names resulting from PRC interference in the WTO) in January 2002. In a 2011 report by Business Environment Risk Intelligence (BERI), Taiwan ranked third-best globally for its investment environment.\nTaiwan is the world's largest supplier of contract computer chip manufacturing (foundry services) and is a leading LCD panel manufacturer, DRAM computer memory, networking equipment, and consumer electronics designer and manufacturer. Major hardware companies include Acer, Asus, HTC, Foxconn, TSMC and Pegatron. Textiles are another major industrial export sector, though of declining importance due to labor shortages, increasing overhead costs, land prices, and environmental protection.\nImports are dominated by raw materials and capital goods, which account for more than 90% of the total. Taiwan imports most of its energy needs. The United States is Taiwan's third largest trading partner, taking 11.4% of Taiwanese exports and supplying 10.0% of its imports. Mainland China has recently become Taiwan's largest import and export partner. In 2010, the mainland accounted for 28.0% of Taiwan's exports and 13.2% of imports. This figure is growing rapidly as both economies become ever more interdependent. Imports from mainland China consist mostly of agricultural and industrial raw materials. Exports to the United States are mainly electronics and consumer goods. As the Taiwanese per capita income level has risen, demand for imported, high-quality consumer goods has increased. Taiwan's 2002 trade surplus with the United States was $8.70 billion.\nThe lack of formal diplomatic relations between the Republic of China (Taiwan) with Taiwan's trading partners appears not to have seriously hindered Taiwan's rapidly expanding commerce. The Republic of China maintains cultural and trade offices in more than 60 countries with which it does not have official relations to represent Taiwanese interests. In addition to the WTO, Taiwan is a member of the Asian Development Bank as \"Taipei, China\" (a name resulting from PRC influence on the bank) and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum as \"Chinese Taipei\" (for the same reason as above). These developments reflect Taiwan's economic importance and its desire to become further integrated into the global economy.\nTaiwan is a member of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). Taiwan is also an observer at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and International Energy Agency\u00a0(IEA) as Member under the acronym of Chinese Taipei, and a member of International Chamber of Commerce as Chinese Taipei. Taiwan signed Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement with People's Republic of China on 29 June 2010. Taiwan has also signed free trade pacts with Singapore and New Zealand. Taiwan applied for the membership in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in 2015.\nThe Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) with the People's Republic of China was signed on 29 June 2010, in Chongqing. It could potentially widen the market for Taiwan's exports. However, the true benefits and impacts brought by ECFA to Taiwan's overall economy are still in dispute. The newly signed agreement will allow for more than 500 products made in Taiwan to enter mainland China at low or no tariffs. As of 2021, Taiwan's exports to the People's Republic of China (including Hong Kong) totaled about US$270 billion per year, which is equivalent to more than 40% of Taiwan's total GDP. The government is also looking to establish trade agreements with Singapore and the United States.\nIndustry.\nIndustrial output has gradually decreased from accounting for over half of Taiwan's GDP in 1986 to just 31% in 2002. Industries have gradually moved to the capital and technology-intensive industries from more labor-intensive industries, with electronics and information technology accounting for 35% of the industrial structure. Industry in Taiwan primarily consists of many small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) with fewer large enterprises. Traditional labor-intensive industries are being moved off-shore and replaced with capital and technology-intensive industries. These industries are in the pre-mature stage of the manufacturing industry in various global economic competitions, and growing from the over-reliance from the original equipment manufacturer and original design manufacturer models. The Institute for Information Industry is responsible for the development of the IT and ICT industry in Taiwan. Industrial Technology Research Institute is the advanced research center for applied technology for the economy of Taiwan. The art industry is significant with sales worth $225.4 million made domestically in 2019. Taiwanese collectors and artists are also prominent in the global art market.\nThe \"e-Taiwan\" project launched by the government seeks to use US$1.83 billion to improve the information and communications infrastructure in Taiwan in five major areas: government, life, business, transport, and broadband. The program seeks to raise industry competitiveness, improve government efficiency, and improve the quality of life, and aims to increase the number of broadband users on the island to 6 million. In 2010, Taiwan's software market grew by 7.1% to reach a value of US$4 billion, accounting for 3.3% of the Asia-Pacific region market value. The digital content production industry grew by 15% in 2009, reaching US$14.03 billion. The optoelectronics industry (including flat panel displays and photovoltaics) totaled NT$2.2 trillion in 2010, a 40% jump from 2009, representing a fifth of the global market share. The economy of Taiwan is a partner in the Global Value Chains of Electronics Industry. Electronic components and personal computer are areas of international strength of Taiwan's Information Technology industry.\nTaiwan has a growing startup sector.\nConsumer goods.\nTaiwan is a major producer of sporting goods with NT$59.8 billion of production in 2020, 40\u201350% of production is indoor fitness equipment. Taiwan is the global leader in golf equipment with 80% of global production concentrated in the country. The four largest golf OEM are all Taiwanese, however, these firms are increasingly selling products under their own brands.\nThe Taiwanese bicycle industry is significant. Production peaked at ten million units a year in the 1980s but declined as low end production moved abroad and domestic manufactures moved upmarket. Giant Bicycles and Merida Bikes are the largest Taiwanese bicycle manufacturers. Mountain bikes and ebikes make up much of contemporary production. In 2022 the bicycle industry hit a record $6 billion US in revenue.\nSemiconductor industry.\nThe semiconductor industry, including IC manufacturing, design, and packing, forms a major part of Taiwan's IT industry. Due to its strong capabilities in OEM wafer manufacturing and a complete industry supply chain, Taiwan has been able to distinguish itself from its competitors. The sector output reached US$39 billion in 2009, ranking first in global market share in IC manufacturing, packaging, and testing, and second in IC design. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) and United Microelectronics Corporation (UMC) are the two largest contract chipmakers in the world, while MediaTek is the fourth-largest fabless supplier globally. In 1987, TSMC pioneered the fabless foundry model, reshaping the global semiconductor industry. From ITRI's first 3-inch wafer fabrication plant built in 1977 and the founding of UMC in 1980, the industry has developed into a world leader with 40 fabs in operation by 2002. In 2007, the semiconductor industry overtook that of the United States, second only to Japan. Although the 2008 financial crisis affected sales and exports, the industry has rebounded with companies posting record profits for 2010. The international industrial forecast of semiconductor manufacturing, which is the flagship industry of the economy of Taiwan that faces immense competition ahead with its American counterparts. By 2020 Taiwan was the unmatched leader of the global semiconductor industry with Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) alone accounting for more than 50% of the global market.\nInformation technology.\nTaiwan's information technology industry has played an important role in the worldwide IT market over the last 20 years. In 1960, the electronics industry in Taiwan was virtually nonexistent. However, with the government's focus on development of expertise with high technology, along with marketing and management knowledge to establish its own industries, companies such as TSMC and UMC were established. The industry used its industrial resources and product management experience to cooperate closely with major international suppliers to become the research and development hub of the Asia-Pacific region. The structure of the industry in Taiwan includes a handful of companies at the top along with many small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) which account for 85% of industrial output. These SMEs usually produce products on an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) or original design manufacturer (ODM) basis, resulting in less resources spent on research and development. Due to the emphasis of the OEM/ODM model, companies are usually unable to make in-depth assessments for investment, production, and marketing of new products, instead relying upon importation of key components and advanced technology from the United States and Japan. Twenty of the top information and communication technology (ICT) companies have International Procurement Offices set up in Taiwan. As a signer of the Information Technology Agreement, Taiwan phased out tariffs on IT products since 1 January 2002.\nTaiwan is a hub for global computing, telecommunications, and data management with a number of large server farms operating in the country. Google's data center in Changhua is believed to be the largest in Asia. Taiwan is well connected to the global undersea fiber optic cable network and serves as a substantial traffic interchange.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture has served as a strong foundation for Taiwan's economic miracle. It contributes 3% to GDP and the service sector makes up 73% of the economy. After retrocession from Japan in 1945, the government announced a long-term strategy of \"developing industry through agriculture, and developing agriculture through industry\". As such, agriculture became the foundation for Taiwan's economic development during early years and served as an anchor for growth in industry and commerce. Whereas in 1951, agricultural production accounted for 35.8% of Taiwan's GDP, by 2013, it had been vastly surpassed, and its NT$475.90 billion accounted for only 1.69% of the GDP. As of 2013[ [update]], Taiwan's agriculture was a mixture of crops (47.88%), livestock (31.16%), fishery (20.87%), and forestry (0.09%). Since its accession into the World Trade Organization and the subsequent trade liberalization, the government has implemented new policies to develop the sector into a more competitive and modernized green industry.\nAlthough only about one-quarter of Taiwan's land area is suitable for farming, virtually all farmland is intensely cultivated, with some areas suitable for two and even three crops a year. However, increases in agricultural production have been much slower than industrial growth. Agricultural modernization has been inhibited by the small size of farms and the lack of investment in better facilities and training to develop more profitable businesses. Taiwan's agricultural population has steadily decreased from 1974 to 2002, prompting the Council of Agriculture to introduce modern farm management, provide technical training, and offer counseling for better production and distribution systems. Promotion of farm mechanization has helped to alleviate labor shortages while increasing productivity; both rice and sugar cane production are completely mechanized. Taiwan's main crops are rice, sugar cane, fruits (many of them tropical), and vegetables. Although self-sufficient in rice production, Taiwan imports large amounts of wheat, mostly from the United States. Meat production and consumption have risen sharply, reflecting a high standard of living. Taiwan has exported large amounts of frozen pork, although this was affected by an outbreak of hoof and mouth disease in 1997. Other agricultural exports include fish, aquaculture, and sea products, canned and frozen vegetables, and grain products. Imports of agriculture products are expected to increase due to the WTO accession, which is opening previously protected agricultural markets.\nEnergy.\nDue to the lack of natural resources on the island, Taiwan is forced to import many of its energy needs (currently at 98%). Imported energy totaled US$11.52 billion in 2002, accounting for 4.1% of its GDP. Although the industrial sector has traditionally been Taiwan's largest energy consumer, its share has dropped in recent years from 62% in 1986 to 58% in 2002. Taiwan's energy consumption is dominated by crude oil &amp; petroleum products (48.52%), followed by coal (29.2%), natural gas (12.23%), nuclear power (8.33%), and hydroelectric power (0.28%). The island is also heavily dependent on imported oil, with 72% of its crude oil coming from the Middle East in 2002. Although the Taiwan Power Company (Taipower), a state-owned enterprise, is in charge of providing electricity for the Taiwan area, a 1994 measure has allowed independent power producers (IPPs) to provide up to 20% of the island's energy needs. Indonesia and Malaysia supply most of Taiwan's natural gas needs. It currently has three operational nuclear power plants. A fourth plant under construction was mothballed in 2014.\nAlthough Taiwan's per capita energy use is on par with neighboring Asian countries, in July 2005 the Ministry of Economic Affairs announced plans to cut 170 million tons of carbon dioxide emissions by 2025. In 2010, carbon dioxide emissions have been reduced by 5.14 million metric tons. In order to further reduce emissions, the government also plans to increase energy efficiency by 2% each year through 2020. In addition, by 2015, emissions are planned to be reduced by 7% compared to 2005 levels.\nTaiwan is the world's 4th largest producer of solar-powered batteries and largest LED manufacturer by volume. In 2010, Taiwan had over 1.66 million square meters of solar heat collectors installed, with an installation density that ranks it as third in the world. The government has already built 155 sets of wind turbines capable of producing 281.6 MW of electricity, and additional projects are planned or under construction. Renewable energy accounts for 6.8% of Taiwan's energy usage as of 2010. In 2010, the green energy sector generated US$10.97 billion in production value. The government also announced plans to invest US$838 million for renewable energy promotion and an additional US$635 million for research and development.\nSteel and heavy manufacturing.\nTaiwan, as of 2017, is the world's thirteenth-largest steel exporter. In 2018, Taiwan exported 12.2 million metric tons of steel, a one percent increase from 12.0 million metric tons in 2017. Taiwan's exports represented about 3 percent of all steel exported globally in 2017, based on available data. The volume of Taiwan's 2018 steel exports was one-sixth that of the world's largest exporter, China, and nearly one-third that of the second-largest exporter, Japan. In value terms, steel represented just 3.6 percent of the total amount of goods Taiwan exported in 2018. Taiwan exports steel to more than 130 countries and territories. Over the decade from 2009 to 2019, Taiwan grew its steel exports by 24%. In 2018, the US imported 300,000 metric tons of pipe and tube products. Taiwan has developed a vast export trade to its most proximate neighbors in flat products. Taiwan's stainless steel exports numbered 2018 about 500,000 metric tons.\nTaiwan is the fourth largest exporter of machine tools and machine tool components in the world. The greater Taichung area is home to a cluster of machine tool manufacturers.\nTaiwanese company Techman Robot Inc. is the world's second largest producer of cobots.\nThe automotive industry in Taiwan is significant, with Taiwanese firms increasingly invested in automotive electrification; 75% of Tesla, Inc.\u2019s suppliers are Taiwanese.\nMaritime industries.\nIn 2017, Taiwan exported one hundred and sixty-two yachts. In 2018 Taiwan was the fourth largest yacht building nation by feet of yacht built after Italy, The Netherlands and Turkey. Taiwan is one of the largest fishing nations on earth and the associated fish processing industry is also significant.\nLargest companies.\nAccording to the 2019 Forbes Global 2000 index, Taiwan's largest publicly traded companies are:\nAccording to the 2022 Fortune Global 500 Rankings, Taiwan's largest publicly traded companies are:\nLabor policy.\nUnion policies.\nThe Labor Union Laws, legislated by the Kuomintang (KMT) on the mainland, gave Taiwan workers the right to unionize. However, prior to the democratization of Taiwan, the functions of trade unions were limited under strict regulation and state corporatism. Under the Labor Union Laws, workers were only allowed to be organized at the companies, which means industry level unions were forbidden. Also, only one union could exist within each company or geographical area. Special occupational groups such as teachers were not allowed to unionize. The right to strike and collective bargaining were also hamstrung by law. The Collective Bargaining Agreement in 1930 stipulated that collective bargains were not legally valid without government approval. The democratization in 1986 brought dramatic changes to union participation and policies. Between 1986 and 1992, unionized workers increased by 13%. A number of autonomous, non-official trade unions emerged, including the Taiwan Confederation of Trade Unions (TCTU) which acquired legal recognition in 2000. The amendments to the Labor Union Laws and Collective Bargaining Agreement both became effective in the early 21st century. The amended Labor Union Law lifted the limitations on special occupational groups from collective representation. The Collective Bargaining Agreement Act in 2008 guaranteed trade unions the power to negotiate with employers.\nEmployment protection.\nTaiwan's labor rights and employment protections increased with its democratization progress in the 1980s, and it still has a relatively high level of employment protection compared to other East Asia countries. Implemented in August 1984, Labor Standards Law was the first comprehensive employment protection law for Taiwan workers. Prior to its implementation, the Factory Act was the primary law governing labor affairs, but was ineffective in practice because of its narrow coverage of businesses and issues and absence of penalties for violation. In contrast, Labor Standards Law covered a broader range of businesses and labor affairs and detailed penalties for its violation. It regulated a period of notice before firing employees and also required a higher level of severance payment. Other labor issues were also regulated by the law, including contract, wage, overtime payment, compensations for occupational accidents, etc. Penalties for employer violation were also clear in the law, stating fines and criminal liabilities. Council of Labor Affairs (CLA) was set up on 1 August 1987 to help with labor inspection and the enforcement of the Labor Standards Law.\nIn Taiwan, companies with at least a single employee have the compulsion to contribute to the insurer's employment service insurance premium. The share of labor insurance is divided into a 7:2:1 ratio between employer, employee, and state. As far as a contribution towards social security, companies should pay at least 6% of the wages of its employees towards the social security.\nActive labor market policies.\nActive labour market policies were carried out in Taiwan in the late 20th and early 21st centuries as a result of economic structural changes caused by globalization and deindustrialization. Unemployment increased and reached approximately 5% in 2002 and 2009. A set of policies was adopted to help the unemployed and provide jobs. The Employment Insurance Act of 2002 grants income security during unemployment but, at the same time, requires beneficiaries to use all available resources to find jobs. The Multi-Faceted Job Creation Program, first introduced in 1999, creates job in the third sector groups, especially in nonprofit organizations. It subsidizes those companies to provide vocational trainings and job opportunities. The Public Sector Temporary Employment Creation Program directly addressed the 2008 financial crisis. Unlike the Multi-Faceted Job Creation Programs, the Public Sector Temporary Employment Creation Program creates jobs in the government itself. From 2008 to 2009, the government was estimated to create 102,000 job opportunities through that program. A job creation project was also implemented to help young people by subsidizing the hiring of young people in universities and private companies.\nWorking hours.\nOn 30 July 1984, Taiwan implemented an eighty-six article Labor Standards Act under Presidential Order No.14069. The act defined the standard work week as 40 labor hours with an eight-hour limit per day, permitting an overtime-included maximum of forty-eight labor hours per week.\nArticle 25 of the Labor Standards Act upholds there will be no sexual discrimination in the conditions of workers, however, because the Taiwanese culture and thus political economy traditionally \"categorizes female employees as naturally marriage- and family-oriented,\" women are assumed to obtain employment in fields that are limited to these ideals. As a result of feminist ideals becoming more prevalent with women seeking equal work conditions in modern societies such as Taiwan, even marital status policy and immigration policy have been affected as women seek less patriarchal roles to the point where Taiwanese men have sought higher rates of transnational marriages since the 1990s.\nScience and industrial parks.\nIn order to promote industrial research and development, the government began establishing science parks, economic zones which provide rent and utility breaks, tax incentives, and specialized lending rates to attract investment. The first of these, the Hsinchu Science Park was established in 1980 by the National Science Council with a focus on research and development in information technology and biotechnology. It has been called Taiwan's \"Silicon Valley\" and has expanded to six campuses covering an area of . Over 430 companies (including many listed on TAIEX) employing over 130,000 people are located within the park, and paid in capital totaled US$36.10 billion in 2008. Both Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company and United Microelectronics Corporation, the world's largest and second largest contract chipmakers, are headquartered within the park. Since 1980, the government has invested over US$1 billion in the park's infrastructure, and further expansion for more specialized parks have been pursued. The Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), headquartered within the park, is the largest nonprofit research organization in Taiwan and has worked to develop applied technological research for industry, including for many of Taiwan's traditional industries (such as textiles).\nFollowing the success of the first park, the Southern Taiwan Science Park (STSP), consisting of the Tainan Science Park and the Kaohsiung Science Park, was established in 1996. In addition to companies, several research institutes (including Academia Sinica) and universities have set up branches within the park with a focus on integrated circuits (ICs), optoelectronics, and biotechnology. The Central Taiwan Science Park (CTSP) was established more recently in 2003. While the CTSP is still under development, many firms (including AU Optronics) have already moved into the park and begun manufacturing operations. Like the other parks, CTSP also focuses on ICs, optoelectronics, and biotechnology, with the optoelectronics industry accounting for 78% of its revenue in 2008. These three science parks alone have attracted over NT$4 trillion (US$137 billion) worth of capital inflow, and in 2010 total revenue within the parks reached NT$2.16 trillion (US$72.8 billion).\nThe Linhai Industrial Park, established in Kaohsiung in 1960, is a well-developed industrial zone with over 490 companies focusing on other industries including base metals, machinery and repairs, nonmetallic mineral products, chemical products, and food and beverage manufacturing. The Changhua Coastal Industrial Park, located in Changhua County, is a newer industrial cluster with many different industries such as food production, glass, textiles, and plastics.\nIndustrial and science parks in Taiwan include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30095", "revid": "29154597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30095", "title": "Republic of China Armed Forces", "text": "Taiwan's military forces\nThe Republic of China Armed Forces () are the national military forces of the Republic of China (ROC), which is now based primarily in the Taiwan Area but formerly governed Mainland China prior to 1949. The armed forces comprise the Army, Navy (including the Marine Corps), Air Force, and Military Police Force. The military operates under the civilian control of the Ministry of National Defense, a cabinet-level body overseen by the Legislative Yuan.\nFormerly known as the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), it was renamed the Republic of China Armed Forces in 1947 due to the implementation of the newly promulgated Constitution of the Republic of China. It was also historically referred to as the Chinese National Armed Forces (CNAF) prior to the establishment of the People's Republic of China on the Chinese mainland and the gradual loss of international recognition in the 1970s by the United Nations and many countries, including the ROC's close ally, the United States.\nUntil the late 1970s, the primary mission of the ROC Armed Forces was to prepare for a counteroffensive aimed at retaking mainland China from the Communists, as exemplified by efforts such as Project National Glory. Following strategic shifts and Taiwan's evolving political landscape, the military's focus turned towards the defence of Taiwan itself against potential invasion by the People's Liberation Army (PLA) of the People's Republic of China (PRC), which continues to be perceived as the principal threat.\nThe ROC Armed Forces today maintain an approximate active strength of 150,000 personnel, with the capability to mobilise up to 1.67 million reservists in times of national emergency or full-scale war. A significant pool of former conscripts is available, as all able-bodied male citizens of the ROC are required to undertake at least one year of compulsory military service upon reaching the age of 18.\nEtymology.\nThe Republic of China Armed Forces is the national military of the ROC. In Taiwan, it is commonly referred to as the National Armed Forces, pronounced \"Kuo2-Ch\u00fcn1\" in Mandarin (, literally \"National Army\"). This term is also widely used among overseas Chinese communities supportive of Taiwan or the ROC government. It is abbreviated as \"Kuo2-Ch\u00fcn1\" (, literally \"National Army\"). Colloquially, it is also known in mainland China and elsewhere worldwide in an international context as the Taiwanese Armed Forces () to distinguish from the People's Liberation Army (PLA) of the People's Republic of China (PRC).\nWhen the ROC was in power in mainland China, its army was the National Revolutionary Army before being renamed as the Republic of China Armed Forces in 1947 due to the implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of China. Prior to the establishment of the PRC in 1949, the ROC military was also widely referred to internationally as the Nationalist Forces, a term that continued to be used by some countries until the 1970s.\nHistory.\nMainland era.\nPrior to 1947, the ROC Armed Forces were known as the National Revolutionary Army, which was founded by Sun Yat-sen in Guangdong in 1924. Because the Republic of China was divided by warlords since the 1911 Revolution, he wanted to create a military that would be politically dominated by the Chinese Nationalist Party (the Kuomintang). Sun Yat-sen accepted the help of the Soviet Union in creating a Soviet-style military and party system. As part of this effort, the Whampoa Military Academy was founded on 1 May 1924 with Soviet trainers and equipment. The Whampoa Academy provided politically indoctrinated officers that were loyal to the ideals of the Revolution and the Kuomintang Party. A Political Department was established in the Army, training political officers to maintain the Kuomintang's ideological and civilian control.\nThe National Revolutionary Army fought in the Northern Expedition from 1926 to 1928 to reunite China under one government for the first time in two decades. It fought in the Second Sino-Japanese War from 1937 to 1945, and then against the Chinese Communist Party in the Chinese Civil War. After the ROC military was defeated by the Communists on the mainland in 1949, the Nationalists evacuated to Taiwan.\nCold War.\nThe promulgation of the Constitution of the Republic of China in 1947 renamed the National Revolutionary Army to the Republic of China Armed Forces (). Although the army was theoretically nationalized, it remained effectively a party army of the Kuomintang until the 1990s. The United States began providing military supplies and equipment to the ROC after the Korean War broke out, and in 1951 the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) Taiwan was created. The ROC military received extensive support from the United States, with MAAG helping set up dozens of military schools (including each branch having its own staff college and officer academy), providing American vehicles, aircraft, ships, and weapons, and restructuring the ROC Army. In 1957, U.S. Ambassador Karl Rankin described the ROC as having the second largest Asian military allied to the United States. In the late 1950s, the ROC Armed Forces had 600,000 troops, including 375,000 in the Army and 17,000 political officers.\nDuring the First Taiwan Strait Crisis in 1954 and 1955, the People's Liberation Army gained air and naval superiority over the ROC Armed Forces near the Dachen and Yijiangshan islands, forcing the ROC to give them up, after artillery fire from the mainland and attacks by PLA Air Force bombers and PLA Navy PT boats. But the ROC prevented the situation from happening again during the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis in 1958, when its garrison on the Kinmen Islands held out through an artillery barrage, the ROC Air Force shot down many PLAAF jets while losing far less of its own, and the Navy sunk some of their PT boats. The ROC Marine Corps used its amphibious vehicles to deliver supplies to the population of the Kinmen Islands while under artillery fire from the mainland. In the 1960s the ROC sent military personnel to assist South Vietnam during the Vietnam War in non-combat roles.\nUp until the late 1980s, the ROC military's objective was to eventually retake the mainland. That strategy changed in the 1990s with the understanding that challenging the PRC's control of the mainland was unrealistic, and instead focused on defending Taiwan and its offshore islands. At first this consisted of both offensive and defensive methods, before becoming focused only on the defensive. To reflect this change, a ten-year restructuring plan for the Armed Forces was proposed in 1993 but it was cancelled in 1995 and replaced by another plan, known as the Armed Forces streamlining program, which was adopted by the government in December 1996. The end of the martial law in Taiwan in 1987 also led to a series of administrative reforms, occurring at the same time as the political changes. These included ending the Kuomintang's political control of the military.\nPost-Cold War.\nThe ROC military bureaucracy was traditionally dominated by the Army, which was primarily an infantry force, until the late 1980s, when more emphasis was placed on the Navy and Air Force. In July 1997, the Armed Forces streamlining program was started, reducing the total number of troops and reorganizing Army divisions into more mobile combined arms brigades. In the late 1980s, the Army had 270,000 personnel, out of a total military of over 500,000. The Army received the biggest reduction in size as part of the military reform. By 2003, the Army was reduced to 199,237 soldiers, while the other services included 56,284 in the Navy (including Marines), 55,170 in the Air Force, 15,015 in the Combined Logistics Command, and 14,168 in the Military Police. The reduction in the number of troops continued during the presidency of Chen Shui-bian from 2000 to 2008. Taiwan's transition to democracy also meant that the Armed Forces had to transition from being the armed wing of the KMT to a modern national military. This was a challenge with change resisted by many officers.\nIn January 2000, two defense laws were passed, the National Defense Law and the Ministry of National Defense Reorganization Law, which both took effect in March 2002. The laws created the basis for the civilian control and nationalization of the ROC military, by subordinating the General Staff to a civilian Minister of Defense, and created new organizations at the MND to improve strategic planning and armaments procurement. The two defense laws were also passed in part because of a scandal during the 1990s about the ROC Navy's decision to purchase certain French frigates, which involved bribery of senior officials and the death of the officer in charge of navy procurement, and resulted in years of investigations. The effect of the post-1987 military reforms was integrating the military into a democratic political system: before 2000 Taiwan's defense policy was controlled by generals, and since then it has been set by the lawmakers. The military has also been included in the truth and reconciliation process which followed the transition from dictatorship to democracy.\nIn the 21st century as the PRC vastly increased its defense spending, the Republic of China registered the lowest growth in defense spending of the major Asia-Pacific powers. These cutbacks were felt as vital land based systems were cut in order to afford an upgrade of aging fourth generation jet fighters (needed to respond to the PRC's fifth generation fighter programs). And even the jet fighter upgrades were cut back in areas such as high performance jet engines. The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission found that these defense cuts could jeopardize Taiwan's military preparedness.\nBy 2008 the ROC military had a total strength of 260,000. In 2013 the ROC Armed Forces had over 240,000 active troops, which was reduced to 215,000 as of 2015, and then to 180,000 by 2023. The International Institute of Strategic Studies reported the active duty personnel of the military in 2023 as 169,000. President Tsai Ing-wen, who took office in 2016, has worked to strengthen the military, including by raising its budget, creating the All-Out Defense Mobilization Agency, and restoring conscription from four months to twelve months. President Lai Ching-te announced a plan in November 2025 to increase Taiwan's annual military spending to T$1.25 trillion (US$39.89 billion) over the next eight years. He also stated that the ROC armed forces will be raised to a high level of combat readiness by 2027. In 2026, the military budget will be greater than 3% of Taiwan's GDP for the first time since 2009.\nOrganization.\nThe professional head of the Armed Forces is the Chief of the General Staff, who answers to the civilian command structure under the Minister of National Defense and the ROC President. Below the Chief are the Executive Vice Chief of the General Staff and two other Vice Chiefs, who oversee the Political Warfare Department and several Deputy Chiefs of the General Staff, each of whom leads a section (J-1 personnel, J-2 intelligence, J-3 operations, J-4 logistics, and J-5 planning). The headquarters of each individual branch are subordinated to the General Staff.\nThe following service commands are directly subordinate to the General Staff.\nThe Coast Guard Administration was created in 2001 from related police and military units and is administered by the Executive Yuan and may be incorporated as a military branch during times of emergency but for the large part remains in civilian control.\nArmy.\nThe Army is the land branch of the ROC Armed Forces tasked with defending Taiwan and its offshore islands. Because of the historical legacy of having once controlled mainland China, the Army has traditionally been the dominant branch of the ROC's military forces, has the largest number of personnel, but it has received the biggest reduction in size from the military reforms of the 1990s. Also part of the reform was changing Army divisions into smaller and more mobile combined arms brigades. In recent years, with the reduction of conscription, it has been reported that Army brigades may only have 60% to 80% of the soldiers they require. The Army has several hundred tanks, some from the U.S. and some locally made, though all of them are many decades old. In 2024 Taiwan received its first M1A2 Abrams tanks and first M142 HIMARS artillery systems.\nIn 2015, the Army was organized into 3 army corps, 5 infantry brigades, 3 mechanized infantry brigades, 4 armored brigades, 3 aviation brigades, and 5 artillery brigades, with a total of 1,100 tanks and 1,600 artillery pieces. The number of infantry brigades was gradually reduced from 25 in 2005 to 5 by 2016 and the number of armored brigades from 5 to 4 in 2010, while artillery brigades were increased and army aviation brigades were established in 2015. Also in 2015, the Army's total personnel was reported at 150,000. In 2023 it had 94,000 soldiers.\nIn 2021, it was announced that Army's corps and regional defense commands will be abolished eventually and replaced with combat theater commands to better coordinate ground, air, and naval forces. Currently, each corps and defense command of the ROC Army is assigned to a combat theater command, and the commanding general of each formation will also lead their theater command in wartime. This was interpreted by some military analysts as reducing the control of the Army over the military command structure and putting a greater focus on joint operations among the three branches. Although they are led by Army generals, in the future Navy and Air Force officers will be appointed as theater commanders. The new commands are comparable to U.S. unified combatant commands or the theater commands of the People's Liberation Army. As of 2021 the Army's Kinmen and Matsu island commands were outside of this structure, as was the Aviation and Special Forces Command.\nNavy.\nThe Navy is responsible for maritime warfare and protecting the waters of Taiwan, including the offshore islands, as well as shipping lanes. The ROC Navy was built up after 1949 with U.S. assistance, receiving destroyers and frigates that were made or designed during World War II. Some of these were still in use at the start of the 1990s, when Taiwan started buying modern ships. In that decade Taiwan acquired French \"La Fayette\" frigates, Dutch \"Zwaardvis\" submarines, and German minehunters, which are still in service as of 2024. It also received \"Kidd\"-class destroyers and \"Oliver Hazard Perry\" frigates from the United States. Since the 2000s, the ROCN has tried to improve its asymmetric warfare capability to counter the much larger People's Liberation Army Navy by locally building smaller and stealthier craft, such as fast missile boats, corvettes, and submarines, though its destroyers and frigates remain the main component of the fleet.\nThe size of the ROCN has not changed significantly between 2005 and 2024, except for the decommissioning of two destroyers and the addition of 12 corvettes. As of 2023 the Navy also had 40,000 personnel. In 2015 the Navy had 4 destroyers, 22 frigates, 1 corvette, 14 landing ships, and 4 diesel attack submarines. The majority of these ships are former U.S. Navy vessels.\nMarine Corps.\nThe Marine Corps is the amphibious warfare arm of the ROC Navy. The original purpose of the Marines was to carry out amphibious landings on the mainland to establish a bridgehead for Army forces, and starting in the 1950s the ROC Marines received training in amphibious warfare from the USMC. Training exercises with the USMC were officially ended in 1979, but were resumed in 2017. More recently, the main purpose of the Marine Corps has been to defend Taiwan by disrupting PRC amphibious operations and to serve as a rapid response force. In 2021 Marines were deployed to Pratas Island when the PLA carried out war games in the area. In 2023 there were 10,000 ROC Marines, and they were organized in two Marine brigades, a special forces unit (the Amphibious Reconnaissance and Patrol Unit), and some support units.\nAir Force.\nThe Air Force is responsible for defending Taiwanese airspace and assisting in disaster relief. In recent years the ROCAF had to send aircraft to respond to Chinese planes entering Taiwan's air defense identification zone. Founded on mainland China, the ROC Air Force on Taiwan received U.S. military assistance in the Cold War, including over 400 aircraft, which were mostly fighters. Beginning in 1954 with the F-86 Sabre, by the late 1980s the ROCAF's fighter force also had the F-100 Super Sabre, the F-104 Starfighter, and Northrop F-5. In the 1990s Taiwan began acquiring more modern aircraft to replace the F-5 and to counter the improving People's Liberation Army Air Force, including the F-16 Fighting Falcon and the Dassault Mirage 2000.\nThe Air Force has reduced its total number of aircraft in the mid-2000s, has been replacing them with more modern fighters. As of 2015, the ROC Air Force had 384 fighters, 19 transports, and 25 aircraft of other types, a reduction from 420 fighters and 40 transport aircraft as of 2005. In 2024 the ROCAF had a total of 35,000 personnel and 430 combat capable aircraft, being organized into 28 squadrons. The main components of the ROC Air Force are the Air Combatant Command and the Air Defense and Missile Command, the latter having five brigades equipped with AA missile systems and several battalions of AA artillery. Its current fighters include the Dassault Mirage 2000, AIDC F-CK-1 Ching-kuo, and the F-16 Fighting Falcon. Although the PLAAF has both technological and numerical superiority over the ROCAF, Taiwan has made efforts to improve its aircraft, including upgrading its F-16 fleet to the most advanced variant, the Block 70 Viper (F-16V).\nMilitary Police.\nThe Military Police are tasked with enforcing military discipline, supporting the civilian police, providing security for government officials and buildings, counterterrorism, and defending the capital of Taipei. The ROCMP is organized into four regional commands (including one for Taipei) which consist of several battalions and other units. In 2024 there were 5,000 MPs. The Military Police Command plans to double the size of its current force in the future to increase security in the capital city.\nReserve.\nThe Reserve Command manages the Armed Forces Reserve, and has a headquarters staff of 400. There are three regional reserve commands that each oversee a reserve training center and offices at the county and municipal levels (Northern, Central, and Southern Area Reserve Commands). The Command is responsible for maintaining mobilization plans and training reserve units during peace time, consisting of fourteen days of drill every one years, and more extensive training in the event of a wartime mobilization. It also has the task of preparing the civilian industries of Taiwan to assist the military during a war, and being the coordinator of an all-out defense effort that involves the civilian population.\nAs of 2023, the Reserve was estimated to have a total of 1,657,000 reservists by the International Institute of Strategic Studies, including 1.5 million in the Army, 67,000 in the Navy, and 90,000 in the Air Force. The RAND Corporation estimated in 2017 that the total number of reservists is 2.5 million, including 60,000 each in the Navy and the Air Force.\nThe Army Reserve would form 44 infantry brigades and 2 armored Brigade. These brigades are organized into four categories depending on the level of readiness: A-Level brigades are the highest level, and include active-duty troops that would serve with reservists; B-Level brigades would consist of cadets studying at military schools and academies; C-Level brigades are local units and represent the largest category in the reserves, and D-Level brigades would be drawn from reserve officer training courses operated by Reserve Command. Army A-Level and B-level brigades along with Marine reserve units would have a front line role similar to regular forces, while the other Army reserves would be used for static defense of important locations. Navy and Air Force reservists would have a supporting role at naval or air bases.\nPersonnel.\nAs of 2024 the armed forces are estimated to have between 150,000 and 169,000 personnel. The number of reservists is estimated at 1.657 million. Starting in 2024, Taiwanese male citizens are required to serve 12 months in the military.\nAccording to the December 2022 reform known as the \"Strengthening All-People's Defense Military Force Restructuring Plan\" (), ROCAF personnel will be organized into four categories: the Main Battle Troops (), the active-duty volunteer force that will be responsible primarily for fighting; the Garrison Troops (), that will mostly consist of conscripts and be used for defending infrastructure; the Civil Defense System (), consisting of alternative service personnel that do not want or are ineligible for combat roles and will be used for humanitarian aid, medical assistance, and logistics; and the Reserve System (), providing former volunteers for the Main Battle Troops and former conscripts for the Garrison Troops.\nImmigrants from the PRC have to reside in Taiwan for twenty years before they can volunteer for military service. They are exempt from conscription.\nIn 2025 the Taiwanese government increased the monthly bonus for volunteer service members to NT$30,000 (US$1,000), roughly double the previous amount.\nAll-out defense.\nSince 2021 training for reserve formations has been increased with an emphasis placed on urban and asymmetric warfare. The training period for reservists has been increased to two weeks from 5\u20137 days. In 2022 reserves numbered 2.31 million. The 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine increased support for and understanding from the public of the effectiveness of well trained and equipped reserves. In 2022 women were included in reserve training. Following the Russian invasion, the Ministry of Defense raised the required national stockpile minimum for medication from two months to six months with up to a years worth of stockpiles mandated for critical drugs.\nThe military runs combat training camps for high school students during school breaks.\nConscription.\nDuring the 2000s, there were initial plans to turn the ROCAF into a volunteer armed forces as relations between the ROC and PRC were improving during this time. In 2012, ROC Ministry of National Defence announced that the length of service was reduced to 4 months from the original 1 year in December 2011 for those born after 1 January 1994, due to aims to establish an all-volunteer force. As since, all able-bodied men reaching conscription age will undergo 4 month long military training instead of serving for 1 year, as it was done previously. Those born prior to 1 January 1994 and were yet to complete their military service were given an option to serve in a non-combatant role for a duration of one year. During the 2010s, when conscription was reduced to four months of training, the military struggled to meet its recruitment targets, especially for combat roles.\nThis policy was reversed in 2022, when president Tsai Ing-wen announced that conscription will revert to 1 year from 2024, as relations with the PRC had deteriorated since at least 2016 when her party came into power. The required four months of training, when it was in effect, was also criticized as being not enough to provide conscripts with military training.\nRank structure.\nOfficers.\nThe ROC Armed Forces' officer corps is generally viewed as being competent, displaying a high degree of professionalism. However, as a whole, the culture in the officer corps tends to be very cautious and conservative. The military also faces difficulties in the recruitment and retention of junior officers and NCOs due to competition with the private sector.\nOfficers are promoted monthly with ceremonial conferences of rank carried out twice a year. Previously both the promotions and ceremonial conferences had been carried out simultaneously on a biannual cycle.\nThe Republic of China Military Academy, the Naval Academy, and the Air Force Academy are the officer commissioning academies of each service branch.\nWomen.\nWomen have a long history of service in Taiwan's armed forces but were exempted from conscription. In 2022, Chen Yu-lin, a political warfare officer, became the first woman promoted to the rank of two star Lieutenant General. In 2023, 15% of active duty military personnel were women.\nIndigenous.\nTaiwanese indigenous people make up a greater percentage of Taiwan's armed forces than their percentage of the overall Taiwanese population, making up 8.7 percent of military personnel as of 2024. Taiwanese indigenous people are especially critical to elite military units where they constitute over half of the personnel in some units.\nArms purchases and weapons development.\nArms purchases.\nAcquisitions over the next several years will emphasize modern ISR equipment that will vastly improve communications and data-sharing among services. These and other planned acquisitions will gradually shift the island's strategic emphasis to offshore engagement of invading PRC forces. It is hoped that this will serve to reduce civilian casualties and damage to infrastructure in the event of armed conflict.\nThe ROC's armed forces are equipped with weapons obtained primarily from the United States, France, United Kingdom and the Netherlands.\nIn July 2007 it was reported that the ROC Army would request the purchase of 30 AH-64D II Apache attack helicopters based on the 2008 defense budget. The United Daily News reported that as many as 90 UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters would also be ordered to replace the UH-1Hs then in service.\nDuring August, the ROC requested 60 AGM-84L Harpoon Block II missiles, two Harpoon guidance control units, 30 Harpoon containers, 30 Harpoon extended air-launch lugs, 50 Harpoon upgrade kits from AGM-84G to AGM-84L configuration and other related elements of logistics and program support, to a total value of US$125 million. The United States government indicated its approval of the order with notification to the United States Congress of the potential sale.\nIn mid-September 2007, the Pentagon notified the U.S. Congress of P-3C Orion order, which included 12 Orions and three \"spare aircraft\", along with an order for 144 SM-2 Block IIIA missiles. The total value of the 12 P-3C Orions were estimated at $1.96 billion and $272 million for the 144 SM-2 missiles. A contract was awarded to Lockheed Martin to refurbish the 12 P-3C Orion aircraft for the ROC on 2009-03-13, with deliveries to start in 2012.\nIn mid-November 2007, the Pentagon notified the US Congress about a possible sale to upgrade the ROC's existing three Patriot missile batteries to the PAC-3 standard. The total value of the upgrade could be as much as $939 million.\nThe US government announced on 3 October that it planned to sell $6.5 billion worth of arms to the ROC ending the freeze of arms sales to the ROC. The plans include $2.5 billion worth of 30 AH-64D Block III Apache Longbow attack helicopters with night-vision sensors, radar, 174 Stinger Block I air-to-air missiles, 1,000 AGM-114L Hellfire missiles, PAC-3 missiles (330), four missile batteries, radar sets, ground stations and other equipment valued up to $3.1 billion. E-2T aircraft upgraded to E-2C Hawkeye 2000 standard were also included, worth up to $250 million. $200 million worth of submarine-launched Harpoon Block II missiles (32) would also be available for sale, $334 million worth of various aircraft spare parts and 182 Javelin missiles, with 20 Javelin command launchers.\nHowever, not included in the arms sale were new F-16 C/D fighters, the feasibility study for diesel-electric submarines or UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters. The White House had declined to sell 66 F-16C/D fighter planes as US Pacific Command has felt no need for advanced arms to be sold to the ROC.\nOn 29 January 2010 the US government announced five notifications to US Congress for arms sales to the ROC, two Osprey class mine hunters for $105 million (all figures in US dollars), 25 Link 16 terminals on ships for $340 million, two ship- and two air-launched Harpoon L/II for $37 million, 60 UH-60M and other related items for $3.1 billion and three PAC-3 batteries with 26 launchers and 114 PAC-3 missiles for $2.81 billion, for a total $6.392 billion overall.\nThe ROC's efforts at arms purchases have consistently been opposed by the PRC. Asymmetric acquisitions should replace more expensive traditional military gear according to David Sacks, a fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.\nLocal Weapons Development.\nThe military's light weapons are generally managed by the Armaments Bureau of the Ministry of National Defense, whose 205th Arsenal is responsible for developing and producing light weapons such as T65 assault rifle, T75 Light machine gun, T86 assault rifle, T91 assault rifle, T75 pistol, various types of bullets etc.\nThe military has also stressed military \"self-reliance,\" which has led to the growth of indigenous military production, producing items such as the ROC's Indigenous Defense Fighter, the Thunderbolt 2000 Multiple Launch Rocket System, Clouded Leopard Armoured Vehicle, the Sky Bow II and Sky Bow III SAMs and Hsiung Feng series of anti-ship missiles.\nReforms and development.\nCivilian control of the military.\nThe modern day ROC military is styled after western military systems, mostly the US military. Internally, it has a political warfare branch/department that tightly controls and monitors each level of the ROC military, and reports directly to the General Headquarters of the ROC military, and if necessary, directly to the President of the ROC. This is a carryover from the pre-1949 era, when KMT and its army were penetrated by Communist agents repeatedly and led to frontline units defecting to Communist China. To strengthen their control over the military and prevent massive defection after retreating to Taiwan in 1949, CKS and CCK employed tight control over the military, by installing political officers and commissioners down to the company level, in order to ensure political correctness in the military and loyalty toward ROC leadership. This gave the political officers/commissars a great deal of power, allowing them to overrule the unit commander and take over the unit. Only in recent years has the political warfare department (due to cutbacks) reduced its power within the ROC military.\nTwo defense reform laws implemented in 2002 granted the civilian defense minister control over the entire military, and expanded legislative oversight authority for the first time in history. In the past the ROC military was closely linked with and controlled by the KMT (Nationalist Party). Following the democratization of the 1990s the military moved to a politically neutral position, though the senior officer ranks remained dominated by KMT members in 2001. In the years following the handover of control to civilian authority politicians remained wary of associating too closely with the military due to the legacy of martial law and the associated abuses conducted by the military. Support for the military increased in accordance with threats from the PRC and the Russian invasion of Ukraine however even in the 2020s many Taiwanese were still distrustful of the military.\nDoctrine and exercises.\nThe primary goal of the ROC Armed Forces is to provide a credible deterrent against hostile action by establishing effective counterstrike and defense capabilities. ROC military doctrine in 2004 centered upon the principle of \"offshore engagement\" where the primary goal of the armed forces in any conflict with the PRC would be to keep as much of the fighting away from Taiwan proper for as long as possible to minimize damage to infrastructure and civilian casualties. As of 2004 the military had also begun to take the threat of a sudden \"decapitation attack\" by the PRC seriously. Consequently, there was growing emphasis on the role of the Navy and Air Force (where the Army had traditionally dominated); as well as the development of rapid reaction forces and quick mobilization of local reserve forces.\nAs of 2021 training for electronic warfare had been emphasized with significant offensive and defensive capabilities having been fielded.\nThe Han Kuang Exercise is the annual military exercise of the Republic of China Armed Forces for combat readiness in the event of an attack by the People's Liberation Army.\nStrategy.\nTaiwan's strategy has shifted significantly in the post-cold war era. Under President Chen Shui-bian it centered on the \u201cDecisive Battle Offshore\u201d (\u51b3\u6230\u5883\u5916) in which an invasion force would be engaged as far away from Taiwan as possible. This strategy led to a deemphasis on the Army and increased emphasis on the Air Force and Navy. In terms of force structure it took a two part approach with a smaller professional force who would take the initiative in a conflict and a larger conscripted force which would primarily perform support and garrison duties.\nThe Ma Ying-jeou administration introduced the \u201cHard ROC\u201d strategy which emphasized asymmetrical warfare and exploiting the natural advantages of being the defender, also referred to as a \u201cporcupine strategy.\u201d This strategy emphasized hardening and mobility over active defense or long range strike. It also placed an emphasis on professional soldiers over conscripts with conscription greatly decreased during this period. Total force structure decreased by nearly 100,000 during this period. In 2014 Taiwan Minister of National Defense Yen Ming believed that the country would be able to hold off a Chinese invasion for at least one month.\nIn the late 2010s under the Tsai Ing-wen administration, Taiwan's military adopted a new strategy called the Overall Defense Concept (ODC), according to The Diplomat \"In short, the ODC is a holistically integrated strategy for guiding Taiwan's military force development and joint operations, emphasizing Taiwan's existing natural advantages, civilian infrastructure and asymmetrical warfare capabilities. It is designed to deter and, if necessary, defeat an invasion by China's People's Liberation Army (PLA).\" In 2021 Defense Minister Chiu Kuo-cheng said that \u201cI always tell my peers to stop asking, \u2018how many days we need to hold out?\u2019 The question is, \u2018how many days does China want to fight?\u2019 We'll keep them company for as many days as they want to fight.\u201d The adopted ODC emphasizes deep strike and layered deterrence.\nForeign cooperation.\nTaiwan has engaged in training with foreign forces, primarily American and British, for a long time but cooperation was stepped up after the passage of the Taiwan Travel Act in 2018. Exchanges between high ranking Taiwanese officers and their NATO counterparts have also been on the rise. This cooperation includes both military and academic exchanges such as those with the NATO School and the NATO Defense College.\nEl Salvador.\nIn the 1970s the Republic of China trained Salvadoran officers involved in human rights violations during the country's civil war.\nEuropean Union.\nIn 2011 and 2012 Taiwan worked with the EU's Naval Force in Operation Atalanta to counter piracy off the coast of Somalia. Since then exchanges and information sharing has continued, between 2011 and 2015 EU anti-piracy officials made five visits to Taiwan.\nEswatini.\nIn 2020, Taiwan donated two UH-1H utility helicopters to Eswatini.\nGuatemala.\nIn the 1970s the Republic of China trained Guatemalan officers involved in human rights violations. In 2019 Guatemalan Minister of Defense Major General Luis Miguel Ralda Moreno visited Taiwan and met with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen.\nHonduras.\nIn 2015 Taiwan donated three UH-1H utility helicopters to Honduras.\nJapan.\nThere is no official cooperation between the ROC military and the Japanese Self Defense Force (JSDF). The JSDF has sent observers to the digital part of the annual Han Kuang Exercise.\nNew Japanese military legislation came into effect in 2016, allowing deployment to defend a regional ally under attack. This is thought to be primarily legislation for Japan to deploy to Taiwan in an event of an attack on Taiwan, which in turn threatens Japanese security in its southern islands.\nNicaragua.\nIn 2019 Taiwan donated five refurbished surplus interceptor boats to the Nicaraguan Armed Forces. The transfer ceremony occurred at the naval forces\u2019 2nd battalion in Puerto Sandino.\nParaguay.\nIn 2019 Taiwan donated two UH-1H helicopters and 30 Humvees to the Armed Forces of Paraguay. Paraguayan President Mario Abdo Ben\u00edtez shared pictures of the military aid on the presidential Twitter feed.\nSingapore.\nStarting in 1975, Singapore has sent units from its military to train in the Republic of China under the Starlight training program (). Singaporean forces training in Taiwan numbered roughly 3,000 as of 2005. Singapore has also supplied the ROCAF with military equipment.\nIn 2007, a F-5F fighter operated by the Republic of China Air Force (ROCAF) crashed into base housing that was occupied by Singaporean personnel, killing the pilots. Two Singaporeans on the ground were also killed, with nine injured. The Starlight program at that time numbered around 7,000 personnel.\nIn 2019, a Singaporean paratrooper was seriously injured during nighttime parachute training. He underwent intensive surgery and recovery in Taiwan. In 2020 he was flown back to Singapore aboard a Singapore Air Force A330 Multi-Role Tanker Transport.\nUnited States.\nCollaboration between the ROC and US militaries began during World War II when both nations were members of the Allied forces, and continued through the Chinese Civil War when ROC forces were supplied primarily by the US until the final evacuation of ROC forces to Taiwan in 1949. Initially the U.S. expected the ROC government to fall and withdrew support until the outbreak of the Korean War when the U.S. 7th Fleet was ordered to the Taiwan Straits both to protect Taiwan from a PRC attack, and to stop ROC actions against the PRC. A formal US-ROC security pact was signed in 1954 establishing a formal alliance that lasted until US recognition of the PRC in 1979. During this period US military advisers were deployed to the ROC and joint exercises were common. The United States Taiwan Defense Command was established in the Philippines for reinforcement of Taiwan airspace. The US and ROC also collaborated on human and electronic intelligence operations directed against the PRC.\nROC units participated in the Korean War and the Vietnam War in non-combat capacities, primarily at the insistence of the United States which was concerned that the high-profile roles for ROC forces in these conflicts would lead to full scale PRC intervention. The United States deployed nuclear weapons on Taiwan as part of the United States Taiwan Defense Command. Nuclear weapons are known to have been stored at Tainan Air Force Base until their withdrawal was ordered by the American President in 1972. High-level cooperation ended with the US recognition of the PRC in 1979, when all remaining US forces in Taiwan were withdrawn. The US continued to supply the ROC with arms sales per the Taiwan Relations Act, albeit in a diminished role.\nWhen the United States Congress enacted on September 30, 2002, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for FY 2003, it required that Taiwan be \"treated as though it were designated a major non-NATO ally.\" Despite some initial misgivings about Congress's perceived intrusion into the President's foreign affairs authority, the Bush administration subsequently submitted a letter to Congress on August 29, 2003, designating Taiwan as a major non-NATO ally.\nIn recent years, the ROC military has again begun higher level cooperation with the United States Armed Forces after over two decades of relative isolation. Senior officers from the U.S. Pacific Command observed the annual Han Kuang military exercises in 2005. The US also upgraded its military liaison position in Taipei from a position held by retired officers hired on a contractual basis to one held by an active duty officer the same year. The United States regularly sends personnel to Taiwan for both training and liaison purposes but does so either secretly or in an unofficial capacity. ROC Marines have trained with their American counterparts in Hawaii and US Marines have also deployed to Taiwan.\nIn 2015 two United States Marine Corps F/A-18C Hornets made an unscheduled landing at Tainan Air Force Base after one of them developed an engine anomaly in-flight. The aircraft were accommodated in an air force hangar until a C-130 full of American technicians could be flown in to check them out.\nTsai Ing-wen's request of purchasing weaponry from the US was approved by the US State Department in July 2019. The deal includes 108 M1 Abrams tanks, 250 FIM-92 Stinger missiles and related equipment worth $2.2 billion. Tsai said the weaponry would \"greatly enhance our land and air capabilities, strengthen military morale and show to the world the US commitment to Taiwan's defense.\" In May 2020, the U.S. Department of State approved a Foreign Military Sale of 18 MK-48 Mod 6 Advanced Technology Heavy Weight Torpedoes for Taiwan in a deal estimated to cost $180 million.\nElite units of the ROC and American militaries have trained together for a long time, units often have particular relationships for example the MPSSC trains and engages in exercises with United States Army Special Forces. In June 2020 the United States Army Special Forces published a promotional video which included footage of Green Berets training in Taiwan. The ROC Army Aviation and Special Forces Command and the United States Army Special Forces have an annual training exercise called Balance Tamper. The ROC Marines receive training annually from the US Marine Corps\u2019 Marine Raider Regiment. The United States Air Force supports Taiwan's air force through air-to-air refueling and training.\nWest Germany.\nIn the 1960s West Germany participated in the Mingteh Project (Ming-teh-Gruppe in German) in which off-duty military officers were sent to Taiwan to advise the government of Chiang Kai-shek.\nMilitary parades.\nThe Republic of China held their first military parade on 10 October 2007 for National Day celebrations since 1991. Previous parades were halted in an effort to ease the tension with the PRC. The parade was aimed at easing worries that the armed forces might be unprepared for a conflict with the PRC. The parade consisted of indigenous missiles, U.S. Patriot II and Avenger anti-missiles systems, U.S.-made F-16s, French-made Mirages and Taiwan-made IDF fighters.\nIn 2015, another parade was held to mark the 70th anniversary of the defeat of Japan in 1945 in northern Hsinchu county. The parade was long at two hours and consisted of indigenous missiles, Apache helicopters and awards for World War II veterans.\nNuclear weapons program.\nThe development of nuclear weapons by the ROC has been a contentious issue. The U.S., hoping to avoid escalating tensions in the Taiwan Strait, has continually opposed arming the ROC with nuclear weapons. Accordingly, the ROC, although not a member of the United Nations, adheres to the principles of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and has stated that it does not intend to produce nuclear weapons. Past nuclear research by the ROC makes it a 'threshold' nuclear state.\nIn 1967, a nuclear weapons program began under the auspices of the Institute of Nuclear Energy Research (INER) at the Chungshan Institute of Science and Technology. The ROC was able to acquire nuclear technology from abroad (including a research reactor from Canada and low-grade plutonium from the United States) allegedly for a civilian energy system, but in actuality to develop fuel for nuclear weapons.\nAfter the International Atomic Energy Agency found evidence of the ROC's efforts to produce weapons-grade plutonium, Taipei agreed in September 1976 under U.S. pressure to dismantle its nuclear weapons program. The nuclear reactor was soon shut down and the plutonium mostly returned to the U.S.\nAnother secret program was revealed after 1987 Lieyu massacre, when Colonel Chang Hsien-yi, deputy director of Nuclear Research at INER who was secretly working for the CIA, defected to the U.S. in December, and produced a cache of incriminating documents. In 1988 upon being questioned by Director of American Institute in Taiwan, David Dean in person with the United States satellite image recording a minimized nuclear test at Jioupeng military base field in Pingtung in 1986, Superior-general Hau Pei-tsun claimed that scientists in Taiwan had already produced the controlled nuclear reaction as the continuous progress in decades after the previous accomplishment equivalent to 1/6 of Hiroshima scale in South Africa in 1980, as per General Hau's Diary and President Nelson Mandela's later findings. Under pressure from the U.S., the program was halted.\nDuring the 1995\u20131996 Taiwan Strait crisis, ROC President Lee Teng-hui proposed reactivating the program, but was forced to back down a few days later after drawing intense criticism from the U.S. government.\nWith the unbalanced military equation across the Taiwan Strait, Taipei may choose nuclear weapons as a deterrent against the military encirclement by the People's Republic of China.\nBudget.\nTaiwan's budget figures exclude both the classified budget and special funds allocated by the Executive Yuan. As of 2020 special funds expenditures were almost 2 billion a year. In 2021 the legislature approved a US$9 billion special budget for weapons and systems procurement.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30096", "revid": "44313162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30096", "title": "Foreign relations of Taiwan", "text": "Foreign relations of Taiwan, officially the Republic of China (ROC), are accomplished by efforts of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a cabinet-level ministry of the central government. As of January\u00a02024,[ [update]] the ROC has formal diplomatic relations with 11 of the 193 United Nations member states and with the Holy See, which governs the Vatican City State. In addition to these relations, the ROC also maintains unofficial relations with 59 UN member states, one self-declared state (Somaliland), three territories (Guam, Hong Kong, and Macau; although, relations with the latter two have been suspended since 2021), and the European Union via its representative offices and consulates. As of 2025, the Government of the Republic of China ranked 33rd on the \"Diplomacy Index\" with 110 offices.\nHistorically, the ROC has required its diplomatic allies to recognize it as the sole legitimate government of \"China\", competing for exclusive use of the name \"China\" with the PRC. During the early 1970s, the ROC was replaced by the PRC as the recognized government of \"China\" in the UN following Resolution 2758, which also led to the ROC's loss of its key position as a permanent member on the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) to the PRC in 1971.\nAs international recognition of the ROC continues to dwindle concurrently with the PRC's rise as a great power, ROC foreign policy has changed into a more realistic position of actively seeking dual recognition with the PRC. For consistency with the one China policy, many international organizations that the ROC participates in use alternative names, including \"Chinese Taipei\" at FIFA and the International Olympic Committee (IOC), among others.\nHistorical context.\nThe ROC government participated in the 1943 Moscow Conference, the Dumbarton Oaks Conference, and the United Nations Conference on International Organization and was a charter member of the United Nations after participating in the alliance that won World War II. In 1949, the Nationalists lost the Chinese Civil War in mainland China and retreated to Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu, forming a rump state. Despite the major loss of territory, the ROC continued to be recognized as the legitimate government of China by the UN and by many non-Communist states.\nAmerican foreign policy 1950\u20131971 called for full recognition and support of the government of China in Taiwan. As the Korean War (1950\u20131953) broke out, Taiwan was not allowed to send military support to South Korea. However, the Truman Administration resumed economic and military aid to the ROC on Taiwan and neutralized the Taiwan Strait by United States Seventh Fleet to stop a Chinese Communist Party (CCP) invasion and a potential ROC counter-invasion of the mainland. In December 1954 a US-Taiwan military alliance was signed as part of the American Cold War strategy in the Far East, in the determination not to allow Chiang Kai-shek's forces on Taiwan to attack China, thereby setting off another even larger war between the United States and China.\nThe American military presence in Taiwan consisted of the Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) and the United States Taiwan Defense Command (USTDC). Other notable units included the 327th Air Division. Until the US formally recognized the People's Republic of China in 1979, Washington provided the ROC with financial grants based on the Foreign Assistance Act, Mutual Security Act, and Act for International Development enacted by the US Congress. A separate Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty was signed between the two governments of US and ROC in 1954 and lasted until 1979.\nThe US State Department's official position in 1959 was:\nThat the provisional capital of the Republic of China has been at Taipei, Taiwan (Formosa) since December 1949; that the Government of the Republic of China exercises authority over the island; that the sovereignty of Formosa has not been transferred to China; and that Formosa is not a part of China as a country, at least not as yet, and not until and unless appropriate treaties are hereafter entered into. Formosa may be said to be a territory or an area occupied and administered by the Government of the Republic of China, but is not officially recognized as being a part of the Republic of China.\nIn the past decades, the US had maintained a position to not support Taiwanese independence, and instead to have a One China policy that's guided by the Taiwan Relations Act, the three U.S.-China Joint Communiques, and the Six Assurances, and to expect cross-Strait differences to be handled peacefully, and oppose any unilateral changes to the status quo from either side.\n1971 expulsion from the UN.\nIn 1971, the UN expelled the ROC and transferred China's seat to the People's Republic of China (PRC). In addition to the recognition of the ROC by a majority of countries before UN Resolution 2758, the ROC lost its membership in all intergovernmental organisations related to the UN. As the UN and related organizations like the International Court of Justice are the most common venues for effective execution of international law and serve as the international community for sovereign states, a majority of the countries aligned with the West in the Cold War terminated diplomatic relations with the ROC and opened diplomatic relations with the PRC.\nThe United Nations Charter's Articles 23 and 110, in its Chapter II, explicitly refer to the ROC, but the seat of \"China\" is currently occupied by the PRC. The ROC continues to maintain substantial relations, including with most of the non-governmental organisations at the United Nations, in addition with the \"concern\" from UNESCO. The Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations was signed and ratified by the ROC on 18 April 1961 and 19 December 1969, including Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes. It is entitled by the founding of the United Nations as the cornerstone of modern-day diplomacy since the Vienna Congress, Article 35 of 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties also applies to the ROC since 1971. Due to the ROC's insecurity and intolerance in the 1970s and 1980s after it was expelled by the UN as well as American influence, the ROC gradually democratized and adopted universal suffrage, ending under the one-party leadership of President Chiang Ching-kuo by lifting 38 years of martial law on the Communist rebellion on mainland China and establishing the new self-identity of Republic of China (system) on Taiwan in the international community, enacting Two Chinas states in the world. UN Resolution 2758 is non-binding on the international law regarding the international status of the Republic of China on Taiwan, and the ROC continues to seek opportunities to join UN Specialized agencies to become a Permanent Observer under the auspices of UN Resolution 396, which duly recommended the questions of debate on Chinese representation in the United Nations.\nElections.\nThe first direct presidential election was held in 1996, and the incumbent President Lee Teng-hui was elected. As of 4 May 2015, ROC nationals are eligible for preferential visa treatment from 142 countries and areas. In the context of superpower and influential diplomacy, the ROC's traditional and stable allies include United States of America, Canada, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. The ROC's cultural diplomacy includes the establishment of the Taiwan Resource Center for Chinese Studies in 2012 in major universities around the world.\nIn the 2024 Taiwanese presidential election, Vice President Lai Ching-te, also known as William Lai, was elected as the new President of Taiwan, winning with 40.05% of the popular vote in Taiwan's most recent election that took place on January 13, 2024. Set to be sworn in on May 20, 2024, this election effectively underscores Taiwan's ongoing commitment to democratic governance amid escalating geopolitical tensions, particularly concerning its large neighbor, China. The election of President Lai, backed by his party, the Democratic Progressive Party, reflects a strong commitment to maintaining Taiwan's sovereignty and actively engaging in international diplomacy and regional security.\nThis electoral outcome was characterized by a notably high voter turnout, demonstrating deep public engagement in the face of both external threats and internal debates about Taiwan's strategic future. Central to the election debates were issues such as the enhancement of economic independence, military upgrades, and the strengthening of international alliances. Lai's victory not only validates his policy platform but also signals Taiwan's determination to maintain an independent course of action amidst ongoing regional tensions.\nUnder President Lai's administration, Taiwan is poised to enhance its international standing and forge stronger diplomatic relationships. Since taking office, Lai has pursued an expansion of Taiwan's strategic global partnerships, particularly with nations involved in the Indo-Pacific strategy, to counter China's regional influence. His efforts include advocating for new trade agreements and enhancing Taiwan's participation in international forums\u00a0\u2013 areas where Taiwan has often faced marginalization due to diplomatic pressures from China.\nThe results of the 2024 election and the ensuing policies under President Lai's leadership are expected to significantly impact Taiwan's international relations and its role on the world stage. As Taiwan continues to assert its sovereignty and democratic values, the international community's response will be pivotal in shaping the political and economic future of the region.\nDevelopment assistance.\nSince 1950 Taiwan has given high priority to international aid, making its representatives welcome even in states without formal diplomatic relations. The policies provide generous aid without strict accountability conditions, especially in developing nations in Africa, Latin America, and the South Pacific. Building a reputation as a responsible and generous donor has earned it prestige, especially in contrast to the role of foreign aid in China's policies, such as the Belt and Road Initiative.\nThe ROC is one of the main supporters of official development assistance, with the International Cooperation and Development Fund managing ROC's Foreign Assistance and International Cooperation projects. As of 2010, along with other US security allies including Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and South Korea in the Asia-Pacific region with Taiwan Relations Act, officials of the ROC have gained quasi-official level visits to the United States both in the governmental and political level, including the Taiwanese\u2013US cooperative military guidance in the annual Han Kuang joint-force exercises.\nThink tanks.\nTaiwan's political system has evolved in terms of increasing political liberalization. By the 1990s, Taiwan had a democratic system with multiparty competition, factionalism, a vigorous civil society, and many interest groups. Think tanks emerged because of the high prestige of expertise and the heavy demand for unofficial diplomacy necessitated by the loss of formal diplomatic recognition. Think tanks have played a major role in planning and operationalizing relations with countries around the world.\nEuropean universities, research centers, and think tanks have developed a new academic field of Taiwan studies, especially in Europe, because of the unique status of Taiwan in the world's diplomatic system. The scholars involved have a deep commitment to Taiwan studies and have developed a Europe-wide network of scholars.\nPolicies.\nEconomics.\nThe ROC's GDP was ahead of several G20 economies before 2012.\nUN specialized agencies.\nAs a non-member state of the United Nations, by participating as members in one or more United Nations Specialized Agencies and operating in a parallel political system with the CCP as in the case of Germany and Korea, the ROC may be granted a Permanent Observer status in organisations such as the IMF and World Bank.\nInvolvement and participation in the Asia Pacific Innovation Conference allows interaction with the Director of Economics and Statistics Division of WIPO, who directly reports to the Director-General.\nInternational isolation.\nDue to \"the absence of a cross-strait understanding\" (1992 consensus), the ROC has encountered international isolation due to political and economic pressure from the PRC since the 1970s, and it has continued under the pro-Taiwan independence administration of the Democratic Progressive Party. Taiwan is not allowed to attend World Health Assembly, Interpol, International Civil Aviation Organization, or the United Nations' Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. Other forms of international isolation include measures against the activities of Chinese Taipei Olympic Committee, Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards (boycotted), and a ban on Taiwan journalists to acquire passes to United Nations and as well as UNFCCC meetings.\nAnalysts argue that PRC's coercive strategy might have proven counterproductive as it has further united US allies (including Australia and the UK) in their response which in turn makes it more challenging for Beijing to achieve its intended geostrategic objectives.\nThe ROC's (multi-sector) civil society currently participates in 11 projects of United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. ROC ranks 31st of 176 countries and territories in the 2016 Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index.\nInternational disputes.\nIn the 1970s many countries switched diplomatic recognition from the ROC to the PRC, including the United States, Japan and Canada. In October 1971, Resolution 2758 was passed by the UN General Assembly, expelling \"the representatives of Chiang Kai-shek\" and transferring China's seat on the Security Council to the PRC. The resolution declared that \"the representatives of the Government of the PRC are the only lawful representatives of China to the United Nations.\" However, the \"eo ipso\" nature of Taiwan and weapons of mass destruction remained a contentious issue.\nMany attempts by the ROC to rejoin the UN have not made it past the committee, due to PRC opposition and threats of veto. President Chen Shui-bian argued that Resolution 2758, replacing the ROC with the PRC in 1971, addressed only the question of who should have China's seat in the UN rather than whether an additional seat for the Taiwan Area could be created to represent the 23 million people residing in the Taiwanese mainland and other islands.\nSince the 1970s, the PRC and ROC have competed for diplomatic recognition from nations across the world, often by offering financial aid to poorer countries as an inducement. As a precondition for diplomatic relations, the PRC requires that the other country renounce any recognition of the ROC. Since the introduction of the \"pragmatic diplomacy\" () policy in 1991, the ROC has not insisted on consideration as the sole representative of China, and does not require nations that recognize it to end their relations with the PRC. For example, when Saint Lucia chose to recognize the ROC in 2007, Foreign Minister Rufus Bousquet said the decision \"should not be construed as a severance of our relationship with the PRC\". However, the PRC responds to foreign recognitions of the ROC by suspending relations with the other country.\nOn less official terms, the ROC is involved in South China Sea disputes over control of the Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Vietnam, and Brunei; and over the Paracel Islands, occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and by the ROC. The ROC government also claims the Senkaku Islands.\nOn October 14, 2024, China launched extensive military exercises near Taiwan in response to President Lai Ching-te's recent speech. Taiwan strongly criticized the move, and the U.S. raised concerns over rising tensions, with the drills marking part of China's broader pressure strategy.\nTypes of relations.\nFull diplomatic relations.\nThe Republic of China (Taiwan) maintains full diplomatic relations with 11 member states of the United Nations and the Holy See (Vatican City), which is a United Nations General Assembly observer state.\nNon-diplomatic representation.\nA certain number of countries have official diplomatic relations with the PRC but also maintain some form of unofficial diplomatic relations with Taiwan. This number includes 59\u00a0sovereign states, 3\u00a0dependent or quasi-dependent territories, and the European Union.\nUnofficial diplomatic relations typically involve an \"Economic, Trade and Cultural Office\" in Taiwan for the partner country, as well as a corresponding \"Taipei/Taiwan/ROC Representative Office\" representing Taiwan within the partner country. These unofficial offices generally function as embassies despite not being officially named as such. For example, the American Institute in Taiwan functions as the United States' \"de facto\" embassy, with the chairman and staff acting as unofficial government consulate officers who nevertheless perform duties that official embassies would undertake.\nVarious countries host Taiwanese representative offices within themselves but don't have representative offices in Taiwan. One country, Luxembourg, has a representative office in Taiwan but does not host a Taiwanese representative office within itself; Taiwan's interests in Luxembourg are served by the Taipei Representative Office in the EU and Belgium. Taiwan also regards the European Union, with which it also has unofficial relations via the Taipei Representative Office in the EU and Belgium, as a state entity in the context of international relations; the EU is a supranational union with a high level of integration between its member states, though each member state retains its national sovereignty.\nTaiwan has unofficial diplomatic relations with Hong Kong and Macao, both of which are Special Administrative Regions of the PRC, though Taiwan does not have such relations with Mainland China (the PRC). Technically, Hong Kong and Macau are integral territories of the PRC, governed under the \"One Country, Two Systems\" framework. This means that Taiwan effectively has unofficial relations with parts of the PRC but not with the national government of the PRC itself. Taiwan maintains hostile relations with the PRC through the Mainland Affairs Council, whose counterpart is the Taiwan Affairs Office; neither office is considered to be an embassy by either Taiwan or the PRC, and both offices are operated within the home country rather than within the host country.\nTaiwan has strong unofficial relations with Somaliland, which is a self-declared state in the Horn of Africa that is claimed as the territory of neighbouring Somalia, in a state of affairs that displays strong parallels to Taiwan's own sovereignty dispute with China.\nTaiwan maintains a \"Taiwan Economic and Cultural Office\" in Guam, which is an unincorporated organized territory of the United States located in Oceania.\nIn 2021, Lithuania announced that it would open an unofficial representative office in Taiwan, and Taiwan likewise announced that it would open an unofficial representative office in Lithuania. The Lithuania office was due to open by fall (autumn) of 2021 in the Northern Hemisphere, which is essentially September to November inclusive. Relations between Lithuania and the PRC have simultaneously soured.\nA certain number of countries have indirect unofficial diplomatic relations with Taiwan via third-party proxy countries. For example, the Taipei Liaison Office in the Republic of South Africa serves the interests of Taiwan throughout a great number of countries in Africa that otherwise don't have any channels of communication with Taiwan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfrica (3 states and 1 de facto state)\nAsia (20 states and 2 territories)\nEurope (23 states and 1 supranational union)\nNorth America (3 states)\nOceania (4 states)\nSouth America (6 states)\nNo representation.\nThe following states recognize Beijing and have no representation in Taiwan (including any non-political, non-diplomatic, non-intergovernmental representation):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfrica (50 states)\nAsia (24 states)\nEurope (22 states)\nNorth America (13 states)\nOceania (9 states)\nSouth America (5 states)\nRelations with neither the ROC nor the PRC.\nA certain number of countries and a sovereign entity do not possess full diplomatic relations with either the ROC or the PRC. This includes one member state of the United Nations, seven de facto states, and one non-territorial sovereign entity (Sovereign Military Order of Malta).\nOut of the seven de facto states that do not possess full diplomatic relations with Taiwan, one of them, Somaliland, has strong unofficial relations with Taiwan, while another, Kosovo, has been unilaterally recognized by Taiwan but does not recognize Taiwan in return. The other five de facto states have not been recognized by Taiwan diplomatically.\nThe Sovereign Military Order of Malta is a non-territorial sovereign entity; it claims and controls no territory, it does not consider itself to be a state, and yet it considers itself to be sovereign. The Order of Malta maintains full diplomatic relations with 110 sovereign states (including the Holy See), official relations with five other sovereign states, and ambassador-level relations with the European Union and the State of Palestine. The Order of Malta does not maintain full diplomatic relations with either Taiwan or the PRC. Even though the Order of Malta doesn't maintain full diplomatic relations with Taiwan, it has been involved in supporting Taiwan's participation in the UN-affiliated World Health Assembly during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nBhutan is the only member state of the United Nations that does not have full diplomatic relations with either the ROC or the PRC, though Bhutan recognizes PRC's sovereignty over Taiwan. The ROC has unilaterally recognized Bhutan as a sovereign state.\nRelations switched from the ROC to the PRC.\nTaiwanese academics stated that if any one state switches its diplomatic relations to the PRC, it would create a domino effect, encouraging other states to do so as well. The Holy See (Vatican), the only European state that has diplomatic relations with Taiwan, made efforts in 2007 to create formal ties with the PRC. High-ranking bishops in the Catholic Church have implied that such a diplomatic move was possible, predicated on the PRC's granting more freedom of religion and interfering less in the hierarchy of the Catholic Church in China.\nStates that have never had diplomatic relations with the ROC but have relations with the PRC.\nTheoretically, all countries are set to open their full diplomatic relations with the ROC.\nBribery allegations.\nTaiwan has been accused on multiple occasions of bribing foreign politicians to commence or maintain diplomatic relations. The ex-president of Guatemala admitted in a U.S. court taking $2.5m from Taiwan in exchange for continuing to recognize it diplomatically. Regarding Taiwanese \"dollar diplomacy\" in Vanuatu a 2004 observer said: \"the methods Taiwan uses, bribing countries and politicians, are unjust, violate international law and disturb the global community. Bribery diplomacy won't last.\" Prior to Nauru choosing to recognize the government of the People's Republic of China, Taiwan had provided Nauruan government ministers with a monthly stipend of $5,000 in exchange for continuation of the Pacific island country's diplomatic relations with Taipei. Nauruan politicians, including President Marcus Stephen received secret funds. Other MPs received $2,500 a month in what was described as \"project funding that requires minimal accounting\".\nHistory.\nTaiwan was annexed by Japan in 1895 after the First Sino-Japanese War. In the Northern Expedition, the Nationalists defeated the warlords of the Beiyang clique and established a unified government for China in Nanjing. The United States recognised Republic of China (ROC) on 25 July 1928, the first government to do so. The Japanese occupied parts of China during World War II. After Japan's defeat in 1945, Taiwan was placed under the temporary administration of the ROC to handle the surrender of Japanese administration. The Chinese Civil War broke out again between the Nationalists and the CCP. The CCP gained control of the mainland in 1949 and proclaimed the People's Republic of China (PRC), while the Nationalists fled to Taiwan, taking the ROC government with them. In 1952, Japan renounced Taiwan in the Treaty of San Francisco without specifying to whom Taiwan is ceded.\nIn 2016, A. P. Winston, the author of \"Chinese Finance under the Republic\", said, \"chief sources of information on those matters of discussion which have been subjects of diplomacy\" were official publications from the United Kingdom. Winston explained that only a few official reports from the Chinese government aside from the maritime customs sector had appeared at that point, and that the government of the ROC was \"too poor, perhaps still too secretive, to make regular and full publication of statistics.\"\nDuring the Cold War the ROC generally maintained an anti-communist stance, however during the late 1960s and early 1970s the government of Chiang Kai-shek undertook secret negotiations with Moscow. Even going so far as having the foreign minister suggest that the ROC would have their own \"Warsaw talk\" with the Soviets. Throughout the Cold War Wang Sheng was a driving force in diplomacy between the ROC and the anti-communist world.\nAfter retreating there in 1949 Chiang Kai-shek never again left Taiwan, this required leaders who wanted to meet with Chiang to travel to Taiwan. The first head of state during the KMT era to make a state visit abroad was Yen Chia-kan in 1977 when he visited Saudi Arabia.\nIn September 2016, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs planned to disband fewer than ten of its embassies to allocate for a \"New Southbound Policy\".\nSince 1990, the ROC has witnessed a net of 16 countries switch recognition to the PRC.\nIn January 2021, the European Parliament passed two Taiwan related resolutions. The first resolution contained statements of support for Taiwan's democracy. The second encouraged member states to work to \"revisit their engagement policies with Taiwan\" as well as to work together with international partners to \"protect democratic Taiwan from foreign threats.\"\nBilateral relations.\nAfrica.\nLiberia recognised the ROC in 1989, and switched back to the PRC in October 2003.\nEswatini.\nAfter Burkina Faso cut relations with Taiwan in 2018, Eswatini remained Taiwan's sole ally in Africa. Taiwan has an embassy in Mbabane, Eswatini. On 7 June 2016, the National Police Agency and Royal Eswatini Police Service signed a joint, cross-border, crime fighting pact, which included exchanges, probes, personnel visits, professional skills enhancement, law enforcement and technical assistance. King Mswati III has visited Taiwan seventeen times as of June 2018, and has promised to continue recognising Taiwan instead of the PRC. As of June 2018, the Taiwanese Ambassador is Thomas Chen ().\nGambia.\nThe Gambia recognised the ROC from 1968 until 1974, and then again from 1995 until 14 November 2013, when President Yahya Jammeh's office announced it had cut diplomatic ties with immediate effect. During this era Taiwan gave hundreds of millions of dollars in aid and loans to The Gambia, much of which was diverted by President Yahya Jammeh and those close to him. The PRC recognised The Gambia on 17 March 2016. Upon Gambian recognition the PRC immediately began to furnish them with aid. The repeated switch off between PRC and ROC recognition is seen as an example of checkbook diplomacy.\nAsia.\nBangladesh.\nBangladesh has had limited bilateral exchanges with the ROC since it declared independence in 1971. Bangladesh is the ROC's second largest South Asian trading partner in spite of a global slump. Bangladesh mainly exports garments, knitwear, jutes, leathers and handicrafts to the ROC and imports an assortment of textiles, machines, electronics, steels, and plastic.\nChina.\nThe Double Tenth Agreement signed on 10 October 1945 is the only legal document between the two parties. The following Political Consultative Conference (Republic of China), was engulfed by Cold War history and the American foreign policy of containment in East Asia after the Korean War. Before the Korean War broke out, the US was preparing for a coup d'\u00e9tat in mid-1950 to replace Chiang Kai-shek with Hu Shih and Sun Li-jen and neutralize the ROC's legal status under UN Trusteeship to block any legal claim of the PRC on Taiwan, as proposed by United States Department of State official Dean Rusk. The Formosa Resolution of 1955 was passed unanimously by the United States Congress. Resolving the cross-strait relationship required both sides to rethink definitions of basic concepts such as sovereignty, \"one China\" and unification.\nThe two polities of \"accession\" resulted in the PRC's Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries, the lifting of its martial law on PRC territory, and more recently the enactment of the PRC's Anti-Secession Law towards the ROC. The two sides have no cross-strait military confidence-building measures (CBM) \"to improve military-to-military relations in ways that reduce fears of attack and the potential for military miscalculation\". Nuclear tensions have risen since the PRC promulgated the Anti-Secession Law.\nThe government position that both Taiwan and mainland China are parts of the same state is not universally accepted among the people of Taiwan. In particular, the pro-independence Pan-Green Coalition considers Taiwan and China to be different countries. By contrast, the pro-unification Pan-Blue Coalition take the view that both Taiwan and mainland China are parts of the ROC. Former president Lee Tung-hui described these relations as \"Special state-to-state relations\". The Chen administrations described Taiwan and China by saying \"...with Taiwan and China on each side of the Taiwan Strait, each side is a country.\". Former President Ma Ying-jeou returned to the government position of the early 1990s, calling relations with Beijing special relations between two areas within one state. That state, according to Taiwan is the ROC, and due to constitutional reasons, neither Taipei nor Beijing recognises each other as a legitimate government.\nThe term preferred by Taiwanese and Chinese governments is \"cross-strait relations\", referring to the geographical separator, the Taiwan Strait. The constitutional position of Taipei is that the territory of the ROC is divided into the \"Mainland Area\" and the \"Free Area\" (also known as \"Taiwan Area\"). Administratively, cross-strait relations are not conducted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Taiwan, but by the Mainland Affairs Council, an instrument of the Executive Yuan. The relations with Hong Kong and Macau are also conducted by the Mainland Affairs Council, although not all regulations applicable to mainland China automatically apply to those territories.\nTaiwanese and Chinese governments do not directly interact. Talks are conducted by China's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS) and Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF), privately constituted bodies that are controlled and directly answerable to the executive branches of their respective governments.\nUntil the late 1990s, Hong Kong and Macau were British and Portuguese colonies respectively. They provided neutral detour points for people and goods crossing the strait. They and Singapore served as venues for talks between the two sides at that time. One \"modus vivendi\" outcome of such talks was the 1992 Consensus, arising from a 1992 meeting in Hong Kong. Under this consensus, the two sides agree that both Taiwan and mainland China are under the same single sovereignty of China, but the two sides agree to disagree on which side is the legitimate representative of that sovereignty. Setting aside that disagreement, the two sides agreed to co-operate on practical matters, such as recognising certifications authenticated by the other side.\nRelations between Taipei and Beijing warmed during the Ma government with the promotion of cross-strait links and increased economic and social interchanges between the two sides, but the 2014 local elections cooled them again. A high-level meeting was held on 11 February 2014 in Nanjing that marked the first time China recognised Taiwan's top government officials on matters across the Taiwan Strait. The thawed tensions were not welcomed by the Pan-Green Coalition for the Taiwan independence movement after the 2000 presidential election and to the \"ex injuria jus non oritur\" basis of the Anti-Secession Law. A meeting was held on 7 November 2015 between presidents Xi and Ma to affirm the 1992 Consensus before the ROC 2016 general election and in the midst of US Navy tests of area sea claims. Following the election, Beijing cut off contact with the main Taiwan liaison body because of President Tsai Ing-wen's refusal to endorse the concept of a single Chinese nation.\nIndia.\nLeadership meetings between ROC and India were carried out in the early 1940s before Indian independence from Great Britain. The ROC is included in India's Look East policy. Bilateral relations between India and the ROC improved starting from the 1990s, despite the absence of official diplomatic relations. India recognises only the PRC. However, economic and commercial links as well as people-to-people contacts have expanded. Like the PRC, the ROC disputes the Chinese border with India over Arunachal Pradesh. The ROC Constitution declares this area a part of South Tibet, and disputes the validity of the McMahon Line.\nIran.\nOn 1 June 1920, a friendship agreement was signed between the ROC and Iran. Ratifications were exchanged on 6 February 1922, with effect on the same day. These relations came to an end in 1971 as Iran recognised Beijing. During the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Taiwan was one of the only few countries that solely supported Iran. The two countries have a significant relationship in commerce and Taiwan imports a significant amount of its oil from Iran. An Iranian newspaper wrote on its front-page in December 2022 that Taiwan has a \"legal right\" to independence.\nIsrael.\nDue to the One China policy, Israel and Taiwan do not have formal diplomatic relations but each has a representative office in the other country and in practice the two countries have friendly relations. There is considerable contact in the areas of science and technology, including military technology.\nAs relations between Israel and the PRC have worsened due to the Gaza war, ties between Israel and Taiwan continue to warm and are driven by assertions that the two are both isolated democracies. Members of the Legislative Yuan set up the Taiwan-Israel Congressional Association on 23 February 2024 to promote people-to-people exchanges; cooperation in agriculture, technology and education; and bilateral visits.\nJapan.\nJapan\u2013Taiwan relations are guided by the 1972 Japan\u2013China Joint Communiqu\u00e9. Japan has maintained non-governmental, working-level relations with Taiwan ever since.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia operates a trade centre office in Taipei, and the ROC has an economic and cultural office in Kuala Lumpur.\nMongolia.\nUntil 1945, Nationalist China claimed sovereignty over Mongolia, but under Soviet pressure and as part of the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of August 1945, it recognised Mongolian independence. In 1953, due to the deterioration of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, it revoked this recognition and resumed considering it a part of China.\nOn 3 October 2002, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs recognised Mongolia as an independent country, although no legislative actions were taken to address concerns over its constitutional claims to Mongolia. A Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office was opened in Ulaanbaatar, and Taipei excluded Mongolia from the definition of the \"mainland area\" for administrative purposes. In 2006, old laws regulating the formation of banners and monasteries in Outer Mongolia were repealed. Offices established to support Taipei's claims over Outer Mongolia, such as the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission, are dormant. However, the official borders of the ROC have not been changed. The official status of recognition is currently ambiguous, though in practice Mongolia is treated as an ordinary foreign power.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippines recognises the One China Policy, but has relations with the ROC through the Manila Economic and Cultural Office in Taipei and the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Manila. Both offices were established in 1975 and were organized as non-profit corporations. The Philippines is the focal country for the ROC's 2016\u20132020 Southbound Policy, where the ROC plans to push for greater ties. The push was initially welcomed by the Aquino Administration, however, the Duterte Administration was elected in May 2016, complicating the issue as President Duterte was seen as 'pro-China', and thus would prefer better ties with the mainland over Taiwan. Political analysts during a forum in Manila said that ties between the Philippines and the ROC would have been the best coalition in the Far East, if the South China Sea territorial disputes between the two nations did not exist. The Philippines supports the ROC's membership in UNESCO.\nSingapore.\nSingapore maintained unofficial relations with both the ROC and the PRC until 1992. It was decided in the Second Ministerial Meeting of APEC as chaired by Singapore in 1990 for the inclusion of the ROC commencing with the Third Ministerial Meeting in Seoul. After the establishment of diplomatic ties between Singapore and PRC on 3 October 1992, Singapore maintained close economic and military ties with Taiwan as part of its attempt to position itself as a neutral party. A diplomatic row broke out between China and Singapore when Lee Hsien Loong visited Taiwan one month before he was sworn in as the Prime Minister of Singapore. Singapore's Ministry of Defence moved to correct an erroneous report in the Liberty Times on a joint military exercise between the Singapore and Taiwan in March 2005. Singapore is the only foreign country to maintain military training camps in Taiwan, and continues to regularly send infantry, artillery, and armoured personnel there for training. The PRC has offered to support relocating some or all of these facilities to Hainan. On the issue of United Nations participation for Taiwan, George Yeo and Mark Chen, the two countries' Foreign Ministers at the time, engaged in a heated exchange of views in 2004 between Beijing's insistence that FTA can only be concluded among sovereign states complicates matters for Taiwan. Accordingly, Singapore and Taiwan signed the \"Agreement between Singapore and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu on Economic Partnership (ASTEP)\" in November 2013.\nSouth Korea.\nThe ROC recognised the establishment of the First Republic of Korea in 1948.\nOn 4 January 1949, the ROC set up an embassy in Myeongdong in Seoul. On 23 August 1992 the ROK severed diplomatic relations with the ROC and then established diplomatic relations with the PRC as part of its Nordpolitik, the last Asian country to switch. In 1991 in the last months of the Cold War, Beijing and Seoul have established ROK and PRC liaisons prior to this and later turned embassies.\nVietnam.\nTaiwan\u2013Vietnam relations are conducted on an unofficial level, as Hanoi adheres to a one-China policy and officially recognises the PRC only. However, this has not stopped bilateral visits and significant flows of migrants and investment capital between the ROC and Vietnam. The ROC is an important foreign direct investment partner to Vietnam.\nOther than the PRC itself, Vietnam is the only communist country that maintains an unofficial relationship with the ROC.\nEurope.\nBelgium.\nIn 2020, Belgium's Chamber of Representatives passed a resolution of support for Taiwan. In 2021, the Flemish Parliament did the same passing a resolution in support of Taiwan with 117 votes in favor, no votes in opposition, and four abstentions. Flemish wind power companies Jan De Nul and DEME are involved in offshore wind farm development in Taiwan.\nCzechia.\nRelations between Czechia and Taiwan are significant. Jaroslav Kubera, President of the Senate of the Czech Republic, planned a visit to Taipei prior to his death, prompting threats of retaliation from China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Kubera's successor, Milo\u0161 Vystr\u010dil, however, led a delegation to Taiwan that arrived in Taipei on August 31, 2020.\nDenmark.\nOn 9 January 1950, Denmark became one of the first European countries to recognize the PRC. While Denmark has continued to maintain unofficial relations with the ROC ever since, they have primarily been related to trade, culture, science and economic affairs.\nEstonia.\nEstonia and Taiwan maintain informal relations, with cultural and economic exchanges despite lacking formal diplomatic ties. Taiwan is represented in Estonia through the Taipei Mission in Latvia. In recent years, Estonia has shown increasing support for Taiwan, notably through reciprocal diplomatic delegations and openness towards a possible Taiwanese representative office in Tallinn. Both nations have cooperated in areas like trade and crisis management, with notable contributions such as Taiwan's donations to Estonia during the COVID-19 pandemic and the Ukrainian refugee crisis.\nGermany.\nIn January 2021 the German government appealed to the Taiwanese government to help persuade Taiwanese semiconductor companies to ramp up production as a global semiconductor shortage was hampering the German economy's recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. A lack of semiconductors had caused vehicle production lines to be idled leading German Economy Minister Peter Altmaier to personally reach out to Taiwan's economics affairs minister Wang Mei-hua in an attempt to get Taiwanese semiconductor companies to increase their manufacturing capacity.\nHoly See (Vatican City).\nDiplomatic relations between the Holy See (Vatican City) and the Republic of China were established on 23 October 1942 and, with the presentation by Archbishop Antonio Riberi of his letter of credence to the President in 1946, the Holy See's Apostolic Delegation in China gained diplomatic status.\nThe Holy See attempted to switch recognition to the CCP/PRC after the end of the civil war but were rebuffed and so ended up recognizing the KMT/ROC on Taiwan. The Holy See and the Republic of China have recognized each other ever since. The Holy See maintains negotiations with the PRC for recognition; however, the Holy See has given the ROC assurances that any negotiations with the PRC will not come at the expense of their relations with the ROC.\nItaly.\nUntil 1970, Taiwan, as the Republic of China, was represented by an embassy in Rome and a consulate-general in Milan. This was separate from the Embassy of the Republic of China to the Holy See, which, while located in Italian territory, remains accredited to Vatican City. This led to confusion in 1989 following the Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing, when Italians protested outside the embassy, believing it to be that of the People's Republic of China.\nIn 2014, Taiwan decided not to participate in Expo 2015 in Milan after the Government of Italy proposed that it be represented as a corporate entity rather than as a country.\nIn 2020, Taiwan donated equipment and supplies to Italy as part of its medical diplomacy in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Equipment donated included 15 respirators donated to WHO hospitals in the hard-hit Lombardy region in April 2020.\nLatvia.\nToday bilateral relations between Latvia and Taiwan are positive, with established economic ties, a visa-free travel regime in place between the two nations and the support of some Latvian parliamentarians towards the participation of the ROC in organizations such as the World Health Organization.\nLithuania.\nIn November 2021, Taiwan opened its representative office in Vilnius under the name of \"Taiwanese\" (the first under this name in the world), with the Lithuanian office in Taipei to open in Spring 2022. Subsequently, the People's Republic of China has imposed numerous unofficial economic sanctions on Lithuania, recalled its ambassador in Vilnius, Shen Zhifei, and demanded Lithuania recall its ambassador in Beijing, Diana Mickevi\u010dien\u0117.\nNetherlands.\nNetherlands\u2013Taiwan relations go back to the 1600s when the Dutch East India Company set up a colony on Taiwan. In the modern era they are defined by the high degree of foreign direct investment which flows between the two countries and long lasting economic partnerships between Dutch and Taiwanese firms.\nIn 2020 the Netherlands' House of Representatives passed a motion supporting Taiwan's participation in international organizations.\nRussia.\nIn the Chinese Civil War, the Soviet Union had a tumultuous yet strategic relationship with the Kuomintang-led Nationalist China until 1949. In the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev recommended the internationalization of the Taiwan Question and appealed to the United Nations and other multilateral organizations to intervene. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union called for the Ten Nations Summit in New Delhi to discuss the issue on 27 September 1958 as one of the precursors of the later Sino-Soviet split. Since the formation of the Russian Federation, Taiwan has exported many ferric materials to Russia in 2004\u20132005. In 2005, the total amount of the trade between the two economies was $2,188,944,473. Russia has a representative office in Taipei, and ROC has a representative office in Moscow. Russia keeps a positive balance in its trade relations with Taiwan mainly from crude oil, cast iron and steel, nonferrous metals, petrochemical products, ferroalloys, coking coal, timber, and chemical fertilizers. Russia imports mostly electronics and electronic parts, computers and computer parts, and home appliances. The two countries established unofficial diplomatic relations between 1993 and 1996. Taipei is targeting Russia for exporting opportunities and marketing potential.\nSlovakia.\nIn 2021, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the National Council of Slovakia passed a resolution to support the attendance of Taiwan to the World Health Assembly.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom's relations with Taiwan are conducted unofficially through the British Office Taipei and the British Council in Taipei.\nAfter the Chinese Civil War and the retreat of the KMT government to Taiwan, the United Kingdom broke off diplomatic relations with the Republic of China and recognised the People's Republic of China from 6 January 1950. In September 1962, Taiwan opened a representative office in London under the name of the Free Chinese Centre, which was later renamed the Taipei Representative Office in the U.K. from April 1992. The United Kingdom opened a representative office in Taipei in 1993 under the name of the British Trade and Cultural Office, which was later renamed the British Office Taipei in 2015.\nIn September 2020, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office ministers stated that the UK hopes Taiwan is allowed to attend the World Health Assembly as an observer.\nNorth America.\nDominica.\nDominica established ties with Taiwan on 10 May 1983. In September 2001, Taiwanese Premier Chang Chun-hsiung visited Dominica to meet with Prime Minister Pierre Charles. On 23 March 2004, shortly after Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit took office, Dominica severed ties with Taiwan in exchange for ties with the People's Republic of China.\nDominican Republic.\nOn 1 May 2018, the Dominican Republic switched. The government initially gave no reason, although it later said in the switchover ceremony that Taiwan was an inalienable part of China and that the switchover was to comply to the one-China policy. It was motivated by loans and investments worth US$3.1\u00a0billion. \"History and socioeconomic reality\" were cited as reasons for the switchover. Flavio Dar\u00edo Espinal, a government executive, said that \"In the following months and years, enormous opportunities for cooperation will gradually open up, not only in the commercial area, but also in the financial, technological, tourist, educational or energy fields. To take just one example, more than 135 million Chinese tourists visit international destinations annually. The establishment of these diplomatic relations will allow part of that tourism to flow into our country in the near future. And that is just one of the things that will improve.\"\nEl Salvador.\nOn 20 August 2018, El Salvador broke ties with Taiwan and established them with the PRC. El\u00a0Salvador now only recognizes the PRC. Just like Panama and the Dominican Republic, the event was broadcast nationwide on radio and television. Hours before the announcement, Taiwan (ROC) announced that it had broken ties with El\u00a0Salvador, citing the imminent establishment of diplomatic and commercial ties with the PRC (China). El\u00a0Salvador's president said that his government had decided to make the switchover due to UN Resolution 2758. The Taiwanese government said that the switchover was not influenced by the Chinese government, but rather, the switchover was done in response to Taiwan refusing to fund the construction of Puerto La Uni\u00f3n and El\u00a0Salvador's 2019 Salvadoran presidential election.\nGuatemala.\nOn 18 March 2014, Guatemala's former president Alfonso Portillo pled guilty in the Federal District Court in Manhattan to a charge that he accepted bribes in exchange for recognising the ROC. President P\u00e9rez Molina said that Guatemala's relations with the ROC were and are strong and that the Portillo confession would not affect diplomatic relations between the two nations. Taiwan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs declined comment.\nHaiti.\nHaiti currently recognises the Republic of China over the People's Republic of China. In 2018, Taiwan offered a US$150 Million loan for Haiti's power grid in a bid to maintain diplomatic ties with the country once its neighbour, Dominican Republic severed ties with Taiwan along with Burkina Faso. In 2018, Haiti's president visited Taiwan to discuss economic issues and diplomatic relations.\nHonduras.\nIn 2021, it was reported the new Honduras Government elected in the 2021 Honduran general election led by the Liberty and Refoundation party was considering recognizing China. This announcement came on the heels of Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El\u00a0Salvador, Nicaragua, and Panama having recently broken relations with the ROC; Taiwan lost a total of nine diplomatic partners during Tsai Ing-wen's presidency with the switch from Honduras. On 15\u00a0March 2023, the president Xiomara Castro said she has instructed her foreign minister to establish official relations with the PRC.\nTaiwanese leadership criticized Honduras' transition by urging them not to \"fall into China's debt trap\". Honduras' foreign minister Eduardo Enrique Reina stated that the country had asked Taiwan to double its annual aid and renegotiate its debt to the island, which went unanswered. Taiwan's foreign ministry disputed this, stating that they were still actively engaged in bilateral talks with Honduras' government. President Tsai Ing-wen responded to the announcement by scheduling time to visit heads of government and state in nearby Belize and Guatemala. The ROC recalled its Honduran ambassador on 23\u00a0March, as Honduras began negotiations with the PRC. A 25\u00a0March statement confirmed that Honduras had completed the switch and their embassy opened in Beijing on 11\u00a0June.\nPanama.\nOn 13 June 2017, the government of Panama switched, breaking all ties with the ROC. Panamanians studying in Taiwan were given the choice of returning to Panama within 30 days or continuing their studies in China. Panama was motivated by promises of multibillion-dollar investments. The shift of recognition began with a letter sent in 2015 to the Chinese government that, according to Isabel Saint Malo, Panama's vice president, was titled \"Panama wants to make ties with China\". The contents of the letter have been kept confidential, as well as the reasons why it was sent. It has also been kept confidential who delivered the letter and assisted in the switchover process, a person described only as \"a distinguished member of the Chinese community living in Panama\".\nThe US ambassador to Panama, John D. Feeley, said that he had asked Panamanian President Juan Carlos Varela about the switchover in 2016 but Varela lied to him, saying that there were no plans to make the switchover. Feeley also said that Varela didn't tell him the truth until one hour before the nationwide announcement.\nOthers questioned why the Panamanian government continues to use equipment donated by Taiwan. The Panamanian government initially gave no reason, later saying that one reason was because \"China is the second largest user of the Panama Canal\" and President Varela said it was because he \"couldn't accept it anymore\" and \"that's what every responsible leader would do\". The Panamanian government officially said that Taiwan was an inalienable part of China and that the switchover was to comply with the one-China policy. The ROC government said that Panama was its \"number one ally\" and that it would not participate in Beijing's checkbook diplomacy. The Taiwanese government complained that Panama maliciously hid the switchover process until the last moment.\nA Panamanian government agency later said that the switchover was because of Taiwanese president Tsai Ing-wen's violations and lack of regard to the 1992 consensus regarding China, Taiwan and the One-china policy. Panamanian newspaper La Estrella questioned the reasons Varela initially gave for the switchover, like \"China has the world's largest population and the 2nd largest economy and user of the Panama Canal\"; La Estrella called Varela's actions contradictory and said that the reasons Varela gave were the reality Panama has lived under for decades, so those couldn't be regarded as valid reasons for the switchover. The same newspaper also says that China's plans in Latin America convince Latin American nations easily, with apparent benefits in the short term but with dependency on China in the long term and that China is silently invading other countries and Latin America in general.\nIn the first year of diplomatic relations, 19 treaties were signed, including a Free Trade Treaty. Varela said that its main purpose was to allow Chinese nationals to easily invest in Panama. Controversies over the sudden switchover included lack of due process, unusually high levels of confidentiality, and the fact that a few weeks before the switchover, Taiwan had donated medical equipment to Panama. In 2018, the first flight from Beijing to Panama by Air China landed at Tocumen International Airport, with a technical stop in Houston. Varela called it a milestone in Panamanian aviation. Due to this new route, the Panamanian ministry of tourism expected at least 40,000 Chinese tourist visits per year. \"History and socioeconomic reality\" were later cited as reasons for the switchover. Varela said that the move was backed by diplomatic relationships dating from 1912 and that the move strengthened the existing relationships, despite the fact that those relationships were with the ROC, not the PRC. As a result, Panama City was almost immediately added to China's list of officially approved tourist destinations. The CCP government has offered the Paname\u00f1ista Party-led government a free feasibility study for the planned 4th set of locks in the Panama Canal to gain a competitive advantage in bids for choosing the company to build the 4th set of locks, not to mention plans for a 1,200 hectare industrial park on the Pacific coast and a 4-hectare campus in Amador near the Biomuseo to house the PRC embassy in Panama. There are also fears that Panama could turn into a conflict zone between the US and the PRC, due to Panama's strategic location.\nUnited States.\nThe ROC and the U.S. signed a formal treaty of commerce and navigation in 1948. ROC passport holders can thus be granted an E1 and E2 Visa, with indefinite renewal status, based on continued operation of their enterprise in the US. In 1979 the US recognised the PRC instead of ROC. Commercial (such as Trade and Investment Framework Agreement signed in 1994, TIFA), cultural and other substantial relations are currently governed, inter alia, by the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act. The Act does not recognise the terminology of \"Republic of China\". United States policy does not support or oppose Taiwan's independence; instead US policy takes a neutral position of \"non-support\" for Taiwan's independence.\nU.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Alex Wong officially visited the ROC in March 2018 to protest the amendment of the PRC Constitution that removed Presidential tenure restrictions. In July 2002, Minister of Justice Chen Ding-nan became the first Taiwanese government official to be invited to visit the White House after the switch.\nWhile the U.S. acknowledged PRC's one-China principle in 1979, it did not accept the PRC's claim on Taiwan. The unofficial name \"Taiwan\" was mentioned in the Three Communiqu\u00e9s between the United States and China. Consistent with the United States' one-China policy, raising the ROC flag on an official government facility's property within U.S. territory is not approved by the United States.\nTaiwan passport holders are included in the U.S. Visa Waiver Program for a stay of 90 days.\nAfter 1979, the US\u2013Taiwan Business Council continued to facilitate commercial activity (mostly semiconductor technology related) and arms sales service. The United States House of Representatives added an amendment to the fiscal year 2016 US defense budget that includes a clause urging the ROC's participation in the biennial Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise. The United States State Department has close bilateral cooperation with the ROC through Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs' Fulbright Program.\nRecent disputes between the U.S. and the ROC include the ROC's ban on the import of U.S. beef and U.S. pork, which was resolved after the ROC adopted the new standard of a maximum residue limit for ractopamine in both beef and pork.\nIn 2007, a measure was introduced into the United States Congress that would dramatically strengthen US ties with the ROC. The United States House of Representatives passed a resolution calling for the lifting of curbs on visits by high-ranking or top ROC officials. The Resolution noted that \"whenever high-level visitors from the ROC, including the President, seek to come to the United States, their requests result in a period of complex, lengthy and humiliating negotiations.\" It further said: \"Lifting these restrictions will help bring a friend and ally of the United States out of its isolation, which will be beneficial to peace and stability in the Asia\u2013Pacific Region.\"\nA bill was introduced to back the ROC's request to join the UN. The bill stated that the ROC and its 23 million people \"deserve membership in the United Nations\" and that the United States should fulfill a commitment \"to more actively support Taiwan's membership in appropriate international organizations.\" The bill was introduced on 8 November 2007. The move was led by New Jersey Representative Scott Garrett.\nUnofficial diplomatic relations are nevertheless maintained on both sides by means of \"de facto\" embassies, which are technically \"private organizations\" staffed and funded by the respective State Departments. The ROC's \"de facto\" embassy network is the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office (TECRO) with offices in Washington, D.C., 12 other US cities and many other countries without official ties. The US' analogous organization is the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT). As of 2010, officials of the ROC had made quasi-official level US visits at a governmental and political level.\nThe U.S. State Department in July 2019 approved the selling of 108 M1A2T Abrams tanks and 250 Stinger missiles to Taiwan. The US Defense Security Cooperation Agency said that the arms sale serves \"US national, economic, and security interests by supporting\" Taiwan's \"continuing efforts to modernize its armed forces and to maintain a credible defensive capability.\"\nIn August 2019, the Trump administration officially announced arms sale to Taiwan, worth USD eight billion, which includes the latest Lockheed Martin-built 66 new F-16C/D fighter jets. China immediately criticized the deal, citing it as detrimental to its sovereignty and interests.\nOn 9 August 2020, U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar arrived in Taiwan. It marked the highest-level US official visit to Taiwan since 1979. As retaliation, the Chinese force jets flew over the mid-line of the Taiwan Strait, which is in the air defense identification zone. The visit was also the highest profile visit since the introduction of Taiwan Travel Act.\nIn August 2022, the U.S. House Speaker, Nancy Pelosi visited the island, an act that was strongly condemned by China.\nChina sent fighter jets and drones near Taiwan on 27 October 2024 in response to a new $2 billion U.S. arms package for Taiwan, escalating tensions in the Taiwan Strait.\nOceania.\nThe ROC maintains diplomatic relations with three countries in Oceania: the Marshall Islands, Palau, and Tuvalu. The PRC has relations with 13 others (including Australia, the Cook Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Vanuatu). The Pacific is an area of intense and continuous diplomatic competition between Beijing and Taipei, with several countries (Kiribati, Nauru, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu) having switched diplomatic support from one to the other at least once. Both the PRC and the ROC provide development aid to their respective allies. In exchange, ROC's allies support its membership bid in the United Nations. The ROC is one of Tuvalu's most important economic partners.\nHistory.\nIn September 2006, the first regional summit of Taiwan's Pacific Island allies took place, hosted by Palau in Koror City. The meeting brought together President Chen and delegates from the Marshall Islands, Tuvalu, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands and Kiribati. It was to become a regular event, known as the Taiwan\u2013Pacific Allies Summit. A second regional meeting was hosted by the Marshall Islands in October, and President Chen attended. This resulted in the Majuro Declaration, in which Taiwan's six Pacific allies re-stated their recognition of the ROC's sovereignty, and promised to support the ROC's attempts to join the United Nations.\nIn June 2007, the ROC donated an aid package of \u20ac700,000, distributed among eight Pacific regional organisations.\nIn January 2008, following the victory of the Kuomintang in the ROC's elections, Kuomintang MP Yang Li-huan stated that under the new government Taiwan's interest in the Pacific could decrease. Three days later, however, it was confirmed that ROC Vice-president Annette Lu would lead a diplomatic visit to the Marshall Islands, Nauru and Solomon Islands.\nIn March 2008, President-elect Ma was reported as saying that his government would put an end to Taiwanese \"cheque-book diplomacy\" in the Pacific (or more specifically, similar to the condition of cestui que use diplomacy). In May of that same year, Ma called for what he referred to as a \"cease-fire\" in the competition between the ROC and the PRC for diplomatic allies. This followed a scandal due to allegations that Taiwan's Foreign Minister James Huang had attempted to buy Papua New Guinea's diplomatic allegiance. Papua New Guinea's foreign minister Sam Abal subsequently confirmed that his country had no intention of recognising the ROC.\nIn October, Taiwan cancelled a scheduled summit with its Pacific Island allies. Although the authorities cited \"preparation problems\", Radio Australia commented that \"the decision appears to be an attempt by the new administration of President Ma Ying-jeou to keep the island's diplomatic activities low-profile and avoid offending China\". In June 2009, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that President Ma would \"attend a [...] leadership summit between Taiwan and its South Pacific allies\" in autumn. The summit, hosted by Solomon Islands, would be attended by the \"heads of state of Taiwan's six allies in the region\" and would focus on \"countering the current economic contraction, climate change and how to strengthen the fisheries industry\". Upon announcing the summit, the Ministry added that Ma had \"developed a fondness for the Pacific region during his previous visit to Solomon Islands when he saw a handful of children at a market selling betel nuts and watermelons while wearing shirts donated by the people of Taiwan\".\nIn July 2009, the ROC donated over \u20ac40,000 in a scholarship scheme benefiting students from Pacific countries, including those, such as Fiji or Papua New Guinea, that do not grant it diplomatic recognition. It donated \u20ac288,000 for regional development assistance programmes, to be used notably on access to water, sanitation and hygiene, renewable energy, solar photovoltaic assessments, fisheries management, education and youth training.\nTaiwan has asked to be recognised as an official dialogue partner of the Pacific Islands Forum. That status is currently awarded to the PRC.\nAustralia.\nIn February 2008, Australia reportedly \"chastised Taiwan for its renewed push for independence\" and \"reiterated its support for a one-China policy\". Australia-Taiwan relations are growing in non-political areas including an annual Bilateral Economic Consultation and both sides also established Joint Energy, Mineral, Trade and Investment Cooperation Consultation (JEMTIC) as well as an Agriculture Working Group meeting. Australia does not object Taiwan's participation in international organizations where consensus has been achieved, and Australia-Taiwan relations are commercially and unofficially-driven, such as the Australia-Taiwan Business Council, along with contacts in education, science, sports and arts.\nTaiwan is unofficially represented in Australia by the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Canberra (which has branches in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane) while Australia is similarly represented by the Australian Office in Taipei. Taiwan has an official, government co-sponsored branch office of Taiwan External Trade Development Council in Sydney. The Australian Consulate-General in Hong Kong is responsible for Visa and Citizenship matters for applicants in Taiwan. Perth has sister city relations with Taipei City and Brisbane has sister city relations with Kaohsiung City.\nFiji.\nThe ROC set up a trade mission in Fiji in 1971. In 1975, PRC established diplomatic relation with Fiji. The trade center became the Trade Mission of the ROC to the Republic of Fiji in 1988. In 1996, ROC and Fiji signed a 'mutual recognition' communique and Fiji set up its representative office named Fiji Trade and Tourism Representative Office in 1997 in Taipei. The Fiji office closed on 10 May 2017.\nKiribati.\nKiribati, under the government of President Taneti Mamau, initially recognised the ROC but switched to the PRC later on.\nFrom 1980 to 2003, Kiribati recognised the PRC. Relations between China and Kiribati then became a contentious political issue within Kiribati. President Teburoro Tito was ousted in a parliamentary vote of no confidence in 2003, over his refusal to clarify the details of a land lease that had enabled Beijing to maintain a satellite-tracking station in the country since 1997, and over Chinese ambassador Ma Shuxue's acknowledged monetary donation to \"a cooperative society linked to Tito\". In the ensuing election, Anote Tong won the presidency after \"stirring suspicions that the station was being used to spy on US installations in the Pacific\". Tong had previously pledged to \"review\" the lease.\nIn November 2003, Tarawa established diplomatic relations with Taipei and Beijing severed its relations with the country. For the PRC, the presence of the satellite-tracking station had made relations with Kiribati relatively important; the station had, in particular, been used to track Yang Liwei's spaceflight. Therefore, for three weeks the PRC called upon I-Kiribati President Anote Tong to break off relations with Taiwan and re-affirm his support for the \"One China\" policy. Only after those three weeks did the PRC sever relations, thereby losing the right to maintain its satellite-tracking base. The ROC began providing economic aid to Kiribati, while Kiribati began supporting Taiwan in the United Nations.\nIn 2004, President Tong said he believed the PRC was trying to influence his country. The comment was mainly due to the PRC's refusal to remove all its personnel from its closed embassy. Tong stated that the Chinese personnel, who remained in Kiribati against his wishes, were handing out anti-government pamphlets; he told New Zealand journalist Michael Field: \"I am sure if we did this in Beijing, we would be in jail in half a second\". Tong's brother and main political opponent, Harry Tong, responded by accusing Taiwan of excessive influence on Kiribati, notably of influencing the country's clergy.\nIn 2008, Taiwan settled Kiribati's unpaid bills to Air Pacific, enabling the airline to maintain its services from Tarawa to Kiritimati.\nIn November 2010, despite their lack of diplomatic relations, the PRC was one of fifteen countries to attend the Tarawa Climate Change Conference in Kiribati, and one of twelve to sign the resulting Ambo Declaration on climate change. On 20 September 2019, Kiribati switched diplomatic relation from ROC to PRC.\nMarshall Islands.\nThe Marshall Islands recognise the ROC and maintain an embassy in Taipei. The magazine \"Islands Business\" reported that President Litokwa Tomeing, elected in January 2008, might turn instead to the PRC. However, in office Tomeing expressed continued support for ties with Taiwan and met with ROC Vice President Annette Lu when she visited the Marshall Islands on 29 January 2008. The current Marshallese ambassador to Taiwan is Anjanette Kattil.\nMicronesia.\nMicronesia recognized the Republic of China until 1989, switching its foreign recognition to the People's Republic of China. In 2023, shortly before his term as president ended, David Panuelo wrote an open letter accusing Beijing of bribing Micronesian officials for recognition and to stay out of a potential conflict, as well as spying on the Micronesian government and personally surveilling him. He furthermore advocated for returning to relations with the Republic of China and held meetings with Taiwanese foreign minister Joseph Wu to determine if it was possible.\nNauru.\nNauru recognized the Republic of China until 2024, before switching its recognition to the People's Republic of China.\nIn 1980, Nauru established official relations with the ROC. In 2002, however, the government of Ren\u00e9 Harris established relations with the PRC, and adopted the One China Policy. Consequently, Taiwan severed its relations with Nauru, and accused the PRC of having bought Nauru's allegiance with financial aid of over \u20ac90,000,000. A reporter for \"The Age\" agreed, stating that \"Beijing recently bought off a threat by Nauru to revert to Taiwan only six months after opening ties with the mainland, offering a large loan to Nauru's near-destitute Government\".\nIn 2003, Nauru closed its newly established embassy in Beijing. Two years later, ROC President Chen met Nauruan President Ludwig Scotty in the Marshall Islands. In May 2005, the ROC and Nauru re-established diplomatic relations, and opened embassies in each other's capitals. The PRC consequently severed its relations with Nauru.\nThe ROC is one of Nauru's two foremost economic aid partners (with Australia). In return, Nauru uses its seat in the United Nations to support the ROC's admittance proposal. Taiwan provides regular medical assistance to Nauru, sending specialised doctors to the country's only hospital.\nIn 2007, Scotty was re-elected, amidst claims that his electoral campaign had been funded by Taiwan. Scotty's opponents claimed that the ROC wanted to ensure that a pro-Taiwan government remained in power. Scotty was replaced by Marcus Stephen in December 2007. Following Stephen's election, President Chen telephoned him to congratulate him, assure him of the ROC's continued assistance for Nauru, request Nauru's continued support in return, and invite him to visit Taiwan.\nNauru remains the focus of diplomatic competition between Beijing and Taipei. In 2006, according to the \"New Statesman\", President Scotty \"was allegedly accosted by a horde of screaming Chinese officials who tried to drag him on to a plane to Beijing just as he was boarding one bound for Taipei\".\nIn 2008, Nauru co-submitted a proposal to the United Nations, requesting that the United Nations General Assembly consider enabling \"Taiwan's participation in the activities of UN specialized agencies\". The proposal was rejected.\nIn 2011 WikiLeaks revealed that Taiwan had been paying a \"monthly stipend\" to Nauruan government ministers in exchange for their continued support, as well as a smaller sum to other members of parliament, as \"project funding that requires minimal accounting\". Reporting on the story, the \"Brisbane Times\" wrote: \"One MP reportedly used his Taiwanese stipend to buy daily breakfast for all schoolchildren in his district, while others were happy to just pocket the cash\". A \"former Australian diplomat with close knowledge of politics in Nauru\" stated that Nauruan President Marcus Stephen, Foreign Minister Kieren Keke and former President Ludwig Scotty, among others, had all accepted \"under the counter\" funding from Taiwan. The leaks revealed that \"Chinese [PRC] agents had also sought to influence Nauru's elections through cash payments to voters, with at least $40,000 distributed in one instance in 2007\".\nWikiLeaks also revealed that Australia had, at one time, been \"pushing\" Nauru to break its relations with Taiwan and establish relations with the PRC instead. Then President Scotty had reportedly resisted on the grounds that it was \"none of Australia's business\".\nIn late 2011, Taiwan \"doubled its health aid\" to Nauru, notably providing a resident medical team on a five-year appointment.\nFrom 11 June 2013 to 27 August 2019, under the government of President Baron Waqa, Nauru maintained its recognition of the Republic of China.\nIn 2018, a diplomatic row between the PRC and Nauru occurred at the Pacific Islands Forum when Nauruans would only stamp entry visas on personal passports of Mainland diplomats rather than diplomatic ones.\nOn 15 January 2024, Nauru chose to recognise the People's Republic of China, severing diplomatic ties with Taiwan.\nNew Zealand.\nWhile New Zealand does not have formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan, the two countries still maintain informal trade, economic, and cultural relations. Taiwan has two Economic and Cultural offices in Auckland and Wellington. New Zealand also has a Commerce and Industry Office in Taipei.\nOn 10 July 2013, New Zealand and ROC signed a bilateral Economic Cooperation Agreement.\nPalau.\nPalau recognises the ROC, and is one of the few countries to maintain an embassy in Taipei. Diplomatic relations began in 1999, five years after Palaun independence. ROC maintains an embassy in Koror City. The ROC provides scholarships to Palauan students, as well as computers for Palauan schools. In 2008, Mario Katosang, Palau's Minister of Education, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We were given 100 Windows-based computers by Taiwan. The education sector uses predominantly Apple Macintosh computers, so I mentioned that we may also need software. Taiwan immediately delivered 100 brand new copies of Windows XP, and offered to train our computer technicians.\nTravel from the Mainland to Palau is illegal.\nTaiwan and Palau entered into a maritime cooperation agreement in March 2019. Taiwan agreed to fund the building of an eight-ton patrol boat in Palau. The agreement also allows Taiwanese patrol boats to resupply in Palau, personnel exchanges, and joint training. The first joint exercise occurred on 23 March when the Taiwanese coast guard frigate \"Hsun Hu No. 7\" conducted a patrol mission with Palauan vessels.\nPapua New Guinea.\nPapua recognises the PRC.\nIn 2005, Papua New Guinea, along with Fiji, supported Taiwan's wish to join the World Health Organization.\nSolomon Islands.\nThe two countries established diplomatic relations on 23 May 1983. A ROC consulate general in Honiara was upgraded to an embassy two years later. Since 2011, the Solomons' ambassador to the ROC has been Laurie Chan, a Solomon Islands national of Chinese ethnic background, and a former Solomon Islands Minister of Foreign Affairs who supported his country's continued relations with Taiwan.\nAfter pro-Taiwan Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare was ousted in a vote of no confidence in December 2007, and replaced by Derek Sikua, ROC President Chen telephoned Prime Minister Sikua, offering his congratulations and Taiwan's continued aid, and requested the Sikua government's continued diplomatic support. Chen also invited Sikua to visit Taiwan, which he did in March 2008. Sikua was welcomed with military honours by Chen, who stated: \"Taiwan is the Solomon Islands' most loyal ally. [...] Taiwan will never forsake the people or government of the Solomon Islands.\" Solomon Islands has continued to recognise the ROC under Sikua's leadership.\nIn June 2019, secret negotiations with Australia were reported that involved the Solomon Islands reassessing if they wanted to switch recognition to the PRC with an internal deadline of mid-September to make a change or leave the status quo. In early September, they announced their intention to change recognition to the PRC. On 16 September, it officially broke its ties with Taiwan, switching its recognition to the PRC.\nIn June 2020 the Premier of Malaita Province, a critic of the switch in recognition, accepted rice from Taiwan as state aid. This was criticised by the national government, who called on him to respect the country's foreign policy.\nTuvalu.\nTuvalu recognises the ROC; Taiwan maintains the only foreign resident embassy in Tuvalu, in Funafuti.\nTuvalu supports the ROC's bid to join the United Nations, and Taiwan has provided Tuvalu with mobile medical missions.\nIn 2006, Taiwan reacted to reports that the PRC was attempting to draw Tuvalu away from the ROC. Taiwan consequently strengthened its weakening diplomatic relations with Tuvalu.\nIn 2019\u00a0\u2013 shortly after Kiribati and the Solomon Islands ended their relations with the Republic of China\u00a0\u2013 Tuvalu reiterated their support for the ROC.\nVanuatu.\nVanuatu recognises the PRC. In November 2004, Prime Minister Serge Vohor briefly established diplomatic relations with Taiwan, before he was ousted for that reason in a vote of no confidence.\nSouth America.\nParaguay.\nParaguay recognizes Taiwan. Paraguayan leader General Alfredo Stroessner was a partner of Generalissimo Chiang. Many Paraguayan officers trained in Fu Hsing Kang College in the ROC.\nStroessner's 1989 ousting and his successor Andr\u00e9s Rodr\u00edguez's reinventing himself as a democratically elected president, were immediately followed by invitations from Beijing to switch diplomatic recognition. However, the Taiwanese ambassador, Wang Sheng, and his diplomats were able to convince the Paraguayans that continuing the relationship with the ROC, and thus keeping the ROC's development assistance and access to the ROC's markets, would be more advantageous for Paraguay. Recognition of Taiwan was a matter of debate in the 2023 Paraguayan general election, with bilateral relations maintained after the results.\nVenezuela.\nIn 2007, the Venezuelan government refused to renew visas for five members of the ROC commercial representation in Caracas.\nRelations with Venezuela have worsened because of the increasing partnership between the socialist government of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and the People's Republic of China, which has led to a more overt rejection of the Taiwan's legitimacy by Venezuela. During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis, Taiwan has been supportive of Juan Guaid\u00f3 and the opposition-led National Assembly.\nMultilateral relations.\nArab world.\nEgypt maintained relations until 1956, when Gamal Abdel Nasser cut off relations and recognised the PRC. Ma Bufang, who was then living in Egypt, was ordered to move to Saudi Arabia, and became the ROC ambassador to Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia ended its diplomatic relations with the ROC in 1990. Ambassador Wang Shi-ming was a Chinese Muslim, and the ROC ambassador to Kuwait. The ROC also maintained relations with Libya and Saudi Arabia.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Union has emphasized human rights in its relations with Taiwan. It is the largest source of foreign direct investment to Taiwan. The European Union has unofficial relations with Taiwan through the European Economic and Trade Office, which was opened on 10 March 2003. Taipei is one of the major trading partners via the European Free Trade Association, and a trading partner with the Eurozone. Taiwanese passport holders with a listed identity card number do not require a Schengen visa to visit the Schengen Area; reciprocally, the ROC has also eliminated visa requirements for citizens of all EU countries. EU-Taiwan relations were debated in the European Parliament. Sixteen EU member states have established offices in Taipei, along with some functional offices. Taipei Representative Office in the EU and Belgium is the unofficial diplomatic representation of Taiwan in the EU. Chinese Taipei is an observer in the OECD, which is headquartered in Paris, France. ROC's Civil Service Protection and Training Commission (CSPTC) and the Belgian Training Institute of the Federal Administration (TIFA) signed Memorandum of Understanding on 7 November 2014 for workshop attendance of public servants that highlighted leadership, innovation and conflict management, as well as global competitiveness strategies in Brussels. The EU rejects granting Mainland China market economy status.\nInternational agreements.\nROC is a party to major international treaties, including:\nTerritorial disputes.\nThe ROC claims islands in the South China Sea on the same basis as its claim to historical Chinese territory retaining the borders dated prior to the establishment of the PRC including Tibet and Outer Mongolia. Unlike its claims on the Asian mainland, however, the ROC actively pursues and defends some of its claims to these islands. These include all of the Spratly Islands, the Paracel Islands, Macclesfield Bank and Scarborough Shoal. These islands are administered by a number of governments around the South China Sea. The ROC also claims the Senkaku Islands, which are administered by Japan. Because ASEAN and the People's Republic of China did not invite the Republic of China to participate in the \"Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea\", the Republic of China did not recognize it.\nThe PRC, in turn, asserts itself as the sole legitimate government of China, and claims all territories administered by the ROC.\nSpecialized diplomacy.\nCulinary diplomacy.\nTaiwan emphasizes its night markets and the high rate of vegan eateries among other aspects of its culinary culture in an effort to promote the nation globally.\nIn 2010, Taiwan launched a \u00a320m culinary diplomacy campaign.\nMedical diplomacy.\nTaiwan's medical diplomacy began in 1961 with a team of medical professionals sent to Libya. In 2018 Taiwan set up a 2 million dollar healthcare fund for its Pacific island nation allies. Taiwan officially refers to most of its medical diplomacy as public health diplomacy.\nMedical diplomacy has formed a key part of Taiwan's outreach to regional countries, especially in Southeast Asia. It is one of the five key components of the New Southbound Policy. Unlike medical diplomacy under previous programs under the NSP medical diplomacy is not focused on providing direct medical care or basic public health programs but on providing high-level professional skill transfers.\nEpidemic prevention diplomacy.\nLocal media has referred to Taiwan's medical diplomacy related to the COVID-19 pandemic as \"epidemic prevention diplomacy\". In March 2020 Australia and Taiwan agreed to exchange 1 million liters of Australian alcohol to be used in making hand sanitizer for 3 metric tons of Taiwanese nonwoven fabric to be used in making facial masks.\nDrone diplomacy.\nIn 2025 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs launched a drone diplomacy program with the intent of supplying uncrewed vehicles to diplomatic allies,regional partners, and those facing Russian aggression especially in Europe. The effort would be facilitated in partnership with the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Taiwanese domestic industry.\nTransport and communications.\nAir links.\nThe dispute over Taiwan's status affects the island's air links with the outside world, particularly Europe, North America and Australia.\nFor many years, Mandarin Airlines, a subsidiary of Taiwan's national airline, China Airlines (CAL), served many international destinations that CAL did not because of political sensitivities. However, in 1995 CAL dropped the national colours from its livery, and now flies to international destinations under its own name. Many countries' national airlines similarly set up special subsidiaries, known as \"shadow airlines\", to operate services to Taipei, with a different name, and livery omitting national symbols. British Airways' subsidiary, British Asia Airways, operated flights to London, KLM's subsidiary, KLM Asia, operated flights to Amsterdam, and Swissair's subsidiary, Swissair Asia, operated flights to Z\u00fcrich, Air France Asie operated flights to Paris, Japan Air Lines established a subsidiary called Japan Asia Airways to operate flights to Tokyo, while Qantas had a subsidiary called Australia Asia Airlines, which operated flights to Sydney. These subsidiaries ceased operations when their parent companies were privatized or went bankrupt (in Swissair's case), with KLM Asia being the only remaining active shadow subsidiary. Other countries' flag carriers, such as Germany's Lufthansa, operated flights to Taipei using an existing subsidiary (in Lufthansa's case, Condor).\nBefore the completion of the second runway at New Tokyo International Airport (now Narita International Airport) in Chiba, Japan, airlines from Taiwan were required to utilize Haneda International Airport for their Tokyo routes in order not to offend the airlines from the PRC that flew to Narita. All Nippon Airways, however, used an existing subsidiary, Air Nippon. With the implementation of a new Japan-Taiwan air agreement, JAL and ANA took over flight operations between Japan and Taiwan in April 2008.\nBeginning July 2008, charter flights between mainland China and Taiwan, which were traditionally only allowed on special holidays such as Chinese New Year, were significantly expanded.\nChina has begun compelling foreign airlines with landing privileges in the mainland to identify Taiwanese destinations as if they were part of the mainland government, e.g. T'aipei CN instead of T'aipei TW.\nTelecommunications.\nInternational dialling codes were assigned by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), an agency of the United Nations, to its member states and their dependencies in the 1960s. Despite the Republic of China on Taiwan still being a member of the UN, and hence the ITU, other member states declared that \"the only representatives of the people of China are the delegates to the ITU and its permanent organs appointed by the Central Government of the People's Republic of China\". This led to the People's Republic of China being assigned the country code 86. Consequently, in the early 1970s, Taiwan had to be unofficially assigned a separate code, 886, although there was pressure from China to change this to 866. This had to be listed as \"reserved\", but in 2006, the code was formally allocated to \"Taiwan, China\".\nCodes in the +86 6 number range have since been allocated to cities in mainland China; for example, the area code for Shanwei is 0660. Consequently, calls from mainland China to Taiwan require the international access code and country code 00886.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30097", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30097", "title": "Anton Schumacher", "text": "German footballer\nAnton \"Toni\" Schumacher (born 1 December 1938 in Bonn) is a German former professional football goalkeeper.\nCareer.\nSchumacher played for 1. FC K\u00f6ln since 1950, from 1963 to 1968 the team played in the Bundesliga. In 1964, he won the German Championship.\nPersonal life.\nThe goalkeeper Harald Schumacher who played for 1. FC K\u00f6ln from 1972 to 1987 was also nicknamed \"Toni\" by the players of the team, to avoid misunderstandings between him and the defender Harald Konopka.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30098", "revid": "44318890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30098", "title": "Thump Records", "text": "American record label\nThump Records is a record label specialized in various genres of music. Founded by Bill Walker and Al Lop Unlawful surveillance \nez for $10,000 in 1990. In 1997 Bill Walker became its sole C.E.O. and President. Unlawful Surveillance Invasion of Privacy 7/17/25 Unlawful Surveillance\nHistory.\nThump's success was ignited by the popularity of its Old School and Low Rider compilation series (co-branded with Low Rider Magazine). Universal Music Group serves as the distributor for Thump, which has also brought on board a variety of artists under its own label.\nTierra gained hit The Intruders' 1967 song \"Together\", written by Gamble &amp; Huff, which reached #18 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 from Boardwalk Records, and later Tierra joined Thump Records. Tierra and Rocky Paddila were top stars of Thump Records. Thump released Low Rider Series, Oldies Series, Old Skool Series and East Side Story Series.\nArtists on Thump Records.\nPresent and past\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n[[Category:American record labels]]\n[[Category:Latin American music record labels]]\n[[Category:Hip-hop record labels]]"}
{"id": "30100", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30100", "title": "The ontological argument", "text": ""}
{"id": "30101", "revid": "4928500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30101", "title": "The cosmological argument", "text": ""}
{"id": "30102", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30102", "title": "The teleological argument", "text": ""}
{"id": "30104", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30104", "title": "Problem of evil", "text": "Reconciling the existence of evil with a God\nThe problem of evil, also known as the problem of suffering, is the philosophical question of how to reconcile the existence of evil and suffering with an omnipotent, omnibenevolent, and omniscient God. There are currently differing definitions of these concepts. The best known presentation of the problem is attributed to the Greek philosopher Epicurus.\nBesides the philosophy of religion, the problem of evil is also important to the fields of theology and ethics. There are also many discussions of evil and associated problems in other philosophical fields, such as secular ethics and evolutionary ethics. But as usually understood, the problem of evil is posed in a theological context.\nResponses to the problem of evil have traditionally been in three types: refutations, defenses, and theodicies.\nThe problem of evil is generally formulated in two forms: the logical problem of evil and the evidential problem of evil. The logical form of the argument tries to show a logical impossibility in the coexistence of a God and evil, while the evidential form tries to show that, given the evil in the world, it is improbable that there is an omnipotent, omniscient, and a wholly good God. Concerning the evidential problem, many theodicies have been proposed. One accepted theodicy is to appeal to the strong account of the compensation theodicy. This view holds that the primary benefit of evils, in addition to their compensation in the afterlife, can reject the evidential problem of evil. The problem of evil has been extended to non-human life forms, to include suffering of non-human animal species from natural evils and human cruelty against them.\nMost philosophers see the logical problem of evil as having been rebutted by various defenses. The evidential arguments remain discussed among contemporary philosophers. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinitions.\nEvil.\nTypically in the context of the problem of evil, a broad concept of evil is considered that encompasses \"any bad state of affairs, wrongful action, or character flaw\". These may be either natural evils or moral evils including minor harm or injustice, in contrast to the modern colloquial use of \"evil\" commonly associated with particularly horrendous moral acts. More restrictive concepts of evil may be relevant to particular formulations and responses to the problem of evil. Marcus Singer says that a usable definition of evil must be based on the knowledge that: \"If something is really evil, it can't be necessary, and if it is really necessary, it can't be evil\". According to philosopher John Kemp, evil cannot be correctly understood on \"a simple hedonic scale on which pleasure appears as a plus, and pain as a minus\".\nEvil takes on different meanings when seen from the perspective of different belief systems, and while evil can be viewed in religious terms, it can also be understood in natural or secular terms, such as social vice, egoism, criminality, and sociopathology. John Kekes writes that an action is evil if \"(1) it causes grievous harm to (2) innocent victims, and it is (3) deliberate, (4) malevolently motivated, and (5) morally unjustifiable\".\nOmniqualities.\nOmniscience is \"maximal knowledge\". According to Edward Wierenga, a classics scholar and doctor of philosophy and religion at the University of Massachusetts, \"maximal\" is not unlimited but limited to \"God knowing what is knowable\". This is the most widely accepted view of omniscience among scholars of the twenty-first century, and is what William Hasker calls \"freewill-theism\". Within this view, future events that depend upon choices made by individuals with free will are unknowable until they occur.\nOmnipotence is maximal power to bring about events within the limits of possibility, but again \"maximal\" is not unlimited. According to the philosophers Hoffman and Rosenkrantz: \"An omnipotent agent is not required to bring about an impossible state of affairs... maximal power has logical and temporal limitations, including the limitation that an omnipotent agent cannot bring about, i.e., cause, another agent's free decision\".\nOmnibenevolence sees God as all-loving. If God is omnibenevolent, he acts according to what is best, but if there is no best available, God attempts, if possible, to bring about states of affairs that are creatable and are optimal within the limitations of physical reality.\nDefenses and theodicies.\nResponses to the problem of evil have occasionally been classified as \"defences\" or \"theodicies\" although authors disagree on the exact definitions. Generally, a defense refers to attempts to address the logical argument of evil that says \"it is logically impossible \u2013 not just unlikely \u2013 that God exists\". A defense does not require a full explanation of evil, and it need not be true, or even probable; it need only be possible, since possibility invalidates the logic of impossibility.\nA theodicy, on the other hand, is more ambitious, since it attempts to provide a plausible justification \u2013 a morally or philosophically sufficient reason \u2013 for the existence of evil. This is intended to weaken the evidential argument which uses the reality of evil to argue that the existence of God is unlikely.\nSecularism.\nIn philosopher Forrest E. Baird's view, one can have a secular problem of evil whenever humans seek to explain why evil exists and its relationship to the world. He adds that any experience that \"calls into question our basic trust in the order and structure of our world\" can be seen as evil, therefore, according to Peter L. Berger, humans need explanations of evil \"for social structures to stay themselves against chaotic forces\".\nFormulation.\nThe problem of evil refers to the challenge of reconciling the existence of evil and suffering with our view of the world, especially but not exclusively, with belief in an omnipotent, omnibenevolent, and omniscient God who acts in the world.\nThe problem of evil may be described either experientially or theoretically. The experiential problem is the difficulty in believing in a concept of a loving God when confronted by evil and suffering in the real world, such as from epidemics, or wars, or murder, or natural disasters where innocent people become victims. Theoretically, the problem is usually described and studied by religion scholars in two varieties: the logical problem and the evidential problem.\nOne of the earliest statements of the problem is found in early Buddhist texts. In the Majjhima Nik\u0101ya, the Buddha (6th or 5th century BCE) states that if a god created sentient beings, then due to the pain and suffering they feel, he is likely to be an evil god.\nLogical problem of evil.\nThe problem of evil possibly originates from the Greek philosopher Epicurus (341\u2013270 BCE). Hume summarizes Epicurus's version of the problem as follows:\n\"Is [god] willing to prevent evil, but not able? then is he impotent. Is he able, but not willing? then is he malevolent. Is he both able and willing? whence then is evil?\"\nThe logical argument from evil is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nP1. If an omnipotent, omnibenevolent and omniscient god exists, then evil does not.\nP2. There is evil in the world.\nC1. Therefore, an omnipotent, omnibenevolent and omniscient god does not exist.\nThis argument is of the form : if its premise (P1) is true, the conclusion (C1) follows of necessity. To show that the first premise is plausible, subsequent versions tend to expand on it, such as this modern example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;P1a. God exists.\nP1b. God is omnipotent, omnibenevolent and omniscient.\nP1c. An omnipotent being has the power to prevent that evil from coming into existence.\nP1d. An omnibenevolent being would want to prevent all evils.\nP1e. An omniscient being knows every way in which evils can come into existence, and knows every way in which those evils could be prevented.\nP1f. A being who knows every way in which an evil can come into existence, who is able to prevent that evil from coming into existence, and who wants to do so, would prevent the existence of that evil.\nP1. If there exists an omnipotent, omnibenevolent and omniscient God, then no evil exists.\nP2. Evil exists (logical contradiction).\nBoth of these arguments are understood to be presenting two forms of the 'logical' problem of evil. They attempt to show that the assumed premises lead to a logical contradiction that cannot all be correct. Most philosophical debate has focused on the suggestion that God would want to prevent all evils and therefore cannot coexist with any evils (premises P1d and P1f), but there are existing responses to every premise (such as Plantinga's response to P1c), with defenders of theism (for example, St. Augustine and Leibniz) arguing that God could exist and allow evil if there were good reasons.\nIf God lacks any one of these qualities\u00a0\u2013 omniscience, omnipotence, or omnibenevolence\u00a0\u2013 then the logical problem of evil can be resolved. Process theology and open theism are modern positions that limit God's omnipotence or omniscience (as defined in traditional theology) based on free will in others.\nEvidential problem of evil.\nThe evidential problem of evil (also referred to as the probabilistic or inductive version of the problem) seeks to show that the existence of evil, although logically consistent with the existence of God, counts against or lowers the probability of the truth of theism. Both absolute versions and relative versions of the evidential problems of evil are presented below.\nA version by William L. Rowe:\nAnother by Paul Draper:\nSkeptical theism is an example of a theistic challenge to the premises in these arguments.\nProblem of evil and animal suffering.\nThe problem of evil has also been extended beyond human suffering, to include suffering of animals from cruelty, disease and evil. One version of this problem includes animal suffering from natural evil, such as the violence and fear faced by animals from predators, natural disasters, over the history of evolution. This is also referred to as the Darwinian problem of evil, after Charles Darwin who wrote in 1856: \"What a book a Devil's chaplain might write on the clumsy, wasteful, blundering low &amp; horridly cruel works of nature!\", and in his later autobiography said: \"A being so powerful and so full of knowledge as a God who could create the universe, is to our finite minds omnipotent and omniscient, and it revolts our understanding to suppose that his benevolence is not unbounded, for what advantage can there be in the sufferings of millions of the lower animals throughout almost endless time? This very old argument from the existence of suffering against the existence of an intelligent first cause seems to me a strong one\".\nThe second version of the problem of evil applied to animals, and avoidable suffering experienced by them, is one caused by some human beings, such as from animal cruelty or when they are shot or slaughtered. This version of the problem of evil has been used by scholars including John Hick to counter the responses and defenses to the problem of evil such as suffering being a means to perfect the morals and greater good because animals are innocent, helpless, amoral but sentient victims. Scholar Michael Almeida said this was \"perhaps the most serious and difficult\" version of the problem of evil. The problem of evil in the context of animal suffering, states Almeida, can be stated as:\nSecular responses.\nWhile the problem of evil is usually considered to be a theistic one, Peter Kivy says there is a secular problem of evil that exists even if one gives up belief in a deity; that is, the problem of how it is possible to reconcile \"the pain and suffering human beings inflict upon one another\". Kivy writes that all but the most extreme moral skeptics agree that humans have a duty to not knowingly harm others. This leads to the secular problem of evil when one person injures another through \"unmotivated malice\" with no apparent rational explanation or justifiable self-interest.\nThere are two main reasons used to explain evil, but according to Kivy, neither is fully satisfactory. The first explanation is psychological egoism \u2013 that everything humans do is from self-interest. Bishop Butler has countered this asserting pluralism: human beings are motivated by self-interest, but they are also motivated by particulars \u2013 that is particular objects, goals or desires \u2013 that may or may not involve self-interest but are motives in and of themselves and may, occasionally, include genuine benevolence. For the egoist, \"man's inhumanity to man\" is \"not explainable in rational terms\", for if humans can be ruthless for ruthlessness' sake, then egoism is not the only human motive. Pluralists do not fare better simply by recognizing three motives: injuring another for one of those motives could be interpreted as rational, but hurting for the sake of hurting, is as irrational to the pluralist as the egoist.\nAm\u00e9lie Rorty offers a few examples of secular responses to the problem of evil:\nEvil as necessary.\nAccording to Michel de Montaigne and Voltaire, while character traits such as wanton cruelty, partiality and egoism are an innate part of the human condition, these vices serve the \"common good\" of the social process. For Montaigne, the idea of evil is relative to the limited knowledge of human beings, not to the world itself or to God. He adopts what philosophers Graham Oppy and N. N. Trakakis refer to as a \"neo-Stoic view of an orderly world\" where everything is in its place.\nThis secular version of the early coherentist response to the problem of evil, (coherentism asserts that acceptable belief must be part of a coherent system), can be found, according to Rorty, in the writings of Bernard de Mandeville and Sigmund Freud. Mandeville says that when vices like greed and envy are suitably regulated within the social sphere, they are what \"spark[s] the energy and productivity that make progressive civilization possible\". Rorty asserts that the guiding motto of both religious and secular coherentists is: 'Look for the benefits gained by harm and you will find they outweigh the damage'.\"\nEconomic theorist Thomas Malthus stated in a 1798 essay on the question of population over-crowding, its impact on food availability, and food's impact on population through famine and death, that it was: \"Necessity, that imperious, all pervading law of nature, restrains them within the prescribed bounds[...] and man cannot by any means of reason escape from it\". He adds: \"Nature will not, indeed cannot be defeated in her purposes.\" According to Malthus, nature and the God of nature, cannot be seen as evil in this natural and necessary process.\nEvil as the absence of good.\nPaul Elmer More says that, to Plato, evil resulted from the human failure to pay sufficient attention to finding and doing good: evil is an absence of good where good should be. More says Plato directed his entire educational program against the \"innate indolence of the will\" and the neglect of a search for ethical motives \"which are the true springs of our life\". Plato asserted that it is the innate laziness, ignorance and lack of attention to pursuing good that, in the beginning, leads humans to fall into \"the first lie, of the soul\" that then often leads to self-indulgence and evil. According to Joseph Kelly, Clement of Alexandria, a neo-Platonist in the 2nd-century, adopted Plato's view of evil. The fourth-century theologian Augustine of Hippo also adopted Plato's view. In his \"Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love\", Augustine maintained that evil exists as an \"absence of the good\".\nSchopenhauer emphasized the existence of evil and its negation of the good. Therefore, according to Mesgari Akbar and Akbari Mohsen, he was a pessimist. He defined the \"good\" as coordination between an individual object and a definite effort of the will, and he defined evil as the absence of such coordination.\nArguably, Hannah Arendt's presentation of the Eichmann Trial as an exemplar of \"the banality of evil\"\u2014consisting of a lack of empathic imagination, coupled with thoughtless conformity\u2014is a variation on Augustine's theodicy.\nDeny problem exists.\nTheophrastus, the Greek Peripatetic philosopher and author of \"Characters\", a work that explores the moral weaknesses and strengths of 30 personality types in the Greece of his day, thought that the nature of 'being' comes from, and consists of, contraries, such as eternal and perishable, order and chaos, good and evil; the role of evil is thereby limited, he said, since it is only a part of the whole which is overall, good. According to Theophrastus, a world focused on virtue and vice was a naturalistic social world where the overall goodness of the universe as a whole included, of necessity, both good and evil, rendering the problem of evil non-existent.\nDavid Hume traced what he asserted as the psychological origins of virtue but not the vices. Rorty says: \"He dispels the superstitious remnants of a Manichean battle: the forces of good and evil warring in the will\"; concluding instead that human beings project their own subjective disapproval onto events and actions.\nEvil as illusory.\nA modern version of this view is found in Christian Science which asserts that evils such as suffering and disease only appear to be real but, in truth, are illusions. The theologians of Christian Science, states Stephen Gottschalk, posit that the Spirit is of infinite might; mortal human beings fail to grasp this and focus instead on evil and suffering that have no real existence as \"a power, person or principle opposed to God\".\nThe illusion theodicy has been critiqued for denying the reality of crimes, wars, terror, sickness, injury, death, suffering and pain to the victim. Further, adds Millard Erickson, the illusion argument merely shifts the problem to a new problem, as to why God would create this \"illusion\" of crimes, wars, terror, sickness, injury, death, suffering and pain; and why God does not stop this \"illusion\".\nMoral rationalism.\n\"In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries rationalism about morality was repeatedly used to reject strong divine command theories of ethics\". Such moral rationalism asserts that morality is based on reason. Rorty refers to Immanuel Kant as an example of a \"pious rationalist\". According to Shaun Nichols, \"The Kantian approach to moral philosophy is to try to show that ethics is based on practical reason\". The problem of evil then becomes, \"how [it is] possible for a rational being of good will to be immoral\".\nKant wrote an essay on theodicy criticizing it for attempting too much without recognizing the limits of human reason. Kant did not think he had exhausted all possible theodicies, but did assert that any successful one must be based on nature rather than philosophy. While a successful philosophical theodicy had not been achieved in his time, added Kant, he asserted there was no basis for a successful anti-theodicy either.\nEvil God challenge.\nOne resolution to the problem of evil is that God is not good. The evil God challenge thought experiment explores whether an evil God is as likely to exist as a good God. Dystheism is the belief that God is not wholly good. Maltheism is the belief in an evil god.\nPeter Forrest has stated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The anti-God that I take seriously is the malicious omnipotent omniscient being, who, it is said, creates so that creatures will suffer, because of the joy this suffering gives It. This may be contrasted with a different idea of anti-God, that of an evil being that seeks to destroy things of value out of hatred or envy. An omnipotent, omniscient being would not be envious. Moreover, destructive hatred cannot motivate creation. For these two reasons I find that rather implausible. My case holds, however, against that sort of anti-God as well as the malicious one. The variety of anti-Gods alerts us to the problem of positing any character to God, whether benign, indifferent, or malicious. There are many such character traits we could hypothesize. Why not a God who creates as a jest? Or a God who loves drama? Or a God who, adapting Haldane's quip, is fond of beetles? Or, more seriously, a God who just loves creating regardless of the joy or suffering of creatures?\nCatholic Response.\nThe Catholic Church believes good things include power and knowledge, and that only the misuse of power and knowledge is evil. Consequently, the church believes God could not be evil or become evil if he is omnipotent and omniscient, since these qualities spring from omnibenevolence. As the Roman Catechism puts it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For by acknowledging God to be omnipotent, we also of necessity acknowledge Him to be omniscient, and to hold all things in subjection to His supreme authority and dominion. When we do not doubt that He is omnipotent, we must be also convinced of everything else regarding Him, the absence of which would render His omnipotence altogether unintelligible. Besides, nothing tends more to confirm our faith and animate our hope than a deep conviction that all things are possible to God; for whatever may be afterwards proposed as an object of faith, however great, however wonderful, however raised above the natural order, is easily and without hesitation believed, once the mind has grasped the knowledge of the omnipotence of God. Nay more, the greater the truths which the divine oracles announce, the more willingly does the mind deem them worthy of belief. And should we expect any favour from heaven, we are not discouraged by the greatness of the desired benefit, but are cheered and confirmed by frequently considering that there is nothing which an omnipotent God cannot effect.\nDisavowal of theodicy.\nThis position argues from a number of different directions that the theodicy project is objectionable. Toby Betenson writes that the central theme of all anti-theodicies is that: \"Theodicies mediate a praxis that sanctions evil\". A theodicy may harmonize God with the existence of evil, but it can be said that it does so at the cost of nullifying morality. Most theodicies assume that whatever evil there is exists for the sake of some greater good. However, if that is so, then it appears humans have no duty to prevent it, for in preventing evil they would also prevent the greater good for which the evil is required. Even worse, it seems that any action can be rationalized, for if one succeeds in performing an evil act, then God has permitted it, and so it must be for the greater good. From this line of thought one may conclude that, as these conclusions violate humanity's basic moral intuitions, no greater good theodicy is true, and God does not exist. Alternatively, one may point out that greater good theodicies lead humanity to see every conceivable state of affairs as compatible with the existence of God, and in that case the notion of God's goodness is rendered meaningless.\nBetenson also says there is a \"rich theological tradition of anti-theodicy\". For many theists, there is no seamless theodicy that provides all answers, nor do 21st-century theologians think there should be. As Felix Christen, Fellow at Goethe University, Frankfurt, says, \"When one considers human lives that have been shattered to the core, and, in the face of these tragedies [ask] the question 'Where is God?'[...] we would do well to stand with [poet and Holocaust survivor] Nelly Sachs as she says, 'We really don't know'.\" Contemporary theodiceans, such as Alvin Plantinga, describe having doubts about the enterprise of theodicy \"in the sense of providing an explanation of precise reasons why there is evil in the world\". Plantinga's ultimate response to the problem of evil is that it is not a problem that can be solved. Christians simply cannot claim to know the answer to the \"Why?\" of evil. Plantinga stresses that this is why he does not proffer a theodicy but only a defense of the logic of theistic belief.\nAtheistic viewpoint.\nFrom an atheistic viewpoint, the problem of evil is solved in accordance with the principle of Occam's razor: the existence of evil and suffering is reconciled with the assumption that an omnipotent, omnibenevolent, and omniscient God exists by assuming that no God exists.\nDavid Hume's formulation of the problem of evil in \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\" is this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[God's] power we allow [is] infinite: Whatever he wills is executed: But neither man nor any other animal are happy: Therefore he does not will their happiness. His wisdom is infinite: He is never mistaken in choosing the means to any end: But the course of nature tends not to human or animal felicity: Therefore it is not established for that purpose. Through the whole compass of human knowledge, there are no inferences more certain and infallible than these. In what respect, then, do his benevolence and mercy resemble the benevolence and mercy of men?\nTheistic arguments.\nThe problem of evil is acute for monotheistic religions such as Christianity, Islam, and Judaism that believe in a God who is omnipotent, omniscient and omnibenevolent; but the question of why evil exists has also been studied in religions that are non-theistic or polytheistic, such as Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism. Excepting the classic primary response of suffering as redemptive as not being a full theodicy, John Hick writes that theism has traditionally responded to the problem within three main categories: the common freewill theodicy, the soul making theodicy, and the newer process theology.\nCruciform theodicy.\nCruciform theodicy is not a full theodical system in the same manner that Soul-making theodicy and Process theodicy are, so it does not address all the questions of \"the origin, nature, problem, reason and end of evil.\" It is, instead, a thematic trajectory. Historically, it has been and remains the primary Christian response to the problem of evil.\nIn cruciform theodicy, God is not a distant deity. In the person of Jesus, James Cone states that a suffering individual will find that God identifies himself \"with the suffering of the world\".\nThis theodicy sees incarnation as the \"culmination of a series of things Divine love does to unite itself with material creation\" to first share in that suffering and demonstrate empathy with it, and second to recognize its value and cost by redeeming it. This view asserts that an ontological change in the underlying structure of existence has taken place through the life and death of Jesus, with its immersion in human suffering, thereby transforming suffering itself. Philosopher and Christian priest Marilyn McCord Adams offers this as a theodicy of \"redemptive suffering\" in which personal suffering becomes an aspect of Christ's \"transformative power of redemption\" in the world. In this way, personal suffering does not only have value for one's self, it becomes an aspect of redeeming others.\nFor the individual, there is an alteration in the thinking of the believer as they come to see existence in this new light. For example, \"On July 16, 1944 awaiting execution in a Nazi prison and reflecting on Christ's experience of powerlessness and pain, Dietrich Bonhoeffer penned six words that became the clarion call for the modern theological paradigm: 'Only the suffering God can help'.\"\nThis theodicy contains a special concern for the victims of the world, and stresses the importance of caring for those who suffer at the hands of injustice. Soelle says that Christ's willingness to suffer on behalf of others means that his followers must themselves serve as \"God's representatives on earth\" by struggling against evil and injustice and being willing to suffer for those on the \"underside of history\".\nAnimal suffering.\nIn response to arguments concerning natural evil and animal suffering, Christopher Southgate, a trained research biochemist and a Senior Lecturer of Theology and Religion at the University of Exeter, has developed a \"compound evolutionary theodicy.\" Southgate uses three methods of analyzing good and harm to show how they are inseparable and create each other. First, he says evil is the consequence of the existence of good: free will is a good, but the same property also causes harm. Second, good is a goal that can only be developed through processes that include harm. Third, the existence of good is inherently and constitutively inseparable from the experience of harm or suffering.\nRobert John Russell summarizes Southgate's theodicy as beginning with an assertion of the goodness of creation and all sentient creatures. Next Southgate argues that Darwinian evolution was the only way God could create such goodness. \"A universe with the sort of beauty, diversity, sentience and sophistication of creatures that the biosphere now contains\" could only come about by the natural processes of evolution. Michael Ruse points out that Richard Dawkins has made the same claim concerning evolution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Russell and Southgate, the goodness of creation is intrinsically linked to the evolutionary processes by which such goodness is achieved, and these processes, in turn, inevitably come with pain and suffering as intrinsic to them. In this scenario, natural evils are an inevitable consequence of developing life. Russell goes on to say that the physical laws that undergird biological development, such as thermodynamics, also contribute to \"what is tragic\" and \"what is glorious\" about life. \"Gravity, geology, and the specific orbit of the moon lead to the tidal patterns of the Earth's oceans and thus to both the environment in which early life evolved and in which tsunamis bring death and destruction to countless thousands of people\".\nHolmes Rolston III says nature embodies 'redemptive suffering' as exemplified by Jesus. \"The capacity to suffer through to joy is a supreme emergent and an essence of Christianity... The whole evolutionary upslope is a lesser calling of this kind\". He calls it the 'cruciform creation' where life is constantly struggling through its pain and suffering toward something higher. Rolston says that within this process, there is no real waste as life and its components are \"forever conserved, regenerated, redeemed\".\nBethany N. Sollereder, Research Fellow at the Laudato Si' Research Institute at Campion Hall, specializes in theology concerning evolution; she writes that evolving life has become increasingly complex, skilled and interdependent. As it has become more intelligent and has increased its ability to relate emotionally, the capacity to suffer has also increased. Southgate describes this using which says \"the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth\" since its beginning. He says God responds to this reality by \"co-suffering\" with \"every sentient being in creation\".\nSouthgate's theodicy rejects any 'means to an end' argument that says the evolution of any species justifies the suffering and extinction of any prior species that led to it, and he affirms that \"all creatures which have died, without their full potential having been realized, must be given fulfillment elsewhere\". Russell asserts that the only satisfactory understanding of that \"elsewhere\" is the eschatological hope that the present creation will be transformed by God into the New Creation, with its new heaven and new earth.\nCritique.\nHeaven.\nIn what Russell describes as a \"blistering attack by Wesley Wildman\" on Southgate's theodicy, Wildman asserts that \"if God really is to create a heavenly world of 'growth and change and relationality, yet no suffering', that world and not this world would be the best of all possible worlds, and a God that would not do so would be 'flagrantly morally inconsistent'.\"\nSouthgate has responded with what he calls an extension of the original argument: \"that this evolutionary environment, full as it is of both competition and decay, is the only type of creation that can give rise to creaturely selves\". That means \"our guess must be that though heaven can eternally preserve those selves subsisting in suffering-free relationship, it could not give rise to them in the first place\".\nRandomness.\nThomas F. Tracy offers a two-point critique: \"The first is the problem of purpose: can evolutionary processes, in which chance plays so prominent a role, be understood as the context of God's purposive action? The second is the problem of the pervasiveness of suffering and death in evolution\".\nAccording to John Polkinghorne, the existence of chance does not negate the power and purposes of a Creator because \"it is entirely possible that contingent processes can, in fact, lead to determined ends\". But in Polkinghorne's theology, God is not a \"Puppetmaster pulling every string\", and his purposes are therefore general. Francisco J. Ayala adds that this means \"God is not the explicit designer of each facet of evolution\". For Polkinghorne, it is sufficient theologically to assume that \"the emergence of some form of self-conscious, God-conscious being\" was an aspect of divine purpose from the beginning whether God purposed humankind specifically or not.\nPolkinghorne also links the existence of human freedom to the flexibility created by randomness in the quantum world. Richard W. Kropf asserts that free will has its origins in the \"evolutionary ramifications\" of the existence of chance as part of the process, thereby providing a \"causal connection\" between natural evil and the possibility of human freedom: one cannot exist without the other. Polkinghorne writes this means that \"there is room for independent action in order for creatures to be themselves and \"make themselves\" in evolution, which therefore makes room for suffering and death.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A world in which creatures 'make themselves' can be held to be a greater good than a ready-made world would have been, but it has an inescapable cost. Evolutionary processes will not only yield great fruitfulness, but they will also necessarily involve ragged edges and blind alleys. Genetic mutation will not only produce new forms of life, but it will also result in malignancy. One cannot have the one without the other. The existence of cancer is an anguishing fact about creation but it is not gratuitous, something that a Creator who was a bit more competent or a bit less callous could easily have avoided. It is part of the shadow side of creative process... The more science helps us to understand the processes of the world, the more we see that the good and the bad are inextricably intertwined... It is all a package deal.\nOther responses to animal suffering and natural evil.\nOthers have argued:\nFree will defense.\nThe problem of evil is sometimes explained as a consequence of free will. Free will is a source of both good and of evil, since with free will comes the potential for abuse. People with free will make their own decisions to do wrong, states Gregory Boyd, and it is they who make that choice, not God. Further, the free will argument asserts that it would be logically inconsistent for God to prevent evil by coercion because then human will would no longer be free.\nThe key assumption underlying the free-will defense is that a world containing creatures who are significantly free is innately more valuable than one containing none. The sort of virtues and values that freedom makes possible \u2013 such as trust, love, charity, sympathy, tolerance, loyalty, kindness, forgiveness and friendship \u2013 are virtues that cannot exist as they are currently known and experienced without the freedom to choose them or not choose them. Augustine offered a theodicy of freewill in the fourth century, but the contemporary version is best represented by Alvin Plantinga.\nPlantinga offers a free will defense, instead of a theodicy, that began as a response to three assertions raised by J. L. Mackie. First, Mackie asserts \"there is no possible world\" in which the \"essential\" theistic beliefs Mackie describes can all be true. Either believers retain a set of inconsistent beliefs, or believers can give up \"at least one of the 'essential propositions' of their faith\". Second, there is Mackie's statement that an all powerful God, in creating the world, could have made \"beings who would act freely, but always go right\", and third is the question of what choices would have been logically available to such a God at creation.\nPlantinga built his response beginning with Gottfried Leibniz' assertion that there were innumerable possible worlds available to God before creation. Leibniz introduced the term theodicy in his 1710 work (\"Theodicic Essays on the Benevolence of God, the Free will of man, and the Origin of Evil\") where he argued that this is the best of all possible worlds that God could have created.\nPlantinga says mankind lives in the actual world (the world God actualized), but that God could have chosen to create (actualize) any of the possibilities including those with moral good but no moral evil. The catch, Plantinga says, is that it is possible that factors within the possible worlds themselves prevented God from actualizing any of the worlds containing moral goodness and no moral evil. Plantinga refers to these factors as the nature of \"human essences\" and \"transworld depravity\".\nAcross the various possible worlds (transworld) are all the variations of possible humans, each with their own \"human essence\" (identity): core properties essential to each person that makes them who they are and distinguishes them from others. Every person is the instantiation of such an essence. This \"transworld identity\" varies in details but not in essence from world to world. This might include variations of a person (X) who always chooses right in some worlds. If somewhere, in some world, (X) ever freely chooses wrong, then the other possible worlds of only goodness could not be actualized and still leave (X) fully free. There might be numerous possible worlds which contained (X) doing only morally good things, but these would not be worlds that God could bring into being, because (X) would not be free in those worlds to make the wrong choice.\nAn all knowing God would know \"in advance\" that there are times when \"no matter what circumstances\" God places (X) in, as long as God leaves (X) free, (X) will make at least one bad choice. Plantinga terms this \"transworld depravity\". Therefore, if God wants (X) to be a part of creation, and free, then it could mean that the only option such a God would have would be to have an (X) who goes wrong at least once in a world where such wrong is possible. (X)'s free choice determined the world available for God to create.\n\"What is important about transworld depravity is that if a person suffers from it, then it wasn't within God's power to actualize any world in which that person is significantly free but does no wrong\". Plantinga extends this to all human agents noting, \"clearly it is possible that everybody suffers from transworld depravity\". This means creating a world with moral good, no moral evil, and truly free persons was not an option available to God. The only way to have a world free of moral evil would be \"by creating one without significantly free persons\".\nDiscussion.\nAccording to William Alston, most philosophers accept Plantinga's free-will defense and see the logical problem of evil as having been rebutted, but the inductive argument remains relevant. Chad Meister notes that while the logical problem of evil is widely considered to have been sufficiently rebutted, the evidential problem remains. Danial Howard-Snyder &amp; John O\u2019Leary-Hawthorne state that it was once assumed by philosophers that the problem made God and evil, but that Plantinga's arguments mean that this is no longer the case, though they remain skeptical of these arguments themselves. William L. Rowe, in referring to Plantinga's argument, has written that \"granted incompatibilism, there is a fairly compelling argument for the view that the existence of evil is logically consistent with the existence of the theistic God\". In \"Arguing About Gods\", Graham Oppy offers a dissent; while he acknowledges that \"[m]any philosophers seem to suppose that [Plantinga's free-will defense] utterly demolishes the kinds of 'logical' arguments from evil developed by Mackie\", he also says \"I am not sure this is a correct assessment of the current state of play\". Among contemporary philosophers, most discussion on the problem of evil currently revolves around the \"evidential\" problem of evil, namely that the existence of God is unlikely, rather than logically impossible.\nCritics of the free will response have questioned whether it accounts for the degree of evil seen in this world. One point in this regard is that while the value of free will may be thought sufficient to counterbalance minor evils, it is less obvious that it outweighs the negative attributes of evils such as rape and murder. Another point is that those actions of free beings which bring about evil very often diminish the freedom of those who suffer the evil; for example the murder of a young child prevents the child from ever exercising their free will. In such a case the freedom of an innocent child is pitted against the freedom of the evil-doer, it is not clear why God would remain unresponsive and passive. Christopher Southgate asserts that a freewill defense cannot stand alone as sufficient to explain the abundance of situations where humans are deprived of freewill. It requires a secondary theory.\nAnother criticism is that the potential for evil inherent in free will may be limited by means which do not impinge on that free will. God could accomplish this by making moral actions especially pleasurable, or evil action and suffering impossible by allowing free will but not allowing the ability to enact evil or impose suffering. Supporters of the free will explanation state that would then no longer be free will. Critics respond that this view seems to imply it would be similarly wrong to try to reduce suffering and evil in these ways, a position which few would advocate.\nNatural evil.\nA third challenge to the free will defence is natural evil, evil which is the result of natural causes (e.g. a child suffering from a disease, mass casualties from a volcano). Criticism of natural evil posits that even if for some reason an all-powerful and all-benevolent God tolerated evil human actions in order to allow free will, such a God would not be expected to also tolerate natural evils because they have no apparent connection to free will. Patricia A. Williams says differentiating between moral and natural evil is common but, in her view, unjustified. \"Because human beings and their choices are part of nature, all evils are natural\".\nAdvocates of the free will response propose various explanations of natural evils. Alvin Plantinga references Augustine of Hippo, writing of the possibility that natural evils could be caused by supernatural beings such as Satan. Plantinga emphasizes that it is not necessary that this be true, it is only necessary that this possibility be compatible with the argument from freewill. There are those who respond that Plantinga's freewill response might address moral evil but not natural evil. Some scholars, such as David Griffin, state that free will, or the assumption of greater good through free will, does not apply to animals. In contrast, a few scholars, while accepting that \"free will\" applies in a human context, have posited an alternative \"free creatures\" defense, stating that animals too benefit from their physical freedom though that comes with the cost of dangers they continuously face.\nThe \"free creatures\" defense has also been criticized, in the case of caged, domesticated and farmed animals who are not free and many of whom have historically experienced evil and suffering from abuse by their owners. Further, even animals and living creatures in the wild face horrendous evils and suffering\u00a0\u2013 such as burns and slow death after natural fires or other natural disasters or from predatory injuries\u00a0\u2013 and it is unclear, state Bishop and Perszyk, why an all-loving God would create such free creatures prone to intense suffering.\nProcess theodicy.\n\"Process theodicy reframes the debate on the problem of evil\" by acknowledging that, since God \"has no monopoly on power, creativity, and self-determination\", God's power and ability to influence events are, of necessity, limited by human creatures with wills of their own. This concept of limitation is one of the key aspects of process theodicy. The God of process theology had all options available before actualizing the creation that exists, and chose voluntarily to create free persons knowing the limitations that would impose: he must not unilaterally intervene and coerce a certain outcome because that would violate free will. God's will is only one factor in any situation, making that will \"variable in effectiveness\", because all God can do is try to persuade and influence the person in the best direction, and make sure that possibility is available. Through knowledge of all possibilities, this God provides \"ideal aims to help overcome [evil] in light of (a) the evil that has been suffered and (b) the range of good possibilities allowed by that past\".\nProcess theology's second key element is its stressing of the \"here and now\" presence of God. God becomes the Great Companion and Fellow-Sufferer where the future is realized hand-in-hand with the sufferer. The God of process theology is a benevolent Providence that feels a person's pain and suffering. According to Wendy Farley, \"God labors in every situation to mediate the power of compassion to suffering\" by enlisting free persons as mediators of that compassion. Freedom and power are shared, therefore, responsibility must be as well. Griffin quotes John Hick as noting that \"the stirring summons to engage on God's side in the never-ending struggle against the evils of an intractable world\" is another key characteristic of process theology.\nCritique.\nA hallmark of process theodicy is its conception of God as persuasive rather than coercive. Nancy Frankenberry asserts that this creates an either-or dichotomy \u2013 either God is persuasive or coercive \u2013 whereas lived experience has an \"irreducible ambiguity\" where it seems God can be both.\nSince the 1940s, process theodicy has also been \"dogged by the problem of 'religious adequacy' of its concept of God\" and doubts about the 'goodness' of its view of God. It has not resolved all the old questions concerning the problem of evil, while it has raised new ones concerning \"the nature of divine power, the meaning of God's goodness, and the realistic assessment of what we may reasonably hope for by way of creative advance\".\n\"Greater good\" responses.\nThe greater good defense is more often argued in response to the evidential version of the problem of evil, while the free will defense is often discussed in the context of the logical version. Some solutions propose that omnipotence does not require the ability to actualize the logically impossible. \"Greater good\" responses to the problem make use of this insight by arguing for the existence of goods of great value which God cannot actualize without also permitting evil, and thus that there are evils he cannot be expected to prevent despite being omnipotent.\nSkeptical theologians argue that, since no one can fully understand God's ultimate plan, no one can assume that evil actions do not have some sort of greater purpose.\nSkeptical theism.\n\"According to skeptical theism, if there were a god, it is likely that he would have reasons for acting that are beyond [human] ken, ... the fact that we don't see a good reason for X does not justify the conclusion that there is no good reason for X\". One standard of sufficient reason for allowing evil is by asserting that God allows an evil in order to prevent a greater evil or cause a greater good. \"Pointless evil\", then, is an evil that does not meet this standard; it is an evil God permitted where there is no outweighing good or greater evil. The existence of such pointless evils would lead to the conclusion there is no benevolent god. The skeptical theist asserts that humans can't know that such a thing as pointless evil exists, that humans as limited beings are simply \"in the dark\" concerning the big picture on how all things work together. \"The skeptical theist's skepticism affirms certain limitations to [human] knowledge with respect to the realms of value and modality\" (method). \"Thus, skeptical theism purports to undercut most \"a posteriori\" arguments against the existence of God\".\nSkeptical theism questions the first premise of William Rowe's argument: \"There exist instances of intense suffering which an omnipotent, omniscient being could have prevented without thereby losing some greater good or permitting some evil equally bad or worse\"; how can that be known? John Schellenberg's argument of divine hiddenness, and the first premise of Paul Draper's Hypothesis of Indifference, which begins \"Gratuitous evil exists\", are also susceptible to questions of how these claimed concepts can be genuinely known.\nCritique.\nSkeptical theism is criticized by Richard Swinburne on the basis that the appearance of some evils having no possible explanation is sufficient to agree there can be none, (which is also susceptible to the skeptic's response); and it is criticized on the basis that, accepting it leads to skepticism about morality itself.\nHidden reasons.\nThe hidden reasons defense asserts the logical possibility of hidden or unknown reasons for the existence of evil as not knowing the reason does not necessarily mean that the reason does not exist. This argument has been challenged with the assertion that the hidden reasons premise is as plausible as the premise that God does not exist or is not \"an almighty, all-knowing, all-benevolent, all-powerful\". Similarly, for every hidden argument that completely or partially justifies observed evils it is equally likely that there is a hidden argument that actually makes the observed evils worse than they appear without hidden arguments, or that the hidden reasons may result in additional contradictions. As such, from an inductive viewpoint hidden arguments will neutralize one another.\nA sub-variant of the \"hidden reasons\" defense is called the \"PHOG\"\u00a0\u2013 profoundly hidden outweighing goods\u00a0\u2013 defense. The PHOG defense, states Bryan Frances, not only leaves the co-existence of God and human suffering unanswered, but raises questions about why animals and other life forms have to suffer from natural evil, or from abuse (animal slaughter, animal cruelty) by some human beings, where hidden moral lessons, hidden social good, and other possible hidden reasons do not apply.\nSoul-making or Irenaean theodicy.\nThe soul-making (or Irenaean) theodicy is named after the 2nd-century Greek theologian Irenaeus whose ideas were adopted in Eastern Christianity. It has been modified and advocated in the twenty-first century by John Hick. Irenaen theodicy stands in sharp contrast to the Augustinian. For Augustine, humans were created perfect but fell, and thereafter continued to choose badly of their own freewill. In Irenaeus' view, humans were not created perfect, but instead, must strive continuously to move closer to it.\nThe key points of a soul-making theodicy begin with its metaphysical foundation: that \"(1) The purpose of God in creating the world was soul-making for rational moral agents\". (2) Humans choose their responses to the soul-making process thereby developing moral character. (3) This requires that God remain hidden, otherwise freewill would be compromised. (4) This hiddenness is created, in part, by the presence of evil in the world. (5) The distance of God makes moral freedom possible, while the existence of obstacles makes meaningful struggle possible. (6) The result of beings who complete the soul-making process is \"a good of such surpassing value\" that it justifies the means. (7) Those who complete the process will be admitted to the kingdom of God where there will be no more evil. Hick argues that, for suffering to have soul-making value, \"human effort and development must be present at every stage of existence including the afterlife\".\nC. S. Lewis developed a theodicy that began with freewill and then accounts for suffering caused by disease and natural disasters by developing a version of the soul-making theodicy. Nicholas Wolterstorff has raised challenges for Lewis's soul-making theodicy. Erik J. Wielenberg draws upon Lewis's broader corpus beyond \"The Problem of Pain\" but also, to a lesser extent, on the thought of two other contemporary proponents of the soul-making theodicy, John Hick and Trent Dougherty, in an attempt to make the case that Lewis's version of the soul-making theodicy has depth and resilience.\nCritique.\nThe Irenaean theodicy is challenged by the assertion that many evils do not promote spiritual growth, but can instead be destructive of the human spirit. Hick acknowledges that this process often fails in the actual world. Particularly egregious cases known as horrendous evils, which \"[constitute] \"prima facie\" reason to doubt whether the participant's life could (given their inclusion in it) be a great good to him/her on the whole,\" have been the focus of recent work in the problem of evil. Horrendous suffering often leads to dehumanization, and its victims become angry, bitter, vindictive, depressed and spiritually worse.\nYet, life crises are a catalyst for change that is often positive. Neurologists Bryan Kolb and Bruce Wexler indicate this has to do with the plasticity of the brain. The brain is highly plastic in childhood development, becoming less so by adulthood once development is completed. Thereafter, the brain resists change. The neurons in the brain can only make permanent changes \"when the conditions are right\" because the brain's development is dependent upon the stimulation it receives. When the brain receives the powerful stimulus that experiences like bereavement, life-threatening illness, the trauma of war and other deeply painful experiences provide, a prolonged and difficult internal struggle, where the individual completely re-examines their self-concept and perceptions of reality, reshapes neurological structures. The literature refers to \"turning points,\" \"defining moments,\" \"crucible moments,\" and \"life-changing events.\" These are experiences that form a catalyst in an individual's life so that the individual is personally transformed, often emerging with a sense of learning, strength and growth, that empowers them to pursue different paths than they otherwise would have.\nSteve Gregg acknowledges that much human suffering produces no discernible good, and that the greater good does not fully address every case. \"Nonetheless, the fact that sufferings are temporal, and are often justly punitive, corrective, sanctifying and ennobling stands as one of the important aspects of a biblical worldview that somewhat ameliorates the otherwise unanswerable problem of pain\".\nA second critique argues that, were it true that God permitted evil in order to facilitate spiritual growth, it might be reasonable to expect that evil would disproportionately befall those in poor spiritual health such as the decadent wealthy, who often seem to enjoy lives of luxury insulated from evil, whereas many of the pious are poor and well acquainted with worldly evils. Using the example of Francis of Assisi, G. K. Chesterton argues that, contrary \"to the modern mind\", wealth is condemned in Christian theology for the very reason that wealth insulates from evil and suffering, and the spiritual growth such experiences can produce. Chesterton explains that Francis pursued poverty \"as men have dug madly for gold\" because its concomitent suffering is a path to piety.\nG. Stanley Kane asserts that human character can be developed directly in constructive and nurturing loving ways, and it is unclear why God would consider or allow evil and suffering to be necessary or the preferred way to spiritual growth. Hick asserts that suffering is necessary, not only for some specific virtues, but that \"...one who has attained to goodness by meeting and eventually mastering temptation, and thus by rightly making [responsible] choices in concrete situations, is good in a richer and more valuable sense than would be one created \"ab initio\" in a state either of innocence or of virtue. In the former case, which is that of the actual moral achievements of mankind, the individual's goodness has within it the strength of temptations overcome, a stability based upon an accumulation of right choices, and a positive and responsible character that comes from the investment of costly personal effort.\"\nHowever, the virtues identified as the result of \"soul-making\" may only appear to be valuable in a world where evil and suffering already exist. A willingness to sacrifice oneself in order to save others from persecution, for example, is virtuous because persecution exists. Likewise, the willingness to donate one's meal to those who are starving is valuable because starvation exists. If persecution and starvation did not occur, there would be no reason to consider these acts virtuous. If the virtues developed through soul-making are only valuable where suffering exists, then it is not clear what would be lost if suffering did not exist. C. Robert Mesle says that such a discussion presupposes that virtues are only instrumentally valuable instead of intrinsically valuable.\nThe soul-making reconciliation of the problem of evil, states Creegan, fails to explain the need or rationale for evil inflicted on animals and resultant animal suffering, because \"there is no evidence at all that suffering improves the character of animals, or is evidence of soul-making in them\". Hick differentiates between animal and human suffering based on \"our capacity imaginatively to anticipate the future\".\nAfterlife.\nThomas Aquinas suggested the afterlife theodicy to address the problem of evil and to justify the existence of evil. The premise behind this theodicy is that the afterlife is unending, human life is short, and God allows evil and suffering in order to judge and grant everlasting heaven or hell based on human moral actions and human suffering. Aquinas says that the afterlife is the greater good that justifies the evil and suffering in current life. Christian author Randy Alcorn argues that the joys of heaven will compensate for the sufferings on earth.\nStephen Maitzen has called this the \"Heaven Swamps Everything\" theodicy, and argues that it is false because it conflates compensation and justification. This theodical view is based on the principle that under a just God, \"no innocent creature suffers misery that is not compensated by happiness at some later stage (e. g. an afterlife)\" but in the traditional view, animals don't have an afterlife.\nMaintzen's argument has been rejected by Seyyed Jaaber Mousavirad based on the strong account of the compensation theodicy. Two accounts of compensation theodicy can be proposed. Based on the weak interpretation that only considers compensation in afterlife, this criticism would be acceptable, but based on the strong account which consider both the \"compensation in afterlife\" and \"the primary benefits of evils\" (even if they are not greater), the compensation theodicy can be defended.\nExemplarist Theodicy.\nJoshua Sijuwade argues that God allows evil in the world in order to turn certain individuals into exemplars, thus letting them contribute towards goodness of our world:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God having allowed a certain class of individuals to suffer\u2014namely, the exemplary sufferers\u2014would be justified by them being presented with the opportunity to transform into exemplars, and thus make a great contribution to the world being a good world. However, God is also justified in having allowed the rest of the sentient creatures in existence\u2014namely, the nonexemplary sufferers\u2014that do not fall into the aforementioned class, to suffer (and thus their suffering experiences not being gratuitous), given that the fact of them having undergone these experiences provides them with the opportunity to be of use in enabling other individuals to undergo the process of transforming into exemplars\u2014and thus they are indirectly involved in the process of making the world a good world.\nDenial of evil.\nIn the second century, Christian theologians attempted to reconcile the problem of evil with an omnipotent, omniscient, omnibenevolent God, by denying that evil exists. Among these theologians, Clement of Alexandria offered several theodicies, of which one was called \"privation theory of evil\" which was adopted thereafter. The other is a more modern version of \"deny evil\", suggested by Christian Science, wherein the perception of evil is described as a form of illusion.\nPrivation theory of evil.\nThe early version of \"deny evil\" is called the \"privation theory of evil\", so named because it described evil as a form of \"lack, loss or privation\". One of the earliest proponents of this theory was the 2nd-century Clement of Alexandria who, according to Joseph Kelly, stated that \"since God is completely good, he could not have created evil; but if God did not create evil, then it cannot exist\". Evil, according to Clement, does not exist as a positive, but exists as a negative or as a \"lack of good\". Clement's idea was criticised for its inability to explain suffering in the world, if evil did not exist. He was also pressed by Gnostics scholars with the question as to why God did not create creatures that \"did not lack the good\". Clement attempted to answer these questions ontologically through dualism, an idea found in the Platonic school, that is by presenting two realities, one of God and Truth, another of human and perceived experience.\nThe fourth-century theologian Augustine of Hippo adopted the privation theory, and in his \"Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love\", maintained that evil exists as \"absence of the good\". God is a spiritual, (not corporeal), Being who is sovereign over other lesser beings because God created material reality \"ex nihilo\". Augustine's view of evil relies on the causal principle that every cause is superior to its effects. God is innately superior to his creation, and \"everything that God creates is good.\" Every creature is good, but \"some are better than others\". However, created beings also have tendencies toward mutability and corruption because they were created out of nothing. They are subject to the prejudices that come from personal perspective: humans care about what affects themselves, and fail to see how their privation might contribute to the common good. For Augustine, evil, when it refers to God's material creation, refers to a privation, an absence of goodness \"where goodness might have been\". Evil is not a substance that exists in its own right separately from the nature of all Being. This absence of good is an act of the will, \"a culpable rejection of the infinite bounty God offers in favor of an infinitely inferior fare\", freely chosen by the will of an individual.\nBen Page and Max Baker-Hytch observe that although there are numerous philosophers who explicitly advocate the privation theory, it also appears to be derived from a functional analysis of goodness, which is a widely embraced perspective in contemporary philosophy.\nCritique.\nThis view has been criticized as semantics: substituting a definition of evil with \"loss of good\", of \"problem of evil and suffering\" with the \"problem of loss of good and suffering\", neither addresses the issue from the theoretical point of view nor from the experiential point of view. Scholars who criticize the privation theory state that murder, rape, terror, pain and suffering are real life events for the victim, and cannot be denied as mere \"lack of good\". Augustine, states Pereira, accepted suffering exists and was aware that the privation theory was not a solution to the problem of evil.\nEvil as illusory.\nAn alternative modern version of the privation theory is by Christian Science, which asserts that evils such as suffering and disease only appear to be real, but in truth are illusions, and in reality evil does not exist. The theologians of Christian Science, states Stephen Gottschalk, posit that the Spirit is of infinite might, mortal human beings fail to grasp this and focus instead on evil and suffering that have no real existence as \"a power, person or principle opposed to God\".\nThe illusion version of privation theory theodicy has been critiqued for denying the reality of crimes, wars, terror, sickness, injury, death, suffering and pain to the victim. Further, adds Millard Erickson, the illusion argument merely shifts the problem to a new problem, as to why God would create this \"illusion\" of crimes, wars, terror, sickness, injury, death, suffering and pain; and why God does not stop this \"illusion\".\nTurning the tables.\nA different approach to the problem of evil is to turn the tables by suggesting that any argument from evil is self-refuting, in that its conclusion would necessitate the falsity of one of its premises. One response\u00a0\u2013 called the defensive response\u00a0\u2013 has been to point out that the assertion \"evil exists\" implies an ethical standard against which moral value is determined, and then to argue that the fact that such a universal standard exists at all implies the existence of God.\nPandeism.\nPandeism is a more modern theory that unites deism and pantheism, and asserts that God created the universe but during creation became the universe. In pandeism, God is no superintending, heavenly power, capable of hourly intervention into earthly affairs. No longer existing \"above,\" God \"cannot\" intervene from above and cannot be blamed for failing to do so. God, in pandeism, was omnipotent and omnibenevolent, but in the form of universe is no longer omnipotent, omnibenevolent.\nRelated issues.\nPhilip Irving Mitchell, Director of the University Honors Program at Dallas Baptist University, offers a list of what he refers to as issues that are not strictly part of the problem of evil yet are related to it:\nThe existential problem of evil.\nThe existential problem asks, in what way does the experience of suffering speak to issues of theodicy and in what way does theodicy hurt or help with the experience of suffering? Dan Allender and Tremper Longman point out that suffering creates internal questions about God that go beyond the philosophical, such as: does God, or anyone, care about what I am suffering every day?\nLiterature and the arts.\nMitchell says that literature surrounding the problem of evil offers a mixture of both universal application and particular dramatization of specific instances, fictional and non-fictional, with religious and secular views. Works such as \"Doctor Faustus\" by Christopher Marlowe; \"Paradise Lost\" by John Milton; \"An Essay on Man\" by Alexander Pope; \"Candide\" by Voltaire; \"Faust\" by Goethe; \"In Memoriam A.H.H.\" by Tennyson; \"The Brothers Karamazov\" by Fyodor Dostoevsky; \"Four Quartets\" by T. S. Eliot; \"The Plague\" by Camus; \"Night\" by Elie Wiesel; \"Holy the Firm\" and \"For the Time Being\" by Annie Dillard; and \"The Book of Sorrows\" by Walter Wangerin Jr. offer insights for how the problem of evil may be understood.\nWhile artist Cornelia van Voorst first declares that, \"artists do not think of the world in terms of good and bad, but more in terms of: What can we make of this?\", she also offers the example of Pablo Picasso's 1935 etching \"Minotauromachie\", currently at the Ashmolean Museum, where a little girl holds up her small shining light to confront and face down the evil Minotaur of war. Franziska Reiniger says art depicting the overwhelming evil of the Holocaust has become controversial. The painting of Lola Lieber-Schwarz \u2013 \"The Murder of Matilda Lieber, Her Daughters Lola and Berta, and Berta's Children Itche (Yitzhak) and Marilka, January 1942\" \u2013 depicts a family lying dead on the snowy ground outside a village with a Nazi and his dog walking away from the scene. His face is not visible. The scene is cold and dead, with only the perpetrator and maybe one of his victims, a child clinging to its mother, still remaining alive. No one knows who was there to witness this event or what their relationship to these events might have been, but the art itself is a depiction of the problem of evil.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30105", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30105", "title": "The rationality of atheism", "text": ""}
{"id": "30106", "revid": "34975998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30106", "title": "Theodicy", "text": "Theological attempt to resolve the problem of evil\nA theodicy (from Ancient Greek \u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2 \"theos\", \"god\" and \u03b4\u03af\u03ba\u03b7 \"dik\u0113\", \"justice\"), meaning 'vindication of God', is an argument in the philosophy of religion that attempts to resolve the problem of evil, which arises when all power (omnipotence) and all goodness (omnibenevolence) are attributed to God simultaneously.\nUnlike a \"defense\", which tries only to demonstrate that God and evil can logically coexist, a theodicy additionally provides a framework in which God and evil's existence are considered plausible. The German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz coined the term \"theodicy\" in his book (1710), though numerous responses to the problem of evil had previously been offered.\nSimilar to a theodicy, a \"cosmodicy\" attempts to justify the fundamental goodness of the universe, while an \"anthropodicy\" attempts similar justification of human nature.\nDefinition and etymology.\nAs defined by philosopher Alvin Plantinga, a theodicy is \"an answer to the question of why God permits evil\". In this view, theodicy is a theological construct that attempts to vindicate God in response to the problem of evil, which appears inconsistent with the existence of an omnipotent and omnibenevolent God. \nAnother definition of theodicy is the vindication of divine goodness and providence in view of the existence of evil. The word \"theodicy\" derives from the Greek words , and . is translated as 'God', and can be translated as either 'trial' or 'judgement'. Thus, \"theodicy\" literally means 'justifying God'.\nIn the \"Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", philosopher Nick Trakakis proposes three additional requirements that must be included in a theodicy:\nAs a response to the problem of evil, a theodicy is distinct from a defense. A defense attempts to demonstrate that the occurrence of evil does not contradict God's existence, but a defense does not propose that rational beings are able to understand why God permits evil. A theodicy shows that it is reasonable to believe in God despite evidence of evil in the world, and it offers a framework that can account for why evil exists. A theodicy is often based on a prior natural theology, which seeks to prove the existence of God; a theodicy seeks to demonstrate that God's existence remains probable after the problem of evil is posed, by giving a justification for God's permitting evil to occur. Defenses propose solutions to the problem of evil, while theodicies attempt to answer the question.\nPseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, a Greek philosopher and theologian, defines evil by those aspects that show an absence of good. Writers in this tradition saw things as reflecting \"forms\", so evil was a failure to reflect the appropriate form adequately\u2014as a deficit of goodness where it should have been present. In the same vein, the theologian and philosopher St. Augustine also defined evil as an absence of good; the theologian and philosopher Thomas Aquinas defined evil similarly, stating that \"a man is called \"bad\" insofar as he lacks a virtue, and an eye is called \"bad\" insofar as it lacks the power of sight.\" The issue of the bad as an absence of the good resurfaces in the work of the philosophers Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Martin Heidegger, in addition to the theologian Karl Barth. Similar views are held by the Neoplatonist philosophers, such as Plotinus and the contemporary Denis O'Brien, who state that evil is a privation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe worldview of Marxism, \"selectively elaborating Hegel\", defines evil in terms of its effect. The philosopher John Kekes states the effect of evil must include actual harm that \"interferes with the functioning of a person as a full-fledged agent\". Christian philosophers and theologians such as Richard Swinburne and N. T. Wright also define evil in terms of effect, stating that an \"act is objectively good (or bad) if it is good (or bad) in its consequences\". Hinduism defines evil in terms of its effect, saying that \"the evils that afflict people (and indeed animals) in the present life are the effects of wrongs committed in a previous life.\" Some contemporary philosophers argue that focusing on the effects of evil is inadequate for a definition, since evil can observe without actively causing harm, while remaining evil.\nThe philosopher Susan Neiman states that \"a \"crime against humanity\" is something for which we have procedures, ... [and it] can be ... fit into the rest of our experience. To call an action \"evil\" is to suggest that it cannot [be fitted in]\".\nThe philosopher Immanuel Kant was the first to offer a purely secular theory of evil, giving an evaluative definition of evil based on its cause, which is having a will that is not fully good. Kant has been an important influence on philosophers such Hannah Arendt, Claudia Card, and Richard Bernstein. \"Hannah Arendt\u00a0... uses the term ['radical evil'] to denote a new form of wrongdoing which cannot be captured by other moral concepts.\" Claudia Card says that evil is excessive wrongdoing; other philosophers such as Hillel Steiner say that evil is qualitatively, not quantitatively, distinct from mere wrongdoing.\nThe philosophers John Locke and Thomas Hobbes, in addition to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, define good and evil in terms of pleasure and pain. Others such as the philosopher Richard Swinburne find the preceding definition to be inadequate, saying that \"the good of individual humans\u00a0... consists\u00a0... in their having free will\u00a0... the ability to develop\u00a0... character\u00a0..., to show courage and loyalty, to love, to be of use, to contemplate beauty and discover truth\u00a0... All that [good]\u00a0... cannot be achieved without\u00a0... suffering along the way.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome theorists define evil by the emotions that are connected to it. \"For example, Laurence Thomas believes that evildoers take delight in causing harm or feel hatred toward their victims (Thomas 1993, 76\u201377).\" Buddhism defines various types of evil, one type being defined as behavior resulting from a failure to emotionally detach oneself from the world.\nChristian theologians generally define evil in terms of both human responsibility and the nature of God: \"If we take the essentialist view of Christian ethics\u00a0... evil is anything contrary to God's good nature\u00a0... (character or attributes).\" The Judaic view, while acknowledging the difference between the human and divine perspective on evil, is rooted in the nature of creation itself and the inherent limitations in matter's capacity to be perfected; the action of free will includes the potential for perfection from individual effort and leaves the responsibility for evil in human hands.\nAs Richard Swinburne notes, \"[It is] deeply central to the whole tradition of Christian (and other western) religion that God is loving toward his creation and that involves him behaving in morally good ways toward it.\" Within Christianity, Swinburne continues, \"God is supposed to be in some way personal\u00a0... a being who is essentially eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, Creator and sustainer of the universe, and perfectly good. An omnipotent being is one who can do anything logically possible\u00a0... such a being could not make me exist and not exist at the same time but he could eliminate the stars\u00a0... An omniscient being is one who knows everything logically possible for him to know\". Swinburne adds that \"God's perfect goodness is moral goodness.\"\nPurposes.\nTheodicies are developed to answer the question of why a good God permits the manifestation of evil, thereby resolving the problem of evil. Some theodicies also address the problem of evil \"to make the existence of an all-knowing, all-powerful, and all-good God consistent with the existence of evil or suffering in the world\".\nThe philosopher Richard Swinburne says that \"most theists need a theodicy, [they need] an account of reasons why God might allow evil to occur.\"\nAccording to the theologian Andrew Loke, theodicies might have a therapeutical use for some people, though their main purpose is to provide a sound theistic argument rather than succeed as therapy. However, theodicies do \"seek to provide hope to the sufferers that... evils can be defeated just as minor tribulations can be defeated.\"\nHistory.\nThe term \"theodicy\" was coined by the German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz in his 1710 book (\"Essays of Theodicy on the Goodness of God, the Freedom of Man and the Origin of Evil\"). Leibniz's was a response to skeptical Protestant philosopher Pierre Bayle; in his biographical dictionary , Bayle wrote that he saw no rational solution to the problem of evil, after rejecting three attempts to solve it. Bayle argued that this state of affairs must simply be accepted, because the Bible asserts the coexistence of God and evil.\nIn \"The Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1914), Constantine Kempf made the following argument: inspired by Leibniz's work, philosophers called their works on the problem of evil \"theodicies\", and philosophy focusing on God was brought under the discipline of theodicy. Kempf argued that theodicy began to include all of natural theology, meaning that theodicy came to consist of the human knowledge of God through the systematic use of reason.\nIn 1966, the British philosopher John Hick published his book \"Evil and the God of Love\", in which he surveyed various Christian responses to the problem of evil and then developed his own. In his book, Hick identified and distinguished between three types of theodicy:\nIn the dialogue \"Is God a Taoist?\", published in his book \"The Tao Is Silent (\"1977), Raymond Smullyan claims to prove that it is logically impossible to have sentient beings without allowing \"evil\", even for God\u2014just as it is impossible for God to create a triangle in the Euclidean plane having a sum of angles other than 180 degrees. Therefore, the capability of feeling implies free will, which may allow for \"evil\", understood here as hurting other sentient beings. The problem of evil happening to good or innocent people is not addressed directly in this dialogue, but both reincarnation and karma are hinted at.\nAncient religions.\nIn his book \"God and Evil\", the Jewish philosopher and theologian David Birnbaum states that \"Writings and discourses on theodicy by Jews, Greeks, Christians, and Eastern religions have graced our planet for thousands of years.\" For example, in his book \"The Search for God in Ancient Egypt\", the German scholar Jan Assman writes that theodicy was an important issue in the Middle Kingdom of Egypt (2000\u20131700 BC), as \"in Ancient Mesopotamian and Israelite literature\".\nPhilip Irving Mitchell of Dallas Baptist University notes that some philosophers have cast the pursuit of theodicy as modern, since earlier scholars used the problem of evil for other purposes\u2014to support the existence of one particular god over another, explain wisdom, or explain a conversion\u2014rather than to justify God's goodness.\nThe historian Sarah Iles Johnston argues that ancient civilizations\u2014such as the ancient Mesopotamians, Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians\u2014held polytheistic beliefs that may have enabled them to deal with the concept of theodicy differently. These religions taught the existence of many gods and goddesses, who controlled various aspects of daily life. These early religions may have avoided the question of theodicy by endowing their deities with the same flaws and jealousies that afflicted humanity. No one god or goddess was fundamentally good or evil; this teaching explained that bad things could happen to good people if they angered a deity, because the gods could exercise the same free will that humankind possesses. Such religions taught that some gods were more inclined to be helpful and benevolent, while others were more likely to be spiteful and aggressive. In this sense, the evil gods could be blamed for misfortune, while the good gods could be petitioned with prayer and sacrifices to make things right. There was still a sense of justice, in that individuals who were right with the gods could avoid punishment.\nThe Epicurean paradox, however, had already been raised c.\u2009300\u00a0BC by the philsopher Epicurus, according to the David Hume in 1779. According to Hume, this paradox describes the problem of reconciling an omnipotent deity, with its benevolence, and the existence of evil. However, if Epicurus did discuss these particular problems in the writing that Hume attributes to him, the discussion would not have been linked with the question of an omnibenevolent and omniscient God, as Hume assumes. (Hume does not cite a source or imply that he had knowledge of Epicurus's writings on this subject holding any greater weight than academic rumor or folklore.)\nBiblical theodicy.\nThe biblical account of the justification of evil and suffering in God's presence shows similarities and contrasts between the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament. For the Hebrew Bible, the Book of Job is often quoted as the authoritative source of discussion. In the introduction to his book \"The Old Testament\", the literary critic and philosopher George Steiner writes as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The author of Job seeks to expand the understanding of divine justice\u00a0... beyond mere retribution, to include a system of divine sovereignty [showing] the King has the right to test His subject's loyalty\u00a0... The book of Job corrects the rigid and overly simplistic doctrine of retribution in attributing suffering to sin and punishment. It closes with a focus on the bond between creator and creation, on placing one in that, and on hope rooted in belief that God is in ultimate control.\nIt is generally accepted that God's responsive speeches in the Book of Job do not directly answer Job's complaints. In this book, God does not attempt to justify himself or reveal the reason for Job's suffering; instead, these speeches focus on increasing Job's overall understanding of his relationship with God. This approach exemplifies Biblical theodicy. Bible scholars generally agree that the Bible \"does not admit of a singular perspective on evil\u00a0... Instead we encounter a variety of perspectives\u00a0... Consequently [the Bible focuses on] moral and spiritual remedies, not rational or logical [justifications]\u00a0... It is simply that the Bible operates within a cosmic, moral and spiritual landscape rather than within a rationalist, abstract, ontological landscape.\"\nThe view presented in the preceding paragraph is demonstrated by God's first and second speeches in the Book of Job:\nIn his book \"Strange Fire: Reading the Bible After the Holocaust\", the scholar Tod Linafelt writes that \"Isaiah is generally recognized as one of the most progressive books of the prophetic corpus.\" Christian theologians comment that in the Bible, \"suffering is understood as having transcendent meaning\u00a0... human agency can give particular instances of suffering a mystical significance that transforms it into something productive.\"\nTheodicy in the Book of Ezekiel (and in the Book Jeremiah 31:29\u201330) confronts the issue of personal moral responsibility. The book explicates the power of sin in that \"The main point is stated at the beginning and at the end\u2014'the soul that sins shall die.'\" To Christians, the \"power of sin\" was abolished in the death and resurrection of Jesus, through which all Christians were forgiven and made righteous. The main point of the Book of Ezekiel \"is explicated by a case history of a family traced through three generations\". The book is not about heredity, but rather about understanding divine justice in a world under divine governance.\nIn his book \"Thematic Threads in the Book of the Twelve\", the scholar Paul L. Redditt comments that \"Theodicy in the Minor Prophets differs little from that in Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel.\" For example, the first chapter of the Book of Habakkuk raises questions about God's justice, laments God's inaction in punishing injustice, and looks for God's action in response\u2014and then objects to what God chooses. Rather than engaging in debate, God gives Habakkuk a vision of the future that includes five oracles (or prophetic messages from God) forming a theodicy:\nIn Redditt's view, Joel and the other minor prophets demonstrate that theodicy and eschatology are connected in the Bible.\nIn the Book of Psalms, Psalm 73 presents the internal struggle created by personal suffering and the prosperity of the wicked. The writer gains perspective when he \"enters the sanctuary of God \" (Psalm 73:16\u201317), seeing that God's justice will eventually prevail. The writer reaffirms his relationship with God, is ashamed of his resentment, and chooses trust. Later in the Book of Psalms, Psalm 77 contains true outspokenness toward God, in addition to determination to hold on to faith and trust.\nJohn M. Frame and Joseph E. Torres comment on these issues in their book \"Apologetics: A Justification of Christian Belief\": For Christians, the scriptures provide assurance that the allowance of evil is for a good purpose based on relationship with God. In his book \"Providence and the Problem of Evil\", Richard Swinburne writes that \"Some of the good\u00a0... cannot be achieved without delay and suffering, and the evil of this world is indeed necessary for the achievement of those good purposes.\u00a0... God has the right to allow such evils to occur, so long as the 'goods' are facilitated and the 'evils' are limited and compensated in the way that various other Christian doctrines (of human free will, life after death, the end of the world, etc.) affirm\u00a0... the 'good states' which (according to Christian doctrine) God seeks are so good that they outweigh the accompanying evils.\"\nThe comments in the preceding paragraph are somewhat illustrated\u2014according to Christian interpretation\u2014in the Book of Exodus, when Pharaoh is described as being \"raised up\" so that God's name would be known throughout the world (Exodus 9:16). In Christian theology, this illustration is mirrored in Romans 9, where Paul appeals to God's sovereignty as sufficient explanation, with God's goodness known experientially by Christians.\nAugustinian theodicy.\nThe Protestant and Calvinist reading of Augustinian theodicy, as promoted primarily by John Hick, is based on the writings of Augustine of Hippo, a Christian philosopher and theologian who lived from AD 354 to 430. The Catholic (pre-Reformation) formulation of the same issue is substantially different, as outlined below. In Hick's approach, this form of theodicy argues that evil does not exist except as a privation\u2014or corruption\u2014of goodness, and therefore God did not create evil. Augustinian scholars have argued that God created the world perfectly, with no evil or human suffering. Evil entered the world through the disobedience of Adam and Eve, and the theodicy casts the existence of evil as a just punishment for this original sin. The theodicy argues that humans have an evil nature in as much as it is deprived of their original goodness, form, order, and measure due to the inherited original sin of Adam and Eve; nevertheless, human nature ultimately remains good due to all existence coming from God, for if nature were completely evil (deprived of the good), it would cease to exist. The theodicy maintains that God remains blameless and good.\nIn the Roman Catholic reading of Augustine, the issue of just war\u2014as developed in his book \"The City of God\"\u2014substantially established his position on the positive justification of killing, suffering, and pain as inflicted upon an enemy when encountered in war for a just cause. Augustine asserted that peacefulness\u2014in the face of a grave wrong that could only be stopped by violence\u2014would be a sin. Defense of oneself or others could be necessary, especially when authorized by a legitimate authority. While not elaborating the conditions required for war to be just, Augustine nonetheless originated the phrase \"just war\" in his work \"The City of God\". In essence, the pursuit of peace must include the option of fighting with all of its eventualities, in order to preserve peace in the long term. Such a war could not be pre-emptive but rather defensive to restore peace. Thomas Aquinas, centuries later, used the authority of Augustine's arguments in an attempt to define the conditions under which a war could be just.\nIrenaean theodicy.\nThe Greek bishop Irenaeus (died c.\u2009202), born in the early 2nd century, expressed ideas that explained the existence of evil as necessary for human development. Irenaeus argued that human creation consists of two parts: humans are made first in the image and then in the likeness of God. The image of God consists of having the potential to achieve moral perfection, whereas the likeness of God is the achievement of that perfection. To attain moral perfection, Irenaeus suggested that humans must have free will. To achieve such free will, humans must experience suffering, and God must be at an epistemic distance (a distance of knowledge) from humanity. Therefore, evil exists to allow humans to develop as moral agents. In the 20th century, John Hick collated the ideas of Irenaeus into a distinct theodicy. He argued that the world exists as a \"vale of soul-making\" (a phrase that he drew from John Keats) and that suffering and evil must therefore occur. He argued that human goodness develops through the experience of evil and suffering.\nCompensation theodicy.\nAccording to the strong version of compensation theodicy that is advanced by the Iranian philsopher Seyyed Jaaber Mousavirad, there are two elements that, when considered together, can solve the problem of evil:\nGiven the strong version of this theodicy, if evils will be compensated, the existence of some good is enough to justify them, even though there will be no resulting greater good in this world. Likewise, if evils will be compensated, it is not necessary for them to be distributed equally. Even if evil has no good for an individual, while it has some good for others, it is reasonable for it to occur.\nCritics, such as Bruce R. Reichenbach, argue that compensation theodicy fails to adequately justify the existence of horrendous evils, particularly when such evils do not lead to greater goods or when they disproportionately affect innocent individuals. He contends that the theory risks treating individuals merely as means to an end, undermining their intrinsic value.\nIn response, proponents argue that God's unique guardianship over humanity allows for the infliction of suffering when it serves a greater purpose in the afterlife. These proponenents maintain that God\u2019s omnipotence ensures that all suffering will be compensated in a manner that ultimately leads to greater satisfaction for the sufferer.\nOrigenian theodicy.\nIn direct response to John Hick's description of theodicy, the philosopher and theologian Mark Scott has indicated that neither Augustine of Hippo nor Irenaeus of Lyons provides an appropriate context for discussing Hick's theistic version of theodicy. As a theologian among the Church Fathers who articulated a theory of (or universal reconciliation), Origen of Alexandria provides a more direct theological comparison for discussing Hick's presentation of universal salvation and theodicy. Neither Irenaeus nor Augustine endorsed a theology of universal salvation in any form comparable to that of John Hick.\nRelatively minor theodicies.\nThe philosopher Michael Martin summarizes what he calls \"relatively minor\" theodicies as follows:\nA defense has been proposed by the American philosopher Alvin Plantinga, which is focused on showing the logical possibility of God's existence. Plantinga's version of the free-will defense argued that the coexistence of God and evil is not logically impossible and that free will further explains the existence of evil without contradicting the existence of God.\nIslam.\nTheodicy is discussed in Islamic theology across various schools, including the three Sunni schools\u2014Ash\u02bfarism, Maturidism, and Atharism\u2014as well as the Mu\u02bftazilite school.\nAsh\u02bfarism.\nMost Sunni theologians analyze theodicy from an anti-realist metaethical standpoint. Ash'ari theologians argue that ordinary moral judgments stem from emotion and social convention, which are inadequate to either condemn or justify divine actions. Ash'arites hold that God creates everything, including human actions, but they distinguish creation () from acquisition () of actions. Ash'arites allow individuals the latter ability, though they do not posit the existence of free will in a fuller sense of the term. In the words of Al-Shahrastani (1086\u20131153):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God creates, in man, the power, ability, choice, and will to perform an act, and man, endowed with this derived power, chooses freely one of the alternatives and intends or wills to do the action, and, corresponding to this intention, God creates and completes the action.\nAsh'ari theology insists on ultimate divine transcendence; moreover, it teaches that human knowledge regarding this transcendence is limited to what has been revealed through the prophets, so that on the question of God's creation of evil, revelation must be accepted (without asking how).\nMaturidism.\nIn contrast to Ash'arism, Maturidism adheres to moral realism\u2014the human mind is able to grasp good and evil independently from revelation\u2014yet disagrees with the Mu'tazilite assertion that God's wisdom entails creating only what is good. Good and evil, though real, are considered to be created by God; thus God is not subject to good and evil, and humans merely learn whatever God created. Blaming God for a violation of right and wrong is thus considered unmerited, since God created \"right\" and \"wrong\" originally. Whatever is considered evil by humans would ultimately be good. A distinction exists between those who follow (or monotheism) and those who reject it. Maturidi cites Surah Al Imran, verse 178, to indicate that God does not regard believers and unbelievers as equal; God would increase the sin of the sinners (and guide the believers).\nAccording to the Maturidite school of thought, ontological evil serves a greater purpose and is in essence secretly good. God's wisdom is not considered to focus on choosing between good and evil; rather, it is concerned with putting things in their proper place. The existence of evil as distinct from good (or opposing good) is rejected throughout sources from Maturidite thinkers. Maturidi himself criticizes believing in the opposition of good and evil as a remnant of Persian dualistic religions. Rumi likewise said in his refutation of \"Ahriman\" (the principle of evil) that \"good cannot exist without evil\" and \"there is no separation between them\".\nAtharism.\nThe Hanbali legal scholar Ibn Taymiyya, whose writings became influential in Wahhabism, argued as follows: while God creates human acts, humans are responsible for their deeds as the agents of their acts. Ibn Taymiyya held that divine creation is good from a causal standpoint, since God creates all things for wise purposes. Thus, apparent evil is actually good in view of its purpose, and pure evil does not exist. This analysis was developed further with practical illustrations by Ibn al-Qayyim, a scholar, jurist, and theologian.\nMu'tazilism.\nMu'tazila theologians approached the problem of theodicy within a framework of moral realism, according to which the moral value of acts is accessible to unaided reason, so that humans can make moral judgments about divine acts. These theologians argued that the divine act of creation is good despite the existence of suffering, because it allows humans the compensation of a greater reward in the afterlife. The theologians posited that individuals have free will to commit evil, and they absolved God of responsibility for such acts. God's justice thus consists of punishing wrongdoers. Following the demise of Mu'tazila as a school, its theodicy was adopted in the Zaydi and Twelver branches of Shia Islam.\nIbn Sina, the most influential Muslim philosopher, analyzed theodicy from a purely ontological, neoplatonic standpoint; he aimed to prove that God, as the absolutely good First Cause, created a good world. Ibn Sina argued that evil refers to either to a cause affecting an entity (such as being burned in a fire), in which case evil is a quality of another entity, or to an entity's imperfection (such as blindness), in which case evil does not exist as an entity. According to Ibn Sina, such qualities are necessary attributes of the best possible order of things, so that the good they serve is greater than the harm they cause.\nPhilosophical Sufi theologians such as Ibn Arabi were influenced by the neoplatonic theodicy of Ibn Sina. The scholar Al-Ghazali anticipated the optimistic theodicy of Leibniz in his dictum \"There is nothing in possibility more wonderful than what is\". The theologian and philsopher Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, who represented the mainstream Sunni view, challenged Ibn Sina's analysis and argued that it merely sidesteps the real problem of evil, which is rooted in the human experience of suffering in a world that contains more pain than pleasure.\nAlternatives.\nJewish anti-theodicy.\nIn 1998, the Jewish theologian Zachary Braiterman coined the term anti-theodicy in his book \"(God) After Auschwitz\"; the term was used to describe Jews, in both a biblical and a post-Holocaust context, whose response to the problem of evil is protest and a refusal to investigate the relationship between God and suffering. An anti-theodicy acts in opposition to a theodicy and places full blame for all experience of evil onto God, but it must rise from an individual's belief in and love of God. Anti-theodicy has been likened to Job's protests in the Book of Job. Braiterman wrote that an anti-theodicy rejects the idea that there is a meaningful relationship between God and evil, or that God could be justified for the experience of evil.\n The Holocaust prompted a reconsideration of theodicy in some Jewish circles. The French Jewish philosopher Emmanuel Levinas, who had been a prisoner of war in Nazi Germany, declared theodicy to be \"blasphemous\", arguing that it is the \"source of all immorality\"; he demanded that the project of theodicy be ended. Levinas asked whether the idea of absolutism survived after the Holocaust\u2014he proposed that it did. He argued that humans are not called to justify God in the face of evil, but to attempt to live godly lives; rather than considering whether God was present during the Holocaust, the duty of humans is to build a world where goodness will prevail.\nThe scholar David R. Blumenthal, in his book \"Facing the Abusing God\", supports the \"theology of protest\", which he saw as presented in Elie Wiesel's play \"The Trial of God\" (1979). Blumenthal supports the view that survivors of the Holocaust cannot forgive God and so must protest about it. Blumenthal believes that a similar theology is presented in the Book of Job, in which Job does not question God's existence or power, but instead his morality and justice. Other prominent voices in the Jewish tradition include the Nobel Prize-winning author Elie Wiesel (mentioned above) and Richard L. Rubinstein (especially in his book \"The Cunning of History\").\nMenachem Mendel Schneerson, the seventh Rebbe of Chabad Lubavitch (a Hasidic Jewish dynasty), sought to elucidate how faith (or trust, ) in God defines the full, transcendental preconditions of anti-theodicy. Rabbi Schneerson endorsed the attitude of \"holy protest\" found in the stories of Job and Jeremiah, as well as those of Abraham (Genesis 18) and Moses (Exodus 33); he argued that a phenomenology of protest, when carried to its logical limits, reveals a profound conviction in cosmic justice\u2014as first exemplified in Abraham's question: \"Will the Judge of the whole earth not do justice?\" (Genesis 18:25). Recalling Kant's 1791 essay on the failure of all theoretical attempts at theodicy, Rabbi Schneerson identifies a viable practical theodicy with messianism. His faithful anti-theodicy is worked out in a long letter, dated 26 April 1965, to Elie Wiesel.\nHannah Arendt offers notable resistance to this trend of anti-theodicy in her works \"The Origins of Totalitarianism\" and\u2014more sensationally\u2014in her reporting on the 1961 trial of Adolf Eichmann, which was collected in her book \"Eichmann in Jerusalem\". Without resorting to transcendental authority, purely by observation, Arendt arrives at a conclusion similar to Augustine's theodicy: She ascribes Adolf Eichmann's evil actions to a lack of empathic imagination and to the thoughtlessness of his conformity to norms of careerism within the Third Reich. She finds a thoughtlessness or total absence of consideration for other perspectives at the center of his behavior. The quality of this lack she describes as \"the banality of evil\". Arendt did not intend to propose \"the banality of evil\" as a technical term or fixed denomination by which to describe the void of empathic imagination that she observed\u2014it simply happened to be a phrase in her description that was appropriated by the reviewing press and by other scholarly responsa. Banality is only a facet or particular quality of her vantage point in looking into this emptiness.\nChristian alternatives to theodicy.\nA number of Christian writers oppose theodicies. The theologian J. Todd Billings deems constructing theodicies to be a \"destructive practice\". In the same vein, the philosopher Nick Trakakis observes that \"theodical discourse can only add to the world's evils, not remove or illuminate them\". As an alternative to theodicy, some theologians have advocated \"reflection on tragedy\" as a more appropriate reply to evil. For example, Wendy Farley believes that \"a desire for justice\" and \"anger and pity at suffering\" should replace \"theodicy's cool justifications of evil\". Sarah K. Pinnock opposes abstract theodicies that would legitimize evil and suffering. However, she endorses discussions of theodicy in which people ponder God, evil, and suffering from a perspective of practical faith .\n In an essay for The Hedgehog Review, the scholar Eugene McCarraher called David Bentley Hart's 2005 book \"The Doors of the Sea\" \"a ferocious attack on theodicy in the wake of the previous year's tsunami\" (in reference to the 2004 tsunami in the Indian Ocean). As Hart states on page 58 of the book: \"The principal task of theodicy is to explain why paradise is not a logical possibility.\" Hart's unwillingness to concede that theodicy has any positive capacity to explain the purpose of evil is consistent with many Greek church fathers. For example, in his book \"Theophany: The Neoplatonic Philosophy of Dionysius the Areopagite\", the philosopher Eric D. Perl writes as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dionysius' ...refusal to assign a cause to evil, then, marks not the failure but the success of his treatment of the problem. To explain evil, to attribute a cause to it, would necessarily be to explain it away, to deny that evil is genuinely evil at all. For to explain something is to show how it is in some way good. ...Only by not explaining evil, by insisting rather on its radical causelessness, its unintelligibility, can we take evil seriously as evil. This is why most \"theodicies\" fail precisely insofar as they succeed. To the extent that they satisfactorily account for or make sense of evil, they tacitly or expressly deny that it is evil and show that it is in fact good. Dionysius' treatment of evil, on the other hand, succeeds by failing, recognizing that the sheer negativity that is evil must be uncaused and hence inexplicable, for otherwise it would not be negativity and would not be evil. It has been wisely remarked that any satisfactory account of evil must enable us to retain our outrage at it. Most theodicies fail this test, for in supposedly allowing us to understand evil they justify it and thus take away our outrage. For Dionysius, however, evil remains outrageous precisely because it is irrational, because there is no reason, no justification for it. The privation theory of evil, expressed in a radical form by Dionysius, is not a shallow disregard or denial of the evident evils in the world. It means rather that, confronted with the evils in the world, we can only say that for no reason, and therefore outrageously, the world as we find it does not perfectly love God, the Good, the sole end of all love. And since the Good is the principle of intelligibility and hence of being, to the extent that anything fails to partake of that principle it is deficient in being. The recognition of evils in the world and in ourselves is the recognition that the world and ourselves, as we find them, are less than fully existent because we do not perfectly love God, the Good.\nThe theologian Karl Barth viewed the evil of human suffering as being ultimately under the \"control of divine providence\". Given this view, Barth deemed it impossible for humans to devise a theodicy that establishes \"the idea of the goodness of God\". For Barth, only the crucifixion could establish the goodness of God. In the crucifixion, God bears and suffers what humanity suffers. This suffering by God Himself makes human theodicies anticlimactic. Barth found a \"twofold justification\" in the crucifixion: the justification of sinful humanity and \"the justification in which God justifies Himself\".\nThe Christian Science religious movement offers a solution to the problem by denying that evil ultimately exists. Mary Baker Eddy (the founder of Christian science) and Mark Twain had contrasting views on theodicy and suffering, which are well-described by the historian Stephen Gottschalk.\nRedemptive suffering, based in Pope John Paul II's theology of the body, embraces suffering as having value in and of itself. In her book \"Wandering in Darkness\", the philosopher Eleonore Stump uses psychology, narrative, and exegesis to demonstrate that redemptive suffering, as found in Thomistic theodicy, can constitute a consistent and cogent defense for the problem of suffering.\nFree-will defense.\nAs an alternative to a theodicy, a defense may be offered as a response to the problem of evil. A defense attempts to show that God's existence is not made logically impossible by the existence of evil; God's existence does not need to be true or plausible, merely logically possible. The American philosopher Alvin Plantinga offers a free-will defense: in this argument, he claims that human free will sufficiently explains the existence of evil; at the same time, he maintains that God's existence remains logically possible. Plantinga argues that, if God's existence and the existence of evil are to be logically inconsistent, a premise must be provided which, if true, would make them inconsistent; since none has been provided, the existence of God and evil must be consistent. Free will furthers this argument by providing a premise which, in conjunction with the existence of evil, entails that God's existence remains consistent. Opponents have argued that this defense is discredited by the existence of evil not related to humans\u2014such as droughts, tsunamis, and malaria.\nIn his book, \"Evil, Sin and Christian Theism\" (2022), the theologian Andrew Loke develops a \"big picture\" free-will defense, arguing that God's justification for allowing suffering is not based primarily on an argument from future benefits, but instead on the nature of love which involves \"allowing humans to exercise their free will in morally significant ways\". Loke employs an approach in which \"Christian theism provides the big picture and uses a combination of theodicies\" in defense of a moderate version of skeptical theism. This big-picture approach, according to him, helps to put the problem of evil and suffering in a larger perspective that answers the major questions inherent in a worldview. Such questions include the following: \"What is the greatest good? What is the meaning of life? Where do I come from? Where am I going?\" Loke argues that Christian theism provides the most comprehensive and consistent answers to these questions: \"the greatest good is to have a right relationship with God, the source of all good. The meaning of life...is to live our lives for the greatest good;...to glorify God and enjoy him...\" In Loke's view, the bigger picture of a just, all-powerful, and loving God who will ultimately defeat evil serves as the backdrop against which all temporal suffering can obtain a meaningful understanding.\nCosmodicy and anthropodicy.\nA cosmodicy attempts to justify the fundamental goodness of the universe in the face of evil, and an anthropodicy attempts to justify the fundamental goodness of human nature in the face of the evils produced by humans.\nConsidering the relationship between theodicy and cosmodicy, the theologian Johannes van der Ven argued that the choice between theodicy and cosmodicy is a false dilemma. The theologian Philip E. Devenish proposed what he described as \"a nuanced view in which theodicy and cosmodicy are rendered complementary, rather than alternative concepts\". The theologian J. Matthew Ashley described the relationship between theodicy, cosmodicy and anthropodicy as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In classical terms, this is to broach the problem of theodicy: how to think about God in the face of the presence of suffering in God's creation. After God's dethronement as the subject of history, the question rebounds to the new subject of history: the human being. As a consequence, theodicy becomes anthropodicy \u2013 justifications of our faith in humanity as the subject of history, in the face of the suffering that is so inextricably woven into the history that humanity makes.\nEssential kenosis.\nEssential kenosis is a form of process theology (related to \"open theism\") that allows a person to affirm that God is almighty, while simultaneously affirming that God cannot prevent genuine evil. In this view, because God\u2014out of love\u2014necessarily gives freedom, agency, self-organization, natural processes, and law-like regularities to creation, God cannot override, withdraw, or fail to provide such capacities. Consequently, God is not culpable for failing to prevent genuine evil. The work of the philosopher Thomas Jay Oord explains this view fully.\nThe theologian Gijsbert van den Brink effectively refutes any view that holds that God has restricted his power because of his love, saying that it creates a \"metaphysical dualism\"; moreover, it would not alleviate God's responsibility for evil, because God could have prevented evil by not restricting himself. Van den Brink then elaborates an explanation of power and love from a Trinitarian perspective which equates these two qualities; he also explains what he calls \"the power of love\" as representative of God's involvement in the struggle against evil.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30107", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30107", "title": "Taiwan (island)", "text": ""}
{"id": "30108", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30108", "title": "Tajikistan", "text": "Landlocked country in Central Asia\nTajikistan, officially the Republic of Tajikistan, is a landlocked country in Central Asia. Dushanbe is its capital and most populous city. Tajikistan borders Afghanistan to the south, Uzbekistan to the west, Kyrgyzstan to the north, and China to the east and is narrowly separated from Pakistan by Afghanistan's Wakhan Corridor. It has a population of more than 10.7 million people.\nThe territory was previously home to cultures of the Neolithic and the Bronze Age, including the Oxus civilisation in west, with the Indo-Iranians arriving during the Andronovo culture. Parts of country were part of the Sogdian and Bactrian civilisations, and was ruled by those including the Achaemenids, Alexander the Great, the Greco-Bactrians, the Kushans, the Kidarites and Hephthalites, the First Turkic Khaganate, the Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphates, the Samanid Empire, the Kara-Khanids, Seljuks, Khwarazmians, the Mongols, Timurids and Khanate of Bukhara. The region was later conquered by the Russian Empire, before becoming part of the Soviet Union. Within the Soviet Union, the country's borders were drawn when it was part of Uzbekistan as an autonomous republic before becoming a constituent republic of the Soviet Union on 5 December 1929.\nOn 9 September 1991, Tajikistan declared itself an independent sovereign state as the Soviet Union was disintegrating. A civil war was fought after independence, lasting from May 1992 to June 1997. Since the end of the war, newly established political stability and foreign aid have allowed the country's economy to grow. The country has been led since 1994 by Emomali Rahmon, who heads an authoritarian regime and whose human rights record has been criticised.\nTajikistan is a presidential republic consisting of four provinces. Tajiks form the ethnic majority in the country, and their national language is Tajik. Russian is used as the official inter-ethnic language. While the state is constitutionally secular, Islam is nominally adhered to by 97.5% of the population. In the Gorno-Badakhshan oblast, there is a linguistic diversity where Rushani, Shughni, Ishkashimi, Wakhi, and Tajik are some of the languages spoken. Mountains cover more than 90% of the country. It is a developing country with a transitional economy that is dependent on remittances and on the production of aluminium and cotton. Tajikistan is a member of the United Nations, CIS, OSCE, OIC, ECO, SCO, CSTO, and a NATO PfP partner.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Tajik\" itself ultimately derives from the Middle Persian \"T\u0101z\u012bk\", the Turkic rendition of the Arabic ethnonym \"\u1e6cayyi\u2019\", denoting a Qahtanite Arab tribe who emigrated to the Transoxiana region of Central Asia in the 7th century AD. Tajikistan appeared as \"Tadjikistan\" or \"Tadzhikistan\" in English prior to 1991. This is due to a transliteration from the . In Russian, there is no single letter \"j\" to represent the phoneme , and therefore \u0434\u0436, or dzh, is used. Tadzhikistan is the alternate spelling and is used in English literature derived from Russian sources.\nWhile the Library of Congress's 1997 Country Study of Tajikistan found it difficult to definitively state the origins of the word \"Tajik\" because the term is \"embroiled in twentieth-century political disputes about whether Turkic or Iranic peoples were the original inhabitants of Central Asia,\" scholars concluded that contemporary Tajiks are the descendants of the Eastern Iranic inhabitants of Central Asia, in particular, the Sogdians and the Bactrians and possibly other groups. In later works, Richard Frye expands on the complexity of the historical origins of the Tajiks. In a 1996 publication, Frye explains that \"factors must be taken into account in explaining the evolution of the peoples whose remnants are the Tajiks in Central Asia\" and that \"the peoples of Central Asia, whether Iranic or Turkic speaking, have one culture, one religion, one set of social values and traditions with only language separating them\".\nRegarding Tajiks, the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Tajiks are the direct descendants of the Iranic peoples whose continuous presence in Central Asia and northern Afghanistan is attested from the middle of the first millennium BC. The ancestors of the Tajiks constituted the core of the ancient population of Khw\u0101rezm (Khorezm) and Bactria, which formed part of Transoxania (Sogdiana). Over the course of time, the eastern Iranic dialect that was used by the ancient Tajiks eventually gave way to Tajiki.\nHistory.\nCultures in the region have been dated back to at least the fourth millennium BC, including the Bronze Age Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex, the Andronovo cultures and the pro-urban site of Sarazm, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe earliest recorded history of the region dates back to about 500 BC when most, if not all, of Tajikistan was part of the Achaemenid Empire. Some authors have suggested that in the seventh and sixth centuries BC parts of Tajikistan, including territories in the Zeravshan valley, formed part of the Hindu Kambojas tribe before it became part of the Achaemenid Empire.\nAfter the region's conquest by Alexander the Great it became part of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, a successor state of Alexander's empire. Northern Tajikistan (the cities of Khujand and Panjakent) was part of Sogdia, a collection of city-states which was overrun by Scytho-Siberians and Yuezhi nomadic tribes around 150 BC. The Silk Road passed through the region and following the expedition of Chinese explorer Zhang Qian during the reign of Wudi (141 BC\u201387 BC) commercial relations between Han Empire and Sogdiana flourished. Sogdians played a role in facilitating trade and worked in other capacities, as farmers, carpetweavers, glassmakers, and woodcarvers.\nThe Kushan Empire, a collection of Yuezhi tribes, took control of the region in the first century AD and ruled until the fourth century AD during which time Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Manichaeism were practised in the region. Later the Hephthalite Empire, a collection of nomadic tribes, moved into the region, and the Arabs disseminated Islam in the eighth century.\nSamanid Empire.\nThe Samanid Empire, 819 to 999, restored Persian control of the region and enlarged the cities of Samarkand and Bukhara, which became the cultural centres of Iran; the region was known as Khorasan. The empire was centred in Khorasan and Transoxiana, at its greatest extent encompassing Afghanistan, parts of Iran, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, parts of Kazakhstan, and Pakistan.\nFour brothers Nuh, Ahmad, Yahya, and Ilyas founded the Samanid state. Each of them ruled territory under Abbasid suzerainty. In 892, Ismail Samani (892\u2013907) united the Samanid state under one ruler, thus putting an end to the feudal system used by the Samanids. It was under him that the Samanids became independent of Abbasid authority.\nThe Kara-Khanid Khanate conquered Transoxania (which corresponded approximately with what later would be Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, southern Kyrgyzstan, and southwest Kazakhstan) and ruled between 999 and 1211. Their arrival in Transoxania signalled a definitive shift from Iranian to Turkic predominance in Central Asia, and gradually the Kara-khanids became assimilated into the Perso-Arab Muslim culture of the region.\nIn the 13th century, the Mongol Empire swept through Central Asia, invaded the Khwarezmian Empire and sacked its cities, looting and massacring people. Turco-Mongol conqueror Tamerlane founded the Timurid Empire, becoming the first ruler of the Timurid dynasty in and around what later became Tajikistan and Central Asia.\nBukharan rule.\nWhat later became Tajikistan fell under the rule of the Khanate of Bukhara during the 16th century and, with the empire's collapse in the 18th century, it came under the rule of the Emirate of Bukhara and Khanate of Kokand. The Emirate of Bukhara remained intact until the 20th century.\nImperial Russia.\nDuring the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to conquer parts of the region. Russian Imperialism led to the Russian Empire's conquest of Central Asia during the 19th century's Imperial Era. Between 1864 and 1885, Russia gradually took control of the entire territory of Russian Turkestan, the Tajikistan portion of which had been controlled by the Emirate of Bukhara and Khanate of Kokand. Russia was interested in gaining access to a supply of cotton and in the 1870s attempted to switch cultivation in the region from grain to cotton (a strategy later copied and expanded by the Soviets).\nDuring the 19th century, the Jadidists established themselves as an Islamic social movement throughout the region. While the Jadidists were pro-modernisation and not necessarily anti-Russian, the Russians viewed the movement as a threat because the Russian Empire was predominantly Christian. Russian troops were required to restore order during uprisings against the Khanate of Kokand between 1910 and 1913. Further violence occurred in July 1916 when demonstrators attacked Russian soldiers in Khujand over the threat of forced conscription during World War I. While Russian troops brought Khujand back under control, clashes continued throughout the year in various locations in Tajikistan.\nSoviet period.\nAfter the Russian Revolution of 1917 guerrillas throughout Central Asia, known as \"basmachi\", waged a war against Bolshevik armies in an attempt to maintain independence. The Bolsheviks prevailed after a four-year war, in which mosques and villages were burned down and the population suppressed.\nBetween 1928 and 1941, Soviet authorities started an anti-religious campaign of secularisation. Practising Christianity, Islam, or Judaism was discouraged and repressed; due to the Soviet anti-religious legislation, several churches, mosques, and synagogues were closed. As a consequence of the conflict and Soviet agriculture policies, Central Asia, Tajikistan included, underwent a famine that claimed lives.\nTajikistan was first created in 1924 as the Tajik Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (abbrievated Tajik ASSR), an autonomous republic within the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic. Despite their historical status as Tajik cities and mostly being populated by Tajiks, none of the regional urban centres\u2014such as Bukhara, Samarkand, Tirmiz, Qarshi, and Khojand\u2014were included in Tajikistan. Instead, the Tajikistani capital was established in Dushanbe, a mountain town with approximately 1,000 residents.\nA specific Persian dialect, with vocabulary and pronunciation different from formal written Persian, was deliberately made the national language of Tajikistan by the Soviets and renamed \"Tajiki\" to forcibly separate it from the common variant of Persian spoken from Istanbul to Calcutta. The Tajiks were also excluded from the enormous global world of Persian literature, both past and current, by the creation of a new phonetic alphabet, first Latin-based in 1928 and later Cyrillic in 1940. With Persian confined to Tajikistan and replaced by Russian as Central Asia's common language, the unity of the Persianate world was broken, steering Soviet and post-Soviet Central Asia onto a developmental path distinct from Iran and Afghanistan. In 1929, the Tajik ASSR was elevated to its own full union republic, the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic. The Sughd Region was added to Tajikistan in the same year.\nBetween 1927 and 1934, collectivisation of agriculture and an expansion of cotton production took place, especially in the southern region. Soviet collectivization policy brought violence against farmers and peasants, classified as anti-Soviet categories of \"enemies of the people\", and forced resettlement occurred throughout Tajikistan. Consequently, some peasants fought collectivisation and revived the Basmachi movement. Some industrial development occurred during this time along with the expansion of irrigation infrastructure.\nTwo rounds of Stalin's purges (1927\u20131934 and 1937\u20131938) resulted in the expulsion of nearly 10,000 people from all levels of the Communist Party of Tajikistan. Ethnic Russians were sent in to replace those expelled and subsequently Russians dominated party positions at all levels, including the top position of first secretary. Between 1926 and 1959 the proportion of Russians among Tajikistan's population grew from less than 1% to 13%. Bobojon Ghafurov, First Secretary of the Communist Party of Tajikistan from 1946 to 1956, was the only Tajik politician of significance outside of the republic during the Soviet Era.\nTajiks began to be conscripted into the Red Army in 1939 and during World War II around 260,000 Tajik citizens fought against Nazi Germany, Finland, and the Empire of Japan. Between 60,000 (4%) and 120,000 (8%) of Tajikistan's 1,530,000 citizens were killed during World War II.\nFollowing the war and the end of Stalin's reign, attempts were made to further expand the agriculture and industry of Tajikistan. During 1957\u201358 Nikita Khrushchev's Virgin Lands Campaign focused attention on Tajikistan, where living conditions, education and industry lagged behind the other Soviet Republics. In the 1980s, Tajikistan had the lowest household saving rate in the USSR, the lowest percentage of households in the two top per capita income groups, and the lowest rate of university graduates per 1000 people.\nBy the 1980s Tajik nationalists were calling for increased rights. Real disturbances did not occur within the republic until 1990. The following year, the Soviet Union collapsed, and Tajikistan declared its independence on 9 September 1991, a day which is celebrated as the country's Independence Day.\nIndependence.\nIn February 1990, riots and strikes in Dushanbe and other cities began due to the difficult socio-economic situation, lack of housing, and youth unemployment. The nationalist and democratic opposition and supporters of independence joined the strikes and began to demand the independence of the republic and democratic reforms. Islamists began to hold strikes to demand respect for their rights and independence. The Soviet leadership introduced Internal Troops in Dushanbe to eliminate the unrest.\nFollowing independence, the nation fell into civil war among factions distinguished by clan loyalties. Regional groups from the Gharm and Gorno-Badakhshan regions of Tajikistan, led by a combination of liberal democratic reformers and Islamists, who eventually became the United Tajik Opposition, rose up against the newly formed government of President Rahmon Nabiyev, which was dominated by people from the Khujand and Kulob regions.\nThe war lasted until 1997. More than 500,000 residents fled during this time because of persecution and increased poverty, seeking better economic opportunities in the West or in other former Soviet republics. The estimated dead numbered over 100,000. Around 1.2 million people were refugees inside and outside of the country.\nEmomali Rahmon came to power in the early part of this conflict in 1992, after Nabiyev was forced at gunpoint on 7 September 1992 to resign from office. Rahmon defeated former prime minister Abdumalik Abdullajanov in a November presidential election with 58% of the vote.\nIn 1997, a ceasefire was reached between Rahmon and opposition parties under the guidance of Gerd D. Merrem, Special Representative to the Secretary General, a result praised as a successful United Nations peacekeeping initiative. The ceasefire guaranteed 30% of ministerial positions would go to the opposition. Elections were held in 1999 and were criticised by opposition parties and foreign observers as unfair; Rahmon was re-elected with 98% of the vote. Elections in 2006 were again won by Rahmon (with 79% of the vote) and he began his third term in office. Opposition parties boycotted the 2006 election and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) criticised it, while observers from the Commonwealth of Independent States claimed the elections were legal and transparent.\nRahmon's administration came under further criticism from OSCE in October 2010 for its censorship and repression of the media. OSCE claimed that the Tajik Government censored Tajik and foreign websites and instituted tax inspections on independent printing houses that led to the cessation of printing activities for a number of independent newspapers.\nRussian border troops were stationed along the Tajik\u2013Afghan border until summer 2005. Since the September 11, 2001 attacks, French troops have been stationed at Dushanbe Airport in support of air operations of NATO's International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. United States Army and Marine Corps personnel periodically visit Tajikistan to conduct joint training missions of up to several weeks' duration. The Government of India rebuilt the Ayni Air Base, a military airport located 15\u00a0km southwest of Dushanbe, at a cost of $70 million, completing the repairs in September 2010. It is the main base of the Tajikistan air force. There have been talks with Russia concerning use of the Ayni facility, and Russia continues to maintain a base on the outskirts of Dushanbe.\nIn 2010, there were concerns among Tajik officials that Islamic militarism in the east of the country was on the rise following the escape of 25 militants from a Tajik prison in August, an ambush that killed 28 Tajik soldiers in the Rasht Valley in September, and another ambush in the valley in October that killed 30 soldiers, followed by fighting outside Gharm that left three militants dead. The country's Interior Ministry insisted that the central government maintained full control over the country's east, and the military operation in the Rasht Valley was concluded in November 2010.\nFighting erupted again, this time in and around Gorno-Badakhshan, in July 2012.\nIn 2015, Russia sent more troops to Tajikistan.\nIn May 2015, Tajikistan's national security underwent a setback when Colonel Gulmurod Khalimov, commander of the special-purpose police unit (OMON) of the Interior Ministry, defected to the Islamic State. Khalimov was allegedly killed on 8 September 2017 during a Russian airstrike near Deir ez-Zor, Syria, although Tajikistan authorities express doubts whether he has died.\nIn 2021, following the Fall of Kabul, Tajikistan allegedly got involved in the Panjshir conflict against the Taliban on the side of the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan.\nIn September 2022 armed clashes, including the use of artillery, erupted along most of the border between Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.\nPolitics.\nAfter independence, Tajikistan was plunged into a civil war. Factions were supported by foreign countries including Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, Uzbekistan and Russia. Russia and Iran focused on keeping peace in the warring nation to decrease the chances of U.S. or Turkish involvement. Russia backed the pro-government faction and deployed troops from the Commonwealth of Independent States to guard the Tajikistan-Afghan border. All but 25,000 of the more than 400,000 ethnic Russians, who were mostly employed in industry, fled to Russia. By 1997, the war had ended after a peace agreement between the government and the Islamist-led opposition, and a central government began to take form, with peaceful elections in 1999.\n\"Longtime observers of Tajikistan often characterize the country as profoundly averse to risk and skeptical of promises of reform, a political passivity they trace to the country's ruinous civil war,\" Ilan Greenberg wrote in a news article in \"The New York Times\" before the country's November 2006 presidential election.\nThe parliamentary elections of 2005 aroused accusations from opposition parties and international observers that President Emomali Rahmon corruptly manipulated the election process and unemployment. Elections in February 2010 saw the ruling PDPT lose four seats in Parliament, yet still maintain a majority. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe election observers said the 2010 polling \"failed to meet many key OSCE commitments\" and that \"these elections failed on many basic democratic standards.\" The government insisted that only minor violations had occurred, which would not affect the will of the Tajik people.\nThe Tajik government has reportedly clamped down on facial hair as part of a crackdown on Islamic influence and due to its perceived associations with Islamic extremism, which is evident in bordering Afghanistan.\nThe presidential election held on 6 November 2006 was boycotted by \"mainline\" opposition parties, including the 23,000-member Islamic Renaissance Party. Four remaining opponents \"all but endorsed the incumbent\", Rahmon.\nFreedom of the press is officially guaranteed by the government, and independent press outlets remain restricted, as does an amount of web content. According to the Institute for War &amp; Peace Reporting, access to local and foreign websites is blocked, and journalists are sometimes obstructed from reporting on some events. In practice, no public criticism of the regime is tolerated and all direct protest is suppressed and denied coverage in the local media.\nIn the 2020 \"Democracy Index\" by the Economist Intelligence Unit, Tajikistan was ranked 160th, after Saudi Arabia, while receiving the designation of \"authoritarian regime\".\nIn July 2019, UN ambassadors of 37 countries, including Tajikistan, signed a joint letter to UNHRC defending China's treatment of Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region.\nIn October 2020, President Emomali Rahmon was re-elected for another seven-year term with 90% of the vote, following a largely ceremonial election.\nIn April 2021, a conflict over water with Kyrgyzstan escalated into one of the border clashes between the two countries since independence.\nIn July 2021, Tajikistan appealed to members of a Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) of ex-Soviet states for help in dealing with security challenges emerging from neighbouring Afghanistan. The safety concerns emerged as foreign troops such as the US and British army exited the country, causing over 1,000 Afghan civilians and servicemen to flee to neighbouring Tajikistan after Taliban insurgents took control of parts of Afghanistan.\nGeography.\nTajikistan is landlocked, and is the smallest nation in Central Asia by area. It lies mostly between latitudes 36\u00b0 and 41\u00b0 N, and longitudes 67\u00b0 and 75\u00b0 E. It is covered by mountains of the Pamir range, and most of the country is over above sea level. The areas of lower land are in the north (part of the Fergana Valley), and in the southern Kofarnihon and Vakhsh river valleys, which form the Amu Darya. Dushanbe is located on the southern slopes above the Kofarnihon valley.\nThe Amu Darya and Panj rivers mark the border with Afghanistan, and the glaciers in Tajikistan's mountains are the source of runoff for the Aral Sea. There are over 900 rivers in Tajikistan longer than 10 kilometres.\nAdministrative divisions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;300px\nTajikistan consists of four administrative divisions. These are the provinces (viloyat) of Sughd and Khatlon, the autonomous province of Gorno-Badakhshan (abbreviated as GBAO), and the Regions of Republican Subordination (RRP\u00a0\u2013 Raiony Respublikanskogo Podchineniya in transliteration from Russian or NTJ \u2013 \u041d\u043e\u04b3\u0438\u044f\u04b3\u043e\u0438 \u0442\u043e\u0431\u0435\u0438 \u04b7\u0443\u043c\u04b3\u0443\u0440\u04e3 [Nohiyahoi tobei jumhurii] in Tajik). Each region is divided into districts (, \"nohiya\" or \"raion\"), which in turn are subdivided into \"jamoats\" (village-level self-governing units) and then villages (\"qyshloqs\"). As of 2006[ [update]], there were 58 districts and 367 jamoats in Tajikistan.\nBiodiversity.\nTajikistan contains five terrestrial ecoregions: Alai-Western Tian Shan steppe, Gissaro-Alai open woodlands, Pamir alpine desert and tundra, Badghyz and Karabil semi-desert, and Paropamisus xeric woodlands.\nEconomy.\nIn 2019, nearly 29% of Tajikistan's GDP came from immigrant remittances (mostly from Tajiks working in Russia). With foreign revenue precariously dependent upon remittances from migrant workers overseas and exports of aluminium and cotton, the economy is vulnerable to external shocks. In fiscal year 2000, international assistance remained an essential source of support for rehabilitation programs that reintegrated former civil war combatants into the civilian economy, which helped keep the peace. International assistance was necessary to address the second year of drought that resulted in a continued shortfall of food production. On 21 August 2001, the Red Cross announced that a famine was striking Tajikistan, and called for international aid for the country. In January 2012, 680,152 of the people living in Tajikistan were living with food insecurity. Out of those, 676,852 were at risk of Phase 3 (Acute Food and Livelihoods Crisis) food insecurity, and 3,300 were at risk of Phase 4 (Humanitarian Emergency). Those with the highest risk of food insecurity were living in the Murghob District of GBAO.\nThe malnutrition rate in Tajikistan will reach 30% in 2023 according to the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP). As in the rest of Central Asia, soils are deteriorating and water resources are diminishing, particularly as a result of climate change.\nTajikistan's economy grew after the war. The GDP of Tajikistan expanded at an average rate of 9.6% over the period of 2000\u20132007 according to the World Bank data. This \"improved\" Tajikistan's position among other Central Asian countries (namely Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan), which seem to have degraded economically ever since. The primary sources of income in Tajikistan are aluminium production, cotton growing and remittances from migrant workers. Cotton accounts for 60% of agricultural output, supporting 75% of the rural population, and using 45% of irrigated arable land. The aluminium industry is represented by the state-owned Tajik Aluminum Company \u2013 the biggest aluminium plant in Central Asia and one of the biggest in the world.\nTajikistan's rivers, such as the Vakhsh and the Panj, have hydropower potential, and the government has focused on attracting investment for projects for internal use and electricity exports. Tajikistan is home to the Nurek Dam, the second highest dam in the world. Russia's RAO UES has been working on the Sangtuda-1 hydroelectric power station (670\u00a0MW capacity) which commenced operations on 18 January 2008. Other projects at the development stage include Sangtuda-2 by Iran, Zerafshan by the Chinese company SinoHydro, and the Rogun power plant that, at a projected height of , would supersede the Nurek Dam as highest in the world if it is brought to completion. A planned project, CASA-1000, will transmit 1000 MW of surplus electricity from Tajikistan to Pakistan with power transit through Afghanistan. The total length of transmission line is 750\u00a0km while the project is planned to be on Public-Private Partnership basis with the support of WB, IFC, ADB and IDB. The project cost is estimated to be around US$865 million. Other energy resources include coal deposits and smaller reserves of natural gas and petroleum.\nIn 2014 Tajikistan was the world's most remittance-dependent economy with remittances accounting for 49% of GDP and expected to fall by 40% in 2015 due to the economic crisis in the Russian Federation. Tajik migrant workers abroad, mainly in the Russian Federation, have become the main source of income for millions of Tajikistan's people and with the 2014\u20132015 downturn in the Russian economy the World Bank warned that numbers of Tajik men would return home and face \"few\" economic prospects.\nAccording to some estimates about 47% of the population lives on less than US$1.25 per day. Migration from Tajikistan and the consequent remittances have been unprecedented in their magnitude and economic impact. In 2010, remittances from Tajik labour migrants totalled an estimated $2.1 billion US dollars, an increase from 2009. Tajikistan has achieved transition from a planned to a market economy without \"substantial and protracted\" recourse to aid, and by purely market-based means, simply by exporting its main commodity of comparative advantage\u00a0\u2014 cheap labour. The World Bank Tajikistan Policy Note 2006 concludes that remittances have played a role as one of the drivers of Tajikistan's economic growth during the past years, have increased incomes, and as a result helped reduce poverty.\nDrug trafficking is an illegal source of income in Tajikistan as it is a transit country for Afghan narcotics bound for Russian and, to a lesser extent, Western European markets; some opium poppy is raised locally for the domestic market. With the increasing assistance from international organisations, such as UNODC, and co-operation with the US, Russian, EU and Afghan authorities a level of progress on the fight against illegal drug-trafficking is being achieved. Tajikistan holds third place in the world for heroin and raw opium confiscations (1216.3\u00a0kg of heroin and 267.8\u00a0kg of raw opium in the first half of 2006). Drug money corrupts the country's government; according to some experts the personalities that fought on both sides of the civil war and have held the positions in the government after the armistice was signed are involved in the drug trade. UNODC is working with Tajikistan to strengthen border crossings, provide training, and set up joint interdiction teams. It helped to establish Tajikistani Drug Control Agency.\nBesides Russia, China is one of the economic and trade partners of Dushanbe. Tajikistan belongs to the group of countries associated with Chinese investment within the Belt and Road Initiative.\nTransportation.\nAs a landlocked country, Tajikistan has no ports and the majority of transportation is via roads, air, and rail. Over the years Tajikistan has pursued agreements with Iran and Pakistan to gain port access in those countries via Afghanistan. In 2009, an agreement was made between Tajikistan, Pakistan, and Afghanistan to improve and build a highway and rail system connecting the three countries to Pakistan's ports. The proposed route would go through the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province in the eastern part of the country. In 2012, the presidents of Tajikistan, Afghanistan, and Iran signed an agreement to construct roads and railways, and oil, gas, and water pipelines to connect the three countries.\nRail.\nThe railroad system totals only of track, all of it broad gauge. The principal segments are in the southern region and connect the capital with the industrial areas of the Hisor and Vakhsh valleys and with Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Russia. Most international freight traffic is carried by train. The Bokhtar\u2013Kulob railway connected the Kulob District with the central area of the country.\nAir.\nIn 2009 Tajikistan had 26 airports, 18 of which had paved runways, of which two had runways longer than 3,000 meters.\nRoads.\nThe total length of roads in the country is 27,800 kilometres. Automobiles account for more than 90% of the total volume of passenger transportation and more than 80% of domestic freight transportation.\nIn 2004 the Tajik\u2013Afghan Friendship Bridge between Afghanistan and Tajikistan was built, improving the country's access to South Asia. The bridge was built by the United States.\nAs of 2014[ [update]] highway and tunnel construction projects are underway or have been completed. Projects include rehabilitation of the Dushanbe \u2013 Chanak (Uzbek border), Dushanbe \u2013 Kulma (Chinese border), and Kurgan-Tube \u2013 Nizhny Pyanj (Afghan border) highways, and construction of tunnels under the mountain passes of Anzob, Shakhristan, Shar-Shar and Chormaghzak. These were supported by international donor countries.\nDemographics.\nIn 2023, Tajikistan was estimated to have a population of 10,389,799 as per the World Bank data. The Tajiks who speak Tajik are the main ethnic group, while there are minorities of Uzbeks and Russians, whose numbers are declining due to emigration; this makes Tajikistan the only country in Central Asia to have a minority of Turkic people, and instead a majority of Iranic people. The Pamiris of Badakhshan, a population of Yaghnobi people, and a minority of Ismailis are considered to belong to the larger group of Tajiks. Citizens of Tajikistan are called Tajikistanis.\nIn 1989, ethnic Russians in Tajikistan made up 7.6% of the population; by 1998 the proportion had reduced to approximately 0.5% following the Tajikistani Civil War which had displaced the majority of ethnic Russians. Following the end of the war, Russian emigration continued. The ethnic German population of Tajikistan has declined due to emigration: having topped at 38,853 in 1979, it has \"almost vanished\" since the collapse of the Soviet Union.\nThe Tajiks are the principal ethnic group in most of Tajikistan, and in northern and western Afghanistan; there are more Tajiks in Afghanistan than in Tajikistan. Tajiks are a minority in Uzbekistan. About 2.4 million Tajik citizens were officially registered in Russia in 2021.\nLanguages.\nThe official languages of Tajikistan are Tajik as the state language and Russian as the interethnic language, as understood in Article 2 of the Constitution: \"The state language of Tajikistan shall be Tajik. Russian shall be the language of international communication.\"\nThe state (national) language (, ) of the Republic of Tajikistan is Tajik, which is written in the Tajik Cyrillic alphabet. Millions of native Tajik speakers live in neighbouring Uzbekistan and in Russia.\nAccording to article 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan, Russian is recognised as the second official language of Tajikistan; the official language of inter-ethnic communication (; ) in the country.&lt;ref name=\"lenta.ru/news/2011/06/09\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nApproximately 90% of the population of Tajikistan speaks Russian at varying levels. The varieties of Russian spoken in Tajikistan are referred to by scholars as \"Tajik(istani) Russian\" and it shares some similarities with \"Uzbek(istani) Russian\", such as morphological differences and lexical differences such as the use of word \"\u0443\u0440\u044e\u043a\" for a wild apricot or \"\u043a\u0438\u0441\u043b\u0443\u0448\u043a\u0430\" for rhubarb.\nBoth Russian and Tajik speakers in the country use the following words in common in addressing unfamiliar people and acquaintances.\nThe \"highly educated\" part of the population of Tajikistan, and the intelligentsia, prefer to speak Russian and Persian, the pronunciation of which in Tajikistan is called the \"Iranian style\".&lt;ref name=\"RFE/RL\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nNative Uzbek speakers live in the north and west of Tajikistan. In fourth place (after Tajik, Russian and Uzbek) by number of native speakers are Pamir languages, whose native speakers live in Kuhistani Badakshshan Autonomous Region. The majority of Zoroastrians in Tajikistan speak one of the Pamir languages. Native speakers of the Kyrgyz language live in the north of Kuhistani Badakshshan Autonomous Region. Yagnobi language speakers live in the west of the country. The Parya language of local Romani people () is spoken in Tajikistan. Tajikistan has communities of native speakers of Persian, Arabic, Pashto, Armenian, Azerbaijani, Tatar, Turkmen, Kazakh, Chinese, and Ukrainian.\nEmployment.\nIn 2009 nearly 1 million Tajiks worked abroad (mainly in Russia). More than 70% of the female population lives in traditional villages.\nReligion.\nTajikistan is a secular state with a constitution providing for freedom of religion, but nevertheless it heavily regulates the practices of its Muslim majority. Sunni Islam of the Hanafi school has been officially recognised by the government since 2009. The government has declared two Islamic holidays, Eid ul-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, as state holidays. According to a US State Department release and Pew research group, the population of Tajikistan is 98% Muslim. Approximately 87\u201395% of them are Sunni and roughly 3% are Shia and roughly 7% are non-denominational Muslims. The Shia part of the population predominantly live in the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region and are followers of the Ismailite branch of Shia Islam. The remaining 2% of the population are followers of Russian Orthodoxy, Protestantism, Zoroastrianism and Buddhism. Muslims fast during Ramadan, while about one third in the countryside and 10% in the cities observe daily prayer and dietary restrictions.\nAs of January 2016, as part of an \"anti-radicalisation campaign\", police in the Khatlon region reportedly shaved the beards of 13,000 men and shut down 160 shops selling the hijab. Shaving beards and discouraging women from wearing hijabs is part of a government campaign targeting trends that are deemed \"alien and inconsistent with Tajik culture\", and \"to preserve secular traditions\".\nThere is a concern for religious institutions becoming active in the political sphere. The Islamic Renaissance Party (IRP), a combatant in the 1992\u20131997 Civil War and then-proponent of the creation of an Islamic state in Tajikistan, constitutes no more than 30% of the government by statute. Membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir, a militant Islamic party which aims for an overthrow of secular governments and the unification of Tajiks under one Islamic state, is illegal and members are subject to arrest and imprisonment.\nBy law, religious communities must register by the State Committee on Religious Affairs (SCRA) and with local authorities. Registration with SCRA requires a charter, a list of 10 or more members, and evidence of local government approval prayer site location. Religious groups that do not have a physical structure are not allowed to gather publicly for prayer. Failure to register can result in fines and closure of a place of worship. There are reports that registration on the local level is sometimes difficult to obtain. People under the age of 18 are barred from public religious practice.\nApproximately 1.6% of the population in Tajikistan is Christian, mostly Orthodox Christians. The territory of Tajikistan is part of the of the of the Russian Orthodox Moscow Patriarchate. The country is home to communities of Catholics, Armenian Christians, Protestants, Lutherans, Jehovah's Witnesses, Baptists, Mormons, and Adventists.\nBukharan Jews had lived in Tajikistan since the second century BC. In the 1940s, the Jewish community of Tajikistan numbered nearly 30,000 people. Most were Persian-speaking Bukharan Jews who had lived in the region for millennia along with Ashkenazi Jews from Eastern Europe who resettled there in the Soviet era. As of 2011, the Jewish population was estimated at less than 500, with roughly half living in Dushanbe.\nHealth.\nThe state's Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare reported that 104,272 disabled people are registered in Tajikistan (2000). The government of Tajikistan and the World Bank considered activities to support this part of the population described in the World Bank's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Public expenditure on health was at 1% of the GDP in 2004.\nLife expectancy at birth was estimated to be 69 years in 2020. The infant mortality rate was approximately 30.42 deaths per 1,000 children in 2018. In 2014, there were 2.1 physicians per 1,000 people, higher than any other low-income country after North Korea.\nTajikistan has experienced a decrease in per capita hospital beds since 1992 following the dissolution of the USSR, while the number remains at 4.8 beds per 1,000 people, above the world average of 2.7.\nAccording to the World Bank, 96% of births are attended by skilled health staff, rising from 66.6% in 1999.\nIn 2010, the country experienced an outbreak of polio that caused more than 457 cases of polio in both children and adults and resulted in 29 deaths before being brought under control.\nIn the summer of 2021, coronavirus ravaged the country, and the Tajik president's sister reportedly died in a hospital of COVID-19. According to local media, the president's sister's sons physically assaulted the health minister and a senior doctor.\nIn 2023, according to the World Health Organization, Tajikistan received its certification, declaring its status as a malaria-free country.\nEducation.\nAn estimated 99.8% of the population of Tajikistan have the ability to read and write.\nPublic education in Tajikistan consists of 11 years of primary and secondary education and the government planned to implement a 12-year system in 2016. There are a number of tertiary education institutions including Khujand State University, which has 76 departments in 15 faculties, Tajikistan State University of Law, Business, &amp; Politics, Khorugh State University, Agricultural University of Tajikistan, Tajik National University, and other institutions. Universities were established during the Soviet Era. As of 2008[ [update]] tertiary education enrollment was 17%, below the sub-regional average of 37%, while higher than any other low-income country after Syria. Tajiks left the education system due to \"low\" demand in the labour market for people with \"extensive\" educational training or professional skills.\nPublic spending on education was relatively constant between 2005\u20132012 and fluctuated from 3.5% to 4.1% of GDP below the OECD average of 6%. The United Nations reported that the level of spending was \"severely inadequate to meet the requirements of the country's high-needs education system.\"\nAccording to a UNICEF-supported survey, about 25% of girls in Tajikistan fail to complete compulsory primary education because of poverty and gender bias, while literacy is \"generally high\" in Tajikistan. Estimates of out of school children range from 4.6% to 19.4% with the majority being girls.\nIn September 2017, the University of Central Asia launched its second campus in Khorog, Tajikistan, offering majors in Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences and Economics. Tajikistan was ranked 108th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nScience in the territory of Tajikistan achieved \"success\" in the Middle Ages, and scientific organisations were created in the Soviet period. During the period of independence, the scientific sphere has experienced a \"crisis\": the annual number of patent applications for inventions decreased in 1994\u20132011 from 193 to 5. A contribution to science is made by universities, where in 2011 6707 researchers worked, of which 2450 had academic degrees.\nCulture.\nThe Tajik language is the mother tongue of around 80% of the citizens of Tajikistan. Urban centres in Tajikistan include Dushanbe (the capital), Khujand, Kulob, Panjakent, Bokhtar, Khorugh and Istaravshan. There are Uzbek, Kyrgyz and Russian minorities.\nThe Yaghnobi people live in areas of northern Tajikistan. The estimated number of Yaghnobis is about 25,000. Forced migrations in the 20th century decimated their numbers. They speak the Yaghnobi language, which is the only direct descendant of the Sogdian language.\nTajikistan artisans created the Dushanbe Tea House, which was presented in 1988 as a gift to the sister city of Boulder, Colorado.\nIn the country, especially among women from the indigenous population, the wearing of traditional national clothing is preserved. The seamstresses and embroiderers of regions of Tajikistan use factory fabrics and local needlework embroidery for home decoration and women's clothing. The practice of Chakan embroidery is preserved among women in certain areas, passing the knowledge down from one generation to the next.\nSport.\nThe national sport of Tajikistan is gushtigiri, a form of wrestling.\nAnother sport is buzkashi, a game played on horseback, like polo. Buzkashi may be played as an individual sport and as a team sport. The aim of the game is to grab a 50\u00a0kg dead goat, ride clear of the other players, get back to the starting point and drop it in a designated circle. It is played at Nowruz celebrations.\nTajikistan has sent athletes to every Summer Olympic Games and four Winter Olympic Games since gaining independence and has enjoyed limited success. The country's best results have come in the hammer throw, with Andrey Abduvaliyev and Dilshod Nazarov each winning gold in the men's event in 1992 and 2016 respectively (albeit with Abduvaliyev participating as part of the Unified Team). Tajikistan's highest medal haul at an Olympic Games came in the 2024 Summer Olympics, where its athletes won three medals.\nThe Tajikistan Football Federation is the governing body of football in Tajikistan. While neither the men's nor the women's teams have qualified for a World Cup, the men's side qualified for the 2023 AFC Asian Cup, in which they unexpectedly reached the quarter finals. The men's team participated in the AFC Challenge Cup on four occasions, winning the inaugural edition in 2006. The women's side has twice participated in the CAFA Women's Championship, finishing third in the 2018 edition and hosting the tournament in 2022.\nThe Tajikistan Cricket Federation was formed in 2012 as the governing body for the sport of cricket in Tajikistan. It was granted affiliate membership of the Asian Cricket Council in the same year.\nIn 2008, rugby union was officially registered with the Ministry of Justice, and there are three men's clubs.\nKhorugh, capital of Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region, is the location of highest altitude where bandy has been played.\nTajikistan has one ski resort, called Safed Dara (formerly \"Takob\"), near the town of Varzob.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30109", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30109", "title": "History of Tajikistan", "text": "The Tajik people came under Russian rule in the 1860s. The Basmachi revolt broke out in the wake of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and was quelled in the early 1920s during the Russian Civil War. In 1924, Tajikistan became an Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic of the Soviet Union, the Tajik ASSR, within Uzbekistan. In 1929, Tajikistan was made one of the component republics of the Soviet Union \u2013 Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic (Tajik SSR) \u2013 and it kept that status until gaining independence 1991 after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.\nIt has since experienced three changes in government and the Tajikistani Civil War. A peace agreement among rival factions was signed in 1997.\nAntiquity (600 BC \u2013 710 AD).\nTajikistan was bordered on the north by the Scytho-Siberian world in Ancient times. Sogdiana, Bactria, Merv and Khorezm were the four principal divisions of Ancient Central Asia inhabited by the ancestors of the present-day Tajikistani Tajiks. Tajiks are now found only in historic Bactria and Sogdiana. Merv is inhabited by the Turkoman and Khorezm by Uzbeks and Kazakhs. Sogdiana was made up of the Zeravshan and Kashka-Darya river valleys. Currently, two of the surviving peoples of Sogdiana who speak a dialect of the Sogdian language are the Yaghnobis and Shugnanis.\nTajikistan was part of the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex in the Bronze Age, candidate for Proto-Indo-Iranian or Proto-Iranian culture. Bactria was located in northern Afghanistan (present-day Afghan Turkestan) between the mountain range of the Hindu Kush and the Amu Darya (Oxus) River and some areas of current south Tajikistan. During different periods, Bactria was a center of various Kingdoms or Empires, and is probably where Zoroastrianism originated. The \"Avesta\"\u2014the holy book of Zoroastrianism\u2014was written in the old-Bactrian dialect; it is also thought that Zoroaster was most likely born in Bactria.\nSome authors have also suggested that in the 7th and 6th century BCE parts of modern Tajikistan, including territories in the Zeravshan valley, formed part of Kambojas, which were referenced in the Mahabharata epic as the Parama Kamboja, before it became part of the Achaemenid Empire.Linguistic evidence, combined with ancient literary and inscriptional evidence suggests the Kambojas originally emigrated from Central Asia.\nAchaemenid Period (550 BC \u2013 329 BC).\nDuring the Achaemenid period, Sogdiana and Bactria were part of the Achaemenid Empire. Sogdians and Bactrians occupied important positions in the administration and military of the Achaemenid Empire.\nHellenistic Period (329 BC \u2013 90 BC).\nAfter the Achaemenid Empire was defeated by Alexander the Great, Bactria, Sogdiana and Merv, being part of Persian Empire, had to defend themselves from new invaders. In fact, the Macedonians faced very stiff resistance under the leadership of Sogdian ruler Spitamenes. Alexander the Great managed to marry Roxana, the daughter of a local ruler, and inherited his land. Following Alexander's brief occupation, the Hellenistic successor states of the Seleucids and Greco-Bactrians controlled the area for another 200 years in what is known as the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. During the time period from 90 BC to 30 BC, Yuezhi destroyed the last Hellenistic successor states and, together with the Tokhari, (to whom they were closely related) created a Kushan Empire around 30 AD.\nKushan Empire (30 BC \u2013 410 AD).\nFor another 400 years, until 410 AD, the Kushan Empire was a major power in the region along with the Roman Empire, the Parthian Empire and Han China. Notable contact was made with local peoples when the envoys of the Han dynasty journeyed to this area in the 2nd century BC. At the end of the Kushan period, the Empire became much smaller and would have to defend itself from the powerful Sassanid Empire that replaced the Parthian Empire. The famous Kushan king Kanishka promoted Buddhism and during this time Buddhism was exported from Central Asia to China.\nThe Sassanids, Hephthalites, and Gokturks (224\u2013710).\nThe Sassanids once controlled much of what is now Tajikistan, but lost the territory to the Hephthalites (possibly also of Iranian descent) during the time of Peroz I.\nThey created a powerful empire that succeeded in making Iran a tributary state around 483\u2013485. Shah of Persia Peroz fought three wars with Hephthalites. During the first war he was captured by Hephthalite army and later was released after Byzantine emperor paid a ransom for him. During the second war Peroz was captured again and was released after paying a huge contribution to the Hephthalite king. During the third war Peroz was killed. The Hephthalites were subjugated in 565 by a combination of Sassanid and K\u00f6k-Turk forces. Subsequently, present Tajikistan was ruled by G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and Sassanids, however when the Sassanid Empire fell the Turks kept control of Tajikistan but they later lost it to the Tang dynasty, however, they later managed to take control of Tajikistan once again, only to lose it to the Arabs in 710.\nMedieval history (710\u20131506).\nArab Caliphate (710\u2013867).\nThe Transoxiana principalities never formed a viable confederacy. Beginning in 651, the Arabs organized periodic marauding raids deep into the territory of Transoxania, but it was not until the appointment of Ibn Qutaiba as Governor of Khorasan in 705, during the reign of Walid I, that the Caliphate adopted the policy of annexing the lands beyond the Oxus. In 715, the task of annexation was accomplished. The entire region thus came under the control of the Caliph and of Islam, but the Arabs continued to rule through local Soghdian Kings and \"dihqans\". The ascension of the Abbasids to rule the Caliphate (750\u20131258) opened a new era in the history of Central Asia. While their predecessors the Umayyads (661\u2013750) were little more than leaders of a loose confederation of Arab tribes, the Abbasids set out to build a huge multi-ethnic centralized state that would emulate and perfect the Sassanian government machine. They gave the Near East and Transoxiana a unity, which they had been lacking since the time of Alexander the Great.\nSamanid Empire (819\u2013999).\nThe Samanid dynasty ruled (819\u20131005) in Khorasan (including Eastern Iran and Transoxiana) and was founded by Saman Khuda. The Samanids were one of the first purely indigenous dynasties to rule in Persia after the Muslim Arab conquest. During the reign (892\u2013907) of Saman Khuda's great-grandson, Ismail I (known as Ismail Samani), Samanids expanded in Khorasan. In 900, Ismail defeated the Saffarids in Khorasan (area of current Northwest Afghanistan and northeastern Iran), while his brother was the governor of Transoxiana. Thus, Samanid rule was acclaimed over the combined regions. The cities of Bukhara (the Samanid capital) and Samarkand became centres of art, science, and literature; industries included pottery making and bronze casting. After 950, Samanid power weakened, but was briefly revitalized under Nuh II, who ruled from 976 to 997. However, with the oncoming encroachment of Muslim Turks, the Samanids lost their domains south of the Oxus river which were taken by Ghaznavids. In 999, Bukhara was taken by the Qarakhanids. The Samanid Isma'il Muntasir (died 1005) tried to restore the dynasty (1000\u20131005), until he was assassinated by an Arab bedouin chieftain.\nThe attack of the Qarakhanid Turks ended the Samanid dynasty in 999 and dominance in Transoxiana passed on to Turkic rulers.\nQarakhanids (999\u20131211) and Khwarezmshahs (1211\u20131218).\nAfter the collapse of Samanid Dynasty, Central Asia became the battleground of many Asian invaders who came from the north-east.\nMongol rule (1218\u20131370).\nThe Mongol Empire swept through Central Asia, invaded Khwarezmian Empire and sacked the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand, looting and massacring people everywhere.\nTimurid Empire (1370\u20131506).\nTimur, founder of the Timurid Empire, was born on 8 April 1336 in Kesh near Samarkand. He was a member of the Turkicized Barlas tribe, a Mongol subgroup that had settled in Transoxiana after taking part in Genghis Khan's son Chagatai's campaigns in that region. Timur began his life as a bandit leader. During this period, he received an arrow-wound in the leg, as a result of which he was nicknamed Timur-e Lang (in Dari) or Timur the Lame. Although the last Timurid ruler of Herat, Badi az Zaman finally fell to the armies of the Uzbek Muhammad Shaibani Khan in 1506, the Timurid ruler of Ferghana, Zahir-ud-Din Babur, survived the collapse of the dynasty and re-established the Timurid dynasty in India in 1526 where they became known as the Mughals.\nEarly modern history (1506\u20131868).\nTurkic rule (1506\u20131598).\nThe Shaybanid state was divided into appanages between all male members (sultans) of the dynasty, who would designate the supreme ruler (Khan), the oldest member of clan. The seat of Khan was first Samarkand, the capital of the Timurids, but some of the Khans preferred to remain in their former appanages. Thus, Bukhara became the seat of the khan for the first time under Ubaid Allah Khan (r. 1533\u20131539).\nThe period of political expansion and economical prosperity was short-lived. Soon after the death of Abdullah Khan II the Shaibanid dynasty died out and was replaced by the Janid or Astrakhanid (Ashtarkhanid) dynasty, another branch of the descendants of J\u00f6chi, whose founder Jani Khan was related to Abdullah Khan II Through his marriage to Abdullah Khan's Sister. The Astrakhanids are also said to be connected to the Hashemites due to Imam Quli Khan's status as a Sayyid. Their descendants today live in India. In 1709, eastern part of Khanate of Bukhara seceded and formed Khanate of Kokand. Thus, the eastern part of present Tajikistan passed to the Khanate of Kokand, while the western one remained part of the Khanate of Bukhara.\nIranian and Turkic Bukharan rule (1740\u20131868).\nIn 1740, the Janid khanate was conquered by Nader Shah, the Afsharid ruler of Iran. The Janid khan Abu al Faiz retained his throne, becoming Nadir's vassal.\nAfter the death of Nader Shah in 1747, the chief of the Manghit tribe, Muhammad Rahim Biy Azaliq, overcame his rivals from other tribes and consolidated his rule in the Khanate of Bukhara. His successor, however, ruled in the name of puppet khans of Janid origin. In 1785 Shah Murad formalized the family's dynastic rule (Manghit dynasty), and the khanate became the Emirate of Bukhara\nRussian and Soviet rule (1868\u20131991).\nRussian vassalage (1868\u20131920).\nRussian Imperialism led to the Russian Empire's conquest of Central Asia during the late 19th century's Imperial Era. Between 1864 and 1885 Russia gradually took control of the entire territory of Russian Turkestan, the Tajikistan portion of which had been controlled by the Emirate of Bukhara and Khanate of Kokand ( from today's border with Kazakhstan in the north to the Caspian Sea in the west and the border with Afghanistan in the south). Tashkent was conquered in 1865 and in 1867 the Turkestan Governor-Generalship was created with Konstantin Petrovich Von Kaufman as the first Governor-General.\nThe expansion was motivated by Russia's economic interests and was connected with the American Civil War in the early 1860s, which severely interrupted the supply of cotton fiber to the Russian industry and forced Russia to turn to Central Asia as an alternative source of cotton supply as well as a market for Russian made goods. The Russian regime in the 1870s attempted to switch cultivation in the region from grain to cotton (a strategy later copied and expanded by the Soviets). By 1885 Tajikistan's territory was either ruled by the Russian Empire or its vassal state, the Emirate of Bukhara, nevertheless Tajiks felt little Russian influence.\nRussian Empire, being a much bigger state with a huge population and having an advanced military, had little difficulty in conquering the regions inhabited by Tajiks, meeting fierce resistance only at Jizzakh, Ura-Tyube, and when their garrison in Samarkand was besieged in 1868 by forces from Shahr-e Sabz and the inhabitants of the city. The army of the Emirate of Bukhara was utterly defeated in three battles, and on 18 June 1868 Emir Mozaffar al-Din (r. 1860\u20131885) signed a peace treaty with the Governor-General of Russian Turkestan Von Kaufman. Samarkand and the Upper Zeravshan were annexed by Russia and the country was opened to Russian merchants. The emir retained his throne as a vassal of Russia and with Russian help he established control over Shahr-e Sabz, the mountainous regions in the upper Zeravshan Valley(1870) and the principalities of the western Pamir (1895).\nDuring the late 19th century the Jadidists established themselves as an Islamic social movement throughout the region. Although the Jadidists were pro-modernization and not necessarily anti-Russian the Russians viewed the movement as a threat. Russian troops were required to restore order during uprisings against the Khanate of Kokand between 1910 and 1913. Further violence occurred in July 1916 when demonstrators attacked Russian soldiers in Khujand over the threat of forced conscription during World War I. Despite Russian troops quickly bringing Khujand back under control, clashes continued throughout the year in various locations in Tajikistan.\nAt the end of August 1920 the last emir, Sayyid Alim Khan, was overthrown by Soviet troops. On 6 October 1920 the emirate was abolished and the Bukharan People's Soviet Republic was proclaimed.\nBasmachi movement (1916\u20131924).\nThe Basmachi movement or Basmachi Revolt was an uprising against Russian Imperial and Soviet rule that arose after the Russian Revolution of 1917 guerrillas throughout Central Asia.\nThe movement's roots lay in the anti-conscription violence of 1916 that erupted when the Russian Empire began to draft Muslims for army service during World War I. In the months following the October 1917 Revolution the Bolsheviks seized power in many parts of the Russian Empire and the Russian Civil War began. Turkestani Muslim political movements attempted to form an autonomous government in the city of Kokand, in the Ferghana Valley. The Bolsheviks launched an assault on Kokand in February 1918 and carried out a general massacre of up to 25,000 people. The massacre rallied support to the Basmachi movements who waged a guerrilla war and a conventional war that seized control of large parts of the Ferghana Valley and much of Turkestan.\nThe fortunes of the decentralized movement fluctuated throughout the early 1920s but by 1923 the Red Army's extensive campaigns dealt the Basmachis many defeats. After major Red Army campaigns and concessions regarding economic and Islamic practices in the mid-1920s, the military fortunes and popular support of the Basmachi declined. Resistance to Soviet/Russian rule did flare up again to a lesser extent in response to collectivization campaigns in the pre-WWII Era.\nSoviet Rule (1920\u20131991).\nIn 1924, the Tajik Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was created as a part of Uzbekistan, but when national borders were drawn in 1928 (during the administrative delimitation) the ancient Tajik cities of Bukhara and Samarkand were placed outside the Tajikistan SSR. As citizens of the newly established Uzbek SSR, many Tajiks came under pressure to conform to their newly ascribed \"Uzbek\" identity, and under threat of exile, many were forced to change their identity and sign in passports as \"Uzbeks\". Tajik schools were closed and Tajiks were not appointed to leadership positions simply because of their ethnicity.\nBetween 1927 and 1934 collectivization of agriculture and a rapid expansion of cotton production took place, especially in the southern region. Soviet collectivization policy brought violence against peasants and forced resettlement occurred throughout Tajikistan. Consequently, some peasants fought collectivization and revived the Basmachi movement. Some small scale industrial development also occurred during this time along with the expansion of irrigation infrastructure.\nTwo rounds of Soviet purges directed by Moscow (1927\u20131934 and 1937\u20131938) resulted in the expulsion of nearly 10,000 people, from all levels of the Communist Party of Tajikistan. Ethnic Russians were sent in to replace those expelled and subsequently Russians dominated party positions at all levels, including the top position of first secretary. Between 1926 and 1959 the proportion of Russians among Tajikistan's population grew from less than 1% to 13%. Bobojon Ghafurov, Tajikistan's First Secretary of the Communist Party of Tajikistan from 1946 to 1956 was the only Tajikistani politician of significance outside the country during the Soviet Era. He was followed in office by Tursun Uljabayev (1956\u201361), Jabbor Rasulov (1961\u20131982), and Rahmon Nabiyev (1982\u20131985, 1991\u20131992).\nTajiks began to be conscripted into the Soviet Army in 1939 and during World War II around 260,000 Tajik citizens fought against Germany, Finland and Japan. Between 60,000(4%) and 120,000(8%) of Tajikistan's 1,530,000 citizens were killed during World War II. Following the war and Stalin's reign attempts were made to further expand the agriculture and industry of Tajikistan. During 1957\u201358 Nikita Khrushchev's Virgin Lands Campaign focused attention on Tajikistan, where living conditions, education and industry lagged behind the other Soviet Republics.\nIn the 1980s, Tajikistan had the lowest household saving rate in the USSR, the lowest percentage of households in the two top per capita income groups, and the lowest rate of university graduates per 1000 people.\nPerestroika and glasnost.\nLiving standards were undermined during the tenure of Kahar Mahkamov as first secretary of the Communist Party of Tajikistan from 1985. Mahkamov's attempted marketisation of the Tajik economy aggravated the poor living conditions and unemployment. On the eve of the Soviet collapse Tajikistan was suffering from a declining economy and dim prospects for recovery.\nPriority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new treaty.\nThe glasnost policy of openness initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev offered disgruntled Tajiks a chance to voice their grievances.\nSoviet coup attempt, the transition period and the end of the Soviet Union.\nIn 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed, and Tajikistan declared its independence.\nRepublic of Tajikistan (1991\u2013present).\nIndependent country and the Commonwealth.\nPost-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.\nThe Tajikistan Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was among the last republics of the Soviet Union to declare its independence. On September 9 (1991), following the collapse of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), Tajikistan declared its independence. During this time, use of the Tajik language, an official language of the Tajikistan SSR next to Russian, was increasingly promoted. Ethnic Russians, who had held many governing posts, lost much of their influence and more Tajiks became politically active.\nThe nation almost immediately fell into a civil war that involved various factions fighting one another; these factions were often distinguished by clan loyalties. The non-Muslim population, particularly Russians and Jews, fled the country during this time because of persecution, increased poverty and better economic opportunities in the West or in other former Soviet republics.\nEmomali Rahmon came to power in 1994, and continues to rule to this day. Ethnic cleansing was controversial during the civil war in Tajikistan. By the end of the war Tajikistan was in a state of complete devastation. The estimated dead numbered over 100,000. Around 1.2 million people were refugees inside and outside the country. In 1997, a ceasefire was reached between Rahmon and opposition parties (United Tajik Opposition).\nPeaceful elections were held in 1999, but they were reported by the opposition as unfair, and Rahmon was re-elected by almost unanimous vote. Russian troops were stationed in southern Tajikistan, in order to guard the border with Afghanistan, until summer 2005. Since the September 11, 2001 attacks, American, Indian and French troops have also been stationed in the country.\nIn October 2020, President Emomali Rahmon was re-elected for next seven-year period with 90 per cent of the votes, following a tightly controlled and largely ceremonial election.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30110", "revid": "48607067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30110", "title": "Geography of Tajikistan", "text": " \nTajikistan is nestled between Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan to the north and west, China to the east, and Afghanistan to the south. Mountains cover 93 percent of Tajikistan's surface area. The two principal ranges, the Pamir Mountains and the Alay Mountains, give rise to many glacier-fed streams and rivers, which have been used to irrigate farmlands since ancient times. Central Asia's other major mountain range, the Tian Shan, skirts northern Tajikistan. Mountainous terrain separates Tajikistan's two population centers, which are in the lowlands of the southern (Panj River) and northern (Fergana Valley) sections of the country. Especially in areas of intensive agricultural and industrial activity, the Soviet Union's natural resource utilization policies left independent Tajikistan with a legacy of environmental problems.\nDimensions and borders.\nWith an area of , Tajikistan has a maximum east-to-west extent of , and a maximum north-to-south extent of . The country's highly irregular border is long, including along the Chinese border to the east and along the frontier with Afghanistan to the south. Most of the southern border with Afghanistan is defined by the Amu Darya (\"darya\" is the Persian word for river) and its tributary the Panj River (Darya-ye Panj), which has headwaters in Afghanistan and Tajikistan. The other neighbors are the former Soviet republics of Uzbekistan (to the west and the north) and Kyrgyzstan (to the north).\nTopography and drainage.\nThe lower elevations of Tajikistan are divided into northern and southern regions by a complex of three mountain chains that constitute the westernmost extension of the massive Tian Shan system. Running essentially parallel from east to west, the chains are the Turkestan, Zeravshan (Zarafshan), and Hisor (Gissar) mountains. The last of these lies just north of the capital, Dushanbe, which is situated in west-central Tajikistan.\nMore than half of Tajikistan lies above an elevation of . Even the lowlands, which are located in the Fergana Valley in the far north and in Khatlon Province in the southwest, are well above sea level. In the Turkestan range, highest of the western chains, the maximum elevation is . The highest elevations of this range are in the east, near the border with Kyrgyzstan. That region is dominated by the peaks of the Pamir-Alay mountain system, including two of the three highest elevations in the former Soviet Union: Mount Lenin \u2014 and Ismoil Somoni Peak \u2014 . Several other peaks in the region also exceed . The mountains contain numerous glaciers, the largest of which, Vanch-Yakh Glacier, covers more than and is the largest glacier in the world outside the polar regions. Because Tajikistan lies in an active seismic belt, severe earthquakes are common.\nFergana Valley.\nThe Fergana Valley, the most densely populated region in Central Asia irrigated by the Syr Darya in its upper course, spreads across the north-eastern arm of Uzbekistan and Northern Tajikistan. This long valley, which lies between two mountain ranges \u2014 the Kuramin Range in the north and the Turkestan Range in the south, reaches its lowest elevation of at Khujand on the Syr Darya. Rivers bring rich soil deposits into the Fergana Valley from the surrounding mountains, creating a series of fertile oases that have long been prized for agriculture.\nDrainage.\nIn Tajikistan's dense river network, the largest rivers are the Syr Darya and the Amu Darya; the largest tributaries are the Vakhsh and the Kofarnihon, which form valleys from northeast to southwest across western Tajikistan. The Amu Darya carries more water than any other river in Central Asia. The upper course of the Amu Darya, called the Panj River, is long. The river's name changes at the confluence of the Panj, the Vakhsh, and the Kofarnihon rivers in far southwestern Tajikistan. The Vakhsh, called the Kyzyl-Suu (\"red water\" in Turkic languages) upstream in Kyrgyzstan and the Surkhob in its middle course in north-central Tajikistan, is the second largest river in southern Tajikistan after the Amu-Panj system. In the Soviet era, the Vakhsh was dammed at several points for irrigation and electric power generation, most notably at Norak (Nurek), east of Dushanbe, where one of the world's highest dams forms the Nurek Reservoir. Numerous factories also were built along the Vakhsh to draw upon its waters and potential for electric power generation. Due to the uneven distribution of water throughout Central Asia, the Soviets created a system in which Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan provided water to Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan in summer, and these three countries provided oil and gas to Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan during winter. After the collapse of the USSR in 1991, this system fell apart and a new resource-sharing plan has yet to be put in place. According to research conducted by the International Crisis Group, this is due to corruption and lack of political will; failure to solve this issue could lead to irreversible regional destabilization.\nThe two most important rivers in northern Tajikistan are the Syr Darya and the Zeravshan (Zarafshan). The former, the second longest river in Central Asia with a total length of , stretches across the Fergana Valley in far-northern Tajikistan. The Zeravshan River, with a total length of , runs for through the north-center of Tajikistan. Tajikistan's rivers reach high-water levels twice a year: in the spring, fed by the rainy season and melting mountain snow, and in the summer, fed by melting glaciers. The summer freshets are the more useful for irrigation, especially in the Fergana Valley and the valleys of southeastern Tajikistan. Most of Tajikistan's lakes are of glacial origin and are located in the Pamir region in the eastern half of the country. The largest, the Karakul (Qarokul) Lake, is a salt lake devoid of life, lying at an elevation of . Tajikistan's second largest water body is the Kayrakkum Reservoir, a long artificial lake in the heart of the Fergana Valley, not far from the city of Khujand in Sughd Province. The lake is fed by the Syr Darya. Another well-known natural lake of glacial origin is Iskanderkul. It is smaller than the Kayrakum Reservoir and lies in the Fann Mountains in western Tajikistan.\nClimate.\nTajikistan's climate is continental, subtropical, and semiarid, with some desert areas. The climate changes drastically according to elevation, however. The Fergana Valley and other lowlands are shielded by mountains from Arctic air masses, but temperatures in that region still drop below freezing for more than 100 days a year. In the subtropical southwestern lowlands, which have the highest average temperatures, the climate is arid, although some sections now are irrigated for farming. At Tajikistan's lower elevations, the average temperature range is in July and in January. In the eastern Pamirs, the average July temperature is , and the average January temperature is .\nTajikistan is the wettest of the Central Asian republics, with the average annual precipitation for the Kafernigan and Vakhsh valleys in the south being around , and up to in the mountains. At the Fedchenko Glacier, as much as of snow falls each year. Only in the northern Fergana Valley and in the rain shadow areas of the eastern Pamirs is precipitation as low as in other parts of Central Asia: in the eastern Pamirs less than falls per year. Most precipitation occurs in the winter and spring.\nEnvironmental problems.\nMost of Tajikistan's environmental problems are associated with the agricultural policies imposed on the country during the Soviet period. By 1991 heavy use of mineral fertilizers and agricultural chemicals was a major cause of pollution in the republic. Among those chemicals were DDT, banned by international convention, and several defoliants and herbicides. In addition to the damage they have done to the air, land, and water, the chemicals have contaminated the cottonseeds whose oil is used widely for cooking. Cotton farmers and their families are at particular risk from the overuse of agricultural chemicals, both from direct physical contact in the field and from the use of the branches of cotton plants at home for fuel. All of these toxic sources are believed to contribute to a high incidence of maternal and child mortality and birth defects. In 1994 the infant mortality rate was 43.2 per 1,000 births, the second highest rate among former Soviet republics. The rate in 1990 had been 40.0 infant deaths per 1,000 births.\nCotton requires particularly intense irrigation. In Tajikistan's cotton-growing regions, farms were established in large, semiarid tracts and in tracts reclaimed from the desert, but cotton's growing season is summer, when the region receives virtually no rainfall. The 50 percent increase in cotton cultivation mandated by Soviet and post-Soviet agricultural planners between 1964 and 1994 consequently overtaxed the regional water supply. Poorly designed irrigation networks led to massive runoff, which increased soil salinity and carried toxic agricultural chemicals downstream to other fields, the Aral Sea, and populated areas of the region.\nBy the 1980s, nearly 90 percent of water use in Central Asia was for agriculture. Of that quantity, nearly 75 percent came from the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya, the chief tributaries of the Aral Sea on the Kazakhstan-Uzbekistan border to the northwest of Tajikistan. As the desiccation of the Aral Sea came to international attention in the 1980s, water-use policy became a contentious issue between Soviet republics such as Tajikistan, where the main rivers rise, and those farther downstream, including Uzbekistan. By the end of the Soviet era, the central government had relinquished central control of water-use policy for Central Asia, but the republics had not agreed on an allocation policy.\nIndustry also causes pollution problems. A major offender is the production of nonferrous metals. One of Tajikistan's leading industrial sites, the aluminum plant at Tursunzoda (formerly known as Regar), west of Dushanbe near the border with Uzbekistan, generates large amounts of toxic waste gases that have been blamed for a sharp increase in the number of birth defects among people who live within range of its emissions.\nIn 1992 the Supreme Soviet of Tajikistan established a Ministry of Environmental Protection. However, the enforcement activity of the ministry was limited severely by the political upheavals that plagued Tajikistan in its first years of independence. The only registered private environmental group in Tajikistan in the early 1990s was a chapter of the Social-Ecological Alliance, the largest informal environmental association in the former Soviet Union. The Tajik branch's main functions have been to conduct environmental research and to organize protests against the Roghun Hydroelectric Plant project.\nNatural hazards: Earthquakes are of varying degrees and are frequent. Flooding and landslides sometimes occur during the annual Spring thaw.\nEnvironment - current issues: inadequate sanitation facilities; increasing levels of soil salinity; industrial pollution; excessive pesticides; part of the basin of the shrinking Aral Sea suffers from severe overutilization of available water for irrigation and associated pollution.\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\" Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer Protection\nPamir Mountains.\nTajikistan is home to some of the highest mountains in the world, including the Pamir and Alay ranges. 93% of Tajikistan is mountainous with altitudes ranging from to almost , and nearly 50% of Tajikistan's territory is above .\nThe massive mountain ranges are cut by hundreds of canyons and gorges at the bottom of which run streams that flow into larger river valleys where the majority of the country's population lives and works. The Pamirs in particular are heavily glaciated, and Tajikistan is home to the largest non-polar glacier in the world, the Fedchenko Glacier.\nThe Pamir Mountains in Tajikistan lie in Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province (GBAO) in the east half of the country. The northern border is formed by the Trans-Alay Range (Independence Peak , Kyzylart Pass ). The highest peak is Ismoil Somoni Peak () (formerly known as Stalin Peak and Communism Peak), on the north-western edge of GBAO. It lies between Ibn Sina Peak () (also known as Lenin Peak) on the border with Kyrgyzstan to the north and Peak Korzhenevskaya () in Academy of Sciences Range () further south. The southern border is formed by the northernmost ridges of the Karakoram Range, with Mayakovskiy Peak (), Karl Marx Peak (), Engels Peak (), and Concord Peak () stretching west to east along the border to Afghanistan.\nRivers.\nThe principal rivers of Central Asia, the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya, both flow through Tajikistan, fed by melting snow and glaciers from the mountains of Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan. There are over 900 rivers in Tajikistan longer than .\nThe largest rivers of Tajikistan are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nAbout 2% of the country's area is covered by lakes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 94th\n*land: \n*water: \n* slightly smaller than Nepal\n* Australia comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Tasmania\n* Canada comparative: slightly less than twice the size of New Brunswick\n* United Kingdom comparative: slightly larger than England\n* United States comparative: slightly larger than North Carolina\n* EU comparative: slightly larger than Greece\n*total: \n*border countries: Afghanistan , China , Kyrgyzstan , Uzbekistan \n*lowest point: Syr Darya \n*highest point: Ismoil Somoni Peak \nArea and boundaries.\nOther peaks include: Lenin Peak ; Peak Korzhenevskaya ; Independence Peak \nResources and land use.\nNatural resources:\nhydropower, some petroleum, uranium, mercury, brown coal, lead, zinc, antimony, tungsten, silver, gold\nLand use (2006 data):\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\" 6%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\" 1%\n&lt;br&gt;\"pastures:\" 21%\n&lt;br&gt;\"non-agricultural land:\" 72%\n&lt;br&gt;\"including forests and woodland:\" 3%\nIrrigated land:\n&lt;br&gt; \"2006:\" \nTotal renewable water resources:\n99.7 cu km (1997)\nNatural hazards:\nearthquakes, floods\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30111", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30111", "title": "Demographics of Tajikistan", "text": "The Demographics of Tajikistan is about the demography of the population of Tajikistan, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation size and structure.\n9,275,787 (2019 est.)\nAccording to Worldmeters\nTajikistan's main ethnic group are the Tajiks, with minorities such as the Uzbeks and Kyrgyz, and a small Russian minority. Because not everyone in Tajikistan is an ethnic Tajik, the non-Tajik citizens of the country are referred to as Tajikistani. The official nationality of any person from Tajikistan is a Tajikistani, while the ethnic Tajik majority simply call themselves Tajik.\nContemporary Tajiks are an Iranian people. In particular, they are descended from ancient Eastern Iranian peoples of Central Asia, such as the Soghdians and the Bactrians, with an admixture of Western Iranian Persians as well as non-Iranian peoples.\nUntil the 20th century, people in the region used two types of distinction to identify themselves: way of life - either nomadic or sedentary - and place of residence. By the late nineteenth century, the Tajik and Uzbek peoples, who had lived in proximity for centuries and often used each other's languages, did not perceive themselves as two distinct nationalities. The modern labels were imposed artificially when Central Asia was divided into five Soviet republics in the 1920s.\nHistorically, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan were also home to Bukharan Jews, who trace their ancestry to the Lost Tribes of Israel taken captive by the Babylonians in the 7th century BC, but almost no Bukharian Jews are left in Tajikistan.\nAge structure.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2012)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nDemographic and health surveys.\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nRegional birth data.\nThere were slightly over 224 thousand births in Tajikistan in 2017, down from 230 thousand in 2016. Most births occurred in Khatlon Region (89 thousand births), followed by Sughd Region (61 thousand births) and the Districts of Republican Subordination (53 thousand births). The fewest births is recorded in Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region in eastern Tajikistan, with around 5,700 births. Dushanbe city recorded approximately 15,500 births in 2017.\nThe crude birth rate for Tajikistan was 25.4\u2030 in 2017, down from 28.1\u2030 two years earlier (in 2015). Khatlon Region has the highest birth rate (28.1\u2030) in 2017, while the city of Dushanbe has the lowest birth rate with 18.8\u2030.\nEthnic groups.\nEthnic Groups in 2020 Census\nEthnic makeup according to the population censuses from 1926 to 2020.\nNote: The category Tajiks also includes ethnic Pamiris, of which 65% are Shughni speakers, 13% are Rushani speakers, 12% speak Wakhi, 5% are Bartangi speakers, 3% are Yazgulyami speakers, 1.5% speak Khufi, and 0.8% are Ishkashimi speakers. In addition there are a few thousands speakers of Yagnobi. According to the 2000 census, excluding the people whose native languages are Pamiri or Yagnobi, Tajiks account for 77.6% of the population and Pamiris and Yagnobis account for 2.3%.\nLanguages.\nSeveral dialects of Persian (Central Asian dialects of Persian) are spoken in Tajikistan and it is one of the two official languages of Tajikistan (officially referred to as Tajik). Russian is the official interethnic language and is widely used in both government and business. The different ethnic minorities speak different languages, for instance Uzbek, Turkmen, Kyrgyz and Khowar. In the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province, Shughni as well as other Pamir languages are spoken. In the northern Yaghnob valley, the Yaghnobi language is still spoken.\nReligion.\nReligious demographics as of 2020[ [update]].\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30112", "revid": "24827452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30112", "title": "Politics of Tajikistan", "text": " \nThe politics of Tajikistan nominally takes place in a framework of a presidential republic, whereby the President is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Legislative power is vested in both the executive branch and the two chambers of parliament.\nIn practice, Tajikistan is governed by President Emomali Rahmon who has headed an authoritarian regime with elements of a cult of personality since 1994. Political opponents are repressed, violations of human rights and freedoms are severe, elections are not free and fair, and corruption and nepotism are rampant. Various important government positions are occupied by his family members, such as his 37-year-old son Rustam Emomali, who is the chairman of the country's parliament and the mayor of its capital city, Dushanbe.\nPolitical background.\nThe August 1991 putsch widened the rift. Frustrated by daily demonstrations in front of the Supreme Soviet and the erosion of the government's authority, the regime appeared to support the Moscow putschists. Qadriddin Aslonov, then the chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Tajikistan, went on record in defence of the (Soviet) status quo when complaining to a journalist of Izvestia that the country is falling into chaos. This statement encapsulated the feeling of the republican leadership. Support for the putschists exasperated the already galvanised intelligentsia. A flood of demonstrators blocked roads adjacent to the building of the Supreme Soviet and forced Qahhor Mahkamov to resign on 31 August 1991. Demonstrators, encouraged by the opposition parties but not entirely controlled by them, had far-reaching demands: the banning of the Communist party and the nationalization of its assets, the resignation of the entire government, the dissolution of the legislature and new elections.\nDuring this turmoil Tajikistan declared its independence from Soviet Union, on September 9, 1991 and promptly fell into a civil war from 1992\u20131997 between old-guard regits, and Islamists loosely organized as the United Tajik Opposition (UTO). Other combatants and armed bands that flourished in this civil chaos simply reflected the breakdown of central authority rather than loyalty to a political faction. The height of hostilities occurred between 1992 and 1993. By 1997, the predominantly Kulyabi-led Tajik government and the UTO successfully negotiated a power-sharing peace accord and implemented it by 2000.\nTajikistan is slowly rebuilding itself with an integrated government and continues to permit a Russia military presence to guard their border with Afghanistan and the basing of the Russian 201st Motorized Rifle Division that never left Tajikistan when it became independent. Most of these Russian-led forces, however, are local Tajik non-commissioned officers and soldiers.\nBoth Tajikistan's presidential and parliamentary elections, in 1999 and 2000, respectively, were widely considered to be flawed and unfair but peaceful. The inclusion of an Islamist party committed to secular government (Islamic Renaissance Party) and several other parties in the Parliamentary elections represented an improvement in the Tajik people's right to choose their government. Tajikistan is the only Central Asian country in which a religiously affiliated political party is represented in Parliament. President Emomali Rahmon, while no longer specifically obliged\u2014as he was under the peace accords\u2014to allocate one-third of government positions to the UTO, has kept some former UTO officials in senior cabinet-level positions. While the government and the now incorporated former opposition continue to distrust each other, they have often found a way to work with each other and are committed to peacefully resolving their differences.\nPrior to the overthrow of the Taliban in 2001, the civil war in Afghanistan produced cross-border effects that threatened to destabilize Tajikistan's fragile and hard-won peace. In the summers of 1999 and 2000, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan used Tajikistan as a staging ground for an insurgency campaign against the government of Uzbekistan. At the same time, Taliban advances in northern Afghanistan threatened to inundate Tajikistan with thousands of refugees. A constant flow of illegal narcotics continues to transit Tajikistan from Afghanistan on its way to Russian and European markets, leaving widespread violent crime, corruption, increased HIV incidence, and economic distortions in its wake. During 2002, stability in the country continued to increase, and the year was largely free of the assassinations and outbreaks of violence perpetrated by unreformed opposition members that plagued the country in previous years.\n\"The sections that follow incorporate text from the Library of Congress Country Study: http:// (January 2007), which is a United States government publication in the public domain.\"\nExecutive branch.\nThe president of Tajikistan, who is directly elected, is both the head of state and the head of government. The president appoints the prime minister and all the members of the government, without the need of parliamentary approval. Tajikistan is thus a presidential republic. Tajikistan held a constitutional referendum on 22 June 2003 and the 2003 Constitution, among other amendments, set a limit of two seven-year terms for the president. Emomali Rahmon's election to the office of the president in 2006 counts as his first 7-year term under the 2003 Constitution, and was re-elected for a second term in 2013, remaining in office until 2020. Rahmon holds the title of 'Leader of the Nation' and is therefore exempt from presidential term limits. This title also grants him and his family legal immunity.\nIn this geographically divided country, the ceremonial position of prime minister traditionally is held by a person from the north to nominally balance President Emomali Rahmon\u2019s southern origin. In 2004 the executive branch fell further under the control of the governing party as appointments by Rahmon left the opposition with only 5 percent of major government positions. This event followed the expiration of the 1997 peace guarantee that the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) would occupy at least 30 percent of top government positions. Prior to the 2006 election, the Government of Tajikistan, which executes the decisions of the president, included two deputy prime ministers, 19 ministers, nine committee heads, and several ex officio members. After the election, Rahmon abolished 10 ministries and five state committees and reappointed Oqil Oqilov as prime minister. Rahmon is said to have accumulated substantial informal power through patronage.\nIn October 2020, Tajikistan's authoritarian President Emomali Rahmon was reelected for a fifth term with nearly 91 percent of the vote, following a tightly controlled and largely ceremonial election.\nLegislative branch.\nThe bicameral Supreme Assembly (\"Majlisi Oli\") includes the 63-seat Assembly of Representatives (\"Majlisi namoyandagon\"), which meets year-round (from November through end of June), and the 33-seat National Assembly (\"Majlisi milli\"), which meets at least twice per year. The bicameral legislature was introduced in the September 1999 Constitution and prior to that Tajikistan had a unicameral legislature.\nThe members of the Assembly of Representatives are chosen by direct popular election for a five-year term. Of the 63 members of the Assembly of Representatives, 22 are elected by party, in proportion to the number of votes received by each party gaining at least 5 percent of total votes, and the remaining members are elected from single-member constituencies.\nIn the National Assembly, three-fourths of the members are chosen by the deputies of the local representative assemblies (\"majlisi\") in the country's four main administrative divisions and in the cities subordinated directly to central government; each of these subnational jurisdictions is entitled to equal representation. The remaining members are appointed directly by the president.\nThe pro-government People\u2019s Democratic Party continued to control both houses of the parliament after the elections of 2005; that party gained 52 of the 63 seats in the Assembly of Representatives. In 2006, 11 women sat in the Assembly of Representatives, and five sat in the National Assembly. Opposition factions in the Supreme Assembly have clashed with pro-government members over some issues.\nJudicial branch.\nThe constitution provides for an independent judiciary. The Supreme Court is the highest court. Other high courts include the Supreme Economic Court and the Constitutional Court, which decides questions of constitutionality. The president appoints the judges of these three courts, with the approval of the legislature. There is also a Military Court. The judges of all courts are appointed to 10-year terms.\nThough the judiciary is nominally independent, the executive branch and criminal groups have considerable influence on judicial functions. Bribery of judges, who are poorly paid and poorly trained, is commonplace. The court system has local, district, regional, and national levels, with each higher court serving as an appellate court for the level below. Appeals of court decisions are rare because the populace generally does not trust the judicial system. Constitutional guarantees to the right to an attorney and to a prompt and public trial often are ignored. The Soviet-era presumption of the guilt of the defendant remains in force. The procurator\u2019s office conducts all criminal investigations. Trials are heard by juries except in cases of national security.\nThe Republic Bar Association (also called the Bar Association of the Republic of Tajikistan) gained its independence in 1995. Yet, according to a source, it was not until 1998 that \"the concept of a lawyer-attorney was introduced [in Tajikistan], being defined as a business person providing legal services on the basis of a license issued by the Ministry of Justice.\" While there is evidence of female lawyers on account of the League of Women Lawyers of Tajikistan's existence, there is no indication as to how women have fared in the legal field once the country declared its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTajikistan consists of 4 administrative divisions. These are the provinces (viloyat) of Sughd and Khatlon, the autonomous province (\"viloyati mukhtor\") of Gorno-Badakhshan (in Tajik: \"Viloyati Mukhtori Kuhistoni Badakhshon\"), and the Region of Republican Subordination (\"Raiony Respublikanskogo Podchineniya\" in transliteration from Russian or in ; formerly known as Karotegin Province). The capital of Sughd is Khujand (formerly Leninabad), the capital of Khatlon is Bokhtar (formerly Qurghonteppa), and the capital of Gorno-Badakhshan is Khorugh (formerly Khorog). The national capital Dushanbe is also the administrative center of the Region of Republican Subordination. Each region is divided into several districts (, \"nohiya\" or \"raion\"), which in turn are subdivided into \"jamoats\" (village-level self-governing units). As of 2008, there were 58 districts and 367 jamoats in Tajikistan. In addition, subregional units included 17 towns and 54 urban-type settlements ().\nProvincial and local government.\nLocal government is divided into representative and executive branches. The representative branch in provinces, towns, and districts is the assembly (\"majlis\") of people's deputies, who are elected locally for a five-year term. The executive power in provinces, towns, and districts is vested in the head of local administration, who is directly appointed by the President, with the approval of the local \"majlis\".\nElectoral system.\nSuffrage is universal for citizens 18 years of age and older. A new election law passed in 2004 has received international criticism for its restrictive candidate registration requirements. Election requires an absolute majority of votes; if no candidate gains a majority, a second round is held between the top two vote getters. By controlling the Central Election Commission, the Rahmon regime has gained substantial influence over the registration of parties, the holding of referendums, and election procedures. In 1999 and 2003, referendums of dubious fairness made constitutional changes that strengthened Rahmon's hold on power. International observers also found substantial irregularities in the conduct of the 1999 presidential election, in which only one opposition candidate was permitted to register, and the media were censored. Six parties participated in the 2000 and 2005 parliamentary elections, although in both cases observers reported state interference with the process and with opposition candidates' access to the media. Rahmon easily won re-election in November 2006, gaining 79 percent of the vote against four little-known opponents; international monitors again found the election unfair. Three major opposition parties\u2014the Democratic Party, the Islamic Renaissance Party, and the Social Democratic Party\u2014boycotted the election.\nPolitical parties.\nIn the early 2000s, independent political parties continued to exist, but their operations were circumscribed and their influence marginal. The governing People\u2019s Democratic Party (PDP) gained strength as some opposition party leaders joined the government and others were disqualified from participation in elections. The Communist Party of Tajikistan, a nominal opposition party that has supported President Rahmon on most issues, has lost support since 2000. The liberal, pro-market Democratic Party also has lost support. In 1997 Rahmon weakened his chief opposition emerging from the civil war, the United Tajik Opposition (UTO), by naming movement leader Akbar Turajonzoda a deputy prime minister. In the ensuing years, the UTO was eclipsed politically by its main component organization, the Islamic Renaissance Party (IRP). In 2003 the IRP lost its chief opposition issue as the ban on religious parties ended. Nevertheless, in 2006 parties still could not receive aid from religious institutions, and tension remained between the government and Islamic factions. In 2006 the IRP was the most influential opposition party in Tajikistan and the only religiously affiliated party represented in the national legislature of a Central Asian country. After the death of long-time IRP leader Said Abdullo Nuri in 2006, a possible split emerged from the struggle for party leadership. Some antigovernment sentiment has been channeled into radical Islamic organizations such as Hizb ut-Tahrir, which is outlawed as a terrorist organization, rather than into conventional political parties. In 2006 six parties, including one faction of the Democratic Party, were banned, and a total of eight parties were registered. In 2005 Mahmadruzi Iskandarov, head of the Democratic Party, received a long prison term for terrorism after being abducted from exile, and in 2006 his party was replaced on the official list by a government-backed splinter group, Vatan.\nTajiks in Uzbekistan.\n Tajiks are a main minority in Uzbekistan, and historically Tajiks lived in a larger area in Central Asia than now.\nInternational organization participation.\nAsDB, CCC, CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, IOC, IOM, ITU, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30113", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30113", "title": "Economy of Tajikistan", "text": "The economy of Tajikistan is dependent upon agriculture and services. Since independence, Tajikistan has gradually followed the path of transition economy, reforming its economic policies. With foreign revenue precariously dependent upon exports of cotton and aluminium, the economy is highly vulnerable to external shocks. Tajikistan's economy also incorporates a massive black market, primarily focused on the drug trade with Afghanistan. Heroin trafficking in Tajikistan is estimated to be equivalent to 30-50% of national GDP as of 2012.\nIn the fiscal year (FY) 2000, international assistance remained an essential source of support for rehabilitation programs that reintegrated former combatants of the Tajikistani Civil War into the civilian economy, thus helping maintain the peace. International assistance also was necessary to address the second year of severe drought that resulted in a continued shortfall of food production. Tajikistan's economy grew substantially after the war. The gross domestic product (GDP) of Tajikistan expanded at an average rate of 9.6% over the period of 2000-2007 according to the World Bank data. This improved Tajikistan's position among other Central Asian countries (namely Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan), which have degraded economically ever since. As of August 2009, an estimated 60% of Tajikistani citizens live below the poverty line. The 2008 financial crisis hit Tajikistan hard, both domestically and internationally. Tajikistan has been hit harder than many countries because it already has a high poverty rate and because many of its citizens depend on remittances from expatriate Tajikistanis.\nEconomic history.\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Tajikistan at market prices http:// by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of ruling currency.\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the US Dollar is exchanged at SM\u00a00.82 only.\nThe Tajikistani economy has been gravely weakened by six years of civil conflict and loss of markets for its products. Tajikistan thus depends on international humanitarian assistance for much of its basic subsistence needs. Even if the peace agreement of June 1997 is honoured, the country faces major problems in integrating refugees and former combatants into the economy. The future of Tajikistan's economy and the potential for attracting foreign investment depend upon stability and continued progress in the peace process.\nIn 2006 GDP per capita of Tajikistan was 85% of 1990s level. While population has increased from 5.3 million in 1991 to 7.3 million in 2009.\nDespite resistance from vested interests, the Government of Tajikistan continued to pursue macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform in FY 2000. In December 1999, the government announced that small-enterprise privatization had been successfully completed, and the privatization of medium-sized and large-owned enterprises (SOEs) continued incrementally. The continued privatization of medium-sized and large SOEs, land reform, and banking reform and restructuring remain top priorities. Shortly after the end of FY 2000, the Board of the International Monetary Fund gave its vote of confidence to the government's recent performance by approving the third annual Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Loan for Tajikistan. Improved fiscal discipline by the Government of Tajikistan has supported the return to positive economic growth. The government budget was nearly in balance in 2001 and the government's 2002 budget targets a fiscal deficit of 0.3% of GDP, including recent increases in social sector spending.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1997\u20132024.\nGross domestic product.\nIn 2005 Tajikistan's GDP grew by 6.7%, to about US$1.89 billion, and growth for 2006 was about 8%, marking the fifth consecutive year of annual growth exceeding 6%. The official forecast for GDP growth in 2007 is 7.5%. Per capita GDP in 2005 was US$258, lowest among the 15 countries of the former Soviet Union. In 2005 services contributed 48%, agriculture 23.4%, and industry 28.6% to GDP. The recent global recession has reduced Tajikistan's GDP growth rate to 2.8% in the first half of 2009. Remittances from expatriate Tajikistanis is estimated to account for 30-50% of Tajikistan's GDP.\nIndustries.\nAgriculture.\nAlthough the government has announced an expedited land reform program, many Soviet-era state farms still existed in 2006, and the state retains control of production and harvesting on privatized farms. Privatization of cotton farms has been especially slow, and unresolved debts of cotton farmers remained a problem in 2006. In the early 2000s, the major crops were cotton (which occupied one-third of arable land in 2004 but decreased after that date), cereals (mainly wheat), potatoes, vegetables (mainly onions and tomatoes), fruits, and rice. Cotton makes an important contribution to both the agricultural sector and the national economy. Cotton accounts for 60 percent of agricultural output, supports 75 percent of the rural population, and uses 45 percent of irrigated arable land. More than 80% of the 8,800 square kilometers of land in use for agriculture depends on irrigation. Tajikistan must import grain from Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.\nTajikistan produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like apricot (31 thousand tons).\nForestry.\n3% of Tajikistan is forested, mainly at elevations between 1,000 and 3,000 meters. No forest region is classified as commercially usable; most are under state protection. Wood production is negligible, but local inhabitants harvest non-wood forest products.\nFishing.\nStreams and lakes produce a limited amount of fish, and some fish is produced by aquaculture. In 2003 some 158 tons of fish were caught and 167 tons raised on fish farms.\nMining and minerals.\nTajikistan has rich deposits of gold, silver, and antimony. The largest silver deposits are in Sughd Province, where Tajikistan's largest gold mining operation is also located. Russia's Norilsk nickel company has explored a large new silver deposit at Bolshoy Kanimansur. Tajikistan also produces strontium, salt, lead, zinc, fluorspar, and mercury. Uranium, an important mineral in the Soviet era, remains in some quantity but is no longer extracted. Fossil fuel deposits are limited to coal, of which about 30,000 tons are mined annually. Tajikistan's extensive aluminium processing industry depends entirely on imported ore.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nThe output of most industries declined sharply during the mid-1990s; despite widespread privatization, in the early 2000s industry rallied very slowly. In 2006 an estimated one-third of Tajikistan's 700 major industrial enterprises were completely idle, and the remainder were operating at 20 or 25% of capacity. The causes are outmoded equipment, low investment levels, and lack of markets. To revitalize the sector, in 2006 the government was considering renationalizing some enterprises. Tajikistan's only major heavy industries are aluminium processing and chemical production. The former, which provided 40% of industrial production in 2005, is centered at the Tursunzoda processing plant, the latter in Dushanbe, Qurghonteppa, and Yovon. Aluminium production increased by 6% in 2005. Some small light industrial plants produce textiles and processed foods, using mainly domestic agricultural products. The textile industry processes about 20% of domestically grown cotton. The expansion of light industry output contributed significantly to GDP growth in 2005. The construction industry, about half of which is state-owned, has suffered from low investment in capital projects and from shoddy workmanship that has discouraged international contracts. However, new infrastructure projects and increased housing construction brought a 60% increase in output from 2004 to 2005. As of 2009, one third of industrial plants and factories are inactive, according to Tajikistan's Institute of Economic Studies. Industrial output has fallen by 13% in the first six months of 2009, leading to a fall in export revenues of 48%.\nEnergy.\nThe rivers of Tajikistan, such as the Vakhsh and the Panj, have great hydropower potential, and the government has focused on attracting investment for projects for internal use and electricity exports. Tajikistan is home to the hydroelectric power station Nurek, the second highest dam in the world. Sangtuda 1 Hydroelectric Power Plant of 670\u00a0megawatts (MW) capacity, operated by Russian Inter RAO UES, commenced operations on 18 January 2008 and was officially commissioned on 31 July 2009. Other projects at the development stage include Sangduta 2 by Iran, Zerafshan by Chinese SinoHydro and Rogun power plant, which, at , is projected to supersede the Nurek Dam as tallest in the world if completed. The Rogun Dam was originally planned to be built by Russia's Inter RAO UES, but following disagreements, Russia pulled out. In 2010, production resumed with Iranian investment and Chinese assistance. Besides hydropower, other energy resources include sizable coal deposits and smaller reserves of natural gas and petroleum. In December 2010, Russian Gazprom announced discovery of significant natural gas reserves in Sarykamish field with 60 bcm of natural gas, enough for 50 years of Tajikistan's domestic consumption. The national power company is Barqi Tojik.\nTajikistan is a partner country of the EU INOGATE energy programme, which has four key topics: enhancing energy security, convergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles, supporting sustainable energy development, and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest.\nServices.\nThroughout the early 2000s, the overall output of the services sector has increased steadily. The banking system has improved significantly because of strengthened oversight by the National Bank of Tajikistan, relaxed restrictions on participation by foreign institutions, and regulatory reform. The system includes 16 commercial banks and the central bank, or National Bank. The state controls the system, although in principle most banks have been privatized. An internationally assisted restructuring program was completed in 2003. Banks provide a narrow range of services, concentrating on providing credit to state-owned enterprises. Only an estimated 10% of the capital in Tajikistan moves through the banking system, and small businesses rarely borrow from banks.\nAbdujabbor Shirinov, Chairman of the National Bank of Tajikistan announced 142 credit organizations, including 16 banks and 299 their branches, two non-bank financial institutions and 124 microfinance organizations functioned in Tajikistan at the first of 2013.\nTourism.\nThe tourism industry of Tajikistan was eliminated by the civil war, but has begun to re-establish itself in recent years. In 2018, the British Backpacker Society ranked Tajikistan as the 7th best adventure travel destination on earth. The Tajik Committee on Tourism Development responded to this accolade by stating that \"the inclusion of Tajikistan in the British Backpacker Society's top 20 adventure travel destinations testifies the development of tourism in [the] country.\"\nLabour.\nIn 2003 Tajikistan's active labour force was estimated at 3.4 million, of whom 64% were employed in agriculture, 24% in services, and 10% in industry and construction. After declining in the early 2000s, the real wages of state employees were raised in 2004 and 2005. Because of the continued dominance of state farms, the majority of workers are government employees, although only a small number rely completely on wages. Driven by high unemployment, in 2006 an estimated 700,000 workers found seasonal or permanent employment in Russia and other countries. Their remittances, estimated at US$600 million in 2005, are an important economic resource in Tajikistan; in 2004 an estimated 15% of households depended mainly on those payments. In May 2009 remittances to Tajiks had fallen to $525 million, a 34% decline from the previous year. Immediately before the 2008 financial crisis, there were an estimated 1.5 million foreign workers sending remittances back to Tajikistan. In 2006 the average wage was US$27 per month. The national unemployment rate was estimated unofficially as high as 40% in 2006, but in rural areas, unemployment has exceeded 60%. Unemployment has been higher in the southern Khatlon Province than in the northern Soghd Province. Mean wages were $0.66 per man-hour in 2009.\nTajikistan's informal employment sector has been reported to use both child labour and forced labour in the country's cotton industry according to the U.S. Department of Labor's \"List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor\".\nCurrency, exchange rate, and inflation.\nThe somoni (SM) was introduced in 2000 to replace the Tajikistani rouble, which had been the currency since 1995. In December 2015, some 7 somoni equaled US$1. Throughout the post-Soviet era, inflation has been a serious obstacle to economic growth and improvement of the standard of living. For the years 2001\u20133, Tajikistan's inflation rates were 33%, 12.2%, and 16.3%, respectively, but in 2004 the rate fell to 6.8%, and the rate for 2005 was 7.1%. In late 2006, inflation approached the 10% level. The official forecast for 2007 is 7%.\nGovernment budget.\nThe year 2004 was the first year of budget deficit after three consecutive years of budget surpluses, which in turn had followed four years of deficits between 1997 and 2000. In 2005 revenues totalled US$442 million (aided by improvements in tax collection), and expenditures were US$542 million, a deficit of US$100 million. The approved 2007 state budget calls for revenues of US$926 million and expenditures of US$954 million, leaving a deficit of US$28 million.\nForeign economic relations.\nIn the post-Soviet era, Tajikistan has substantially shifted its markets away from the former Soviet republics; in 2005, more than 80% of total exports went to customers outside the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), including more than 70% to countries of the European Union (EU) and Turkey. However, because most of Tajikistan's food and energy are imported from CIS countries, in 2005 only about 53% of total trade activity was outside the CIS. In 2005, the top overall buyers of Tajikistan's exports, in order of value, were the Netherlands, Turkey, Russia, Uzbekistan, Latvia, and Iran. Besides aluminium, which accounts for more than half of export value, the main export commodities are cotton, electric power, fruits, vegetable oils, and textiles. In 2005 the largest suppliers of Tajikistan's imports, in order of value, were Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, China, and Ukraine. Those import rankings are determined largely by the high value of fuels and electric power that Tajikistan buys from its neighbours. Another significant import is alumina (aluminium oxide) to supply the aluminium industry. The major suppliers of alumina are Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine.\nTajikistan has suffered trade deficits throughout the post-Soviet era. In 2003, the deficit was US$97 million, based on exports of US$705 million and imports of US$802 million. In 2004, exports were worth US$736 million and imports, US$958 billion, creating a trade deficit of US$222 million. The deficit increased again in 2005, to US$339 million, mainly because cotton exports decreased and domestic demand for goods increased.\nIn 2005, the current account deficit was US$86 million, having shown a general downward trend since the late 1990s. The estimated current account deficit for both 2006 and 2007 is 4.5% of GDP, or about US$90 million in 2006. In 2005 the overall balance of payments was US$14 million. The estimated overall balance of payments for 2006 is US$8 million.\nAt the end of 2006, Tajikistan's external debt was estimated at US$830 million, most of which was long-term international debt. This amount grew steadily through the 1990s and early 2000s because of state borrowing policy. In 2004 Tajikistan eliminated about 20% of its external debt by exchanging debt to Russia for Russian ownership of the Nurek space tracking station, and by 2006, rescheduling negotiations had reduced the debt by about two-thirds as a percentage of gross domestic product.\nIn the early 2000s, foreign direct investment has remained low because of political and economic instability, corruption, the poor domestic financial system, and Tajikistan's geographic isolation. The establishment of businesses nearly always requires bribing officials and often encounters resistance from entrepreneurs with government connections. To attract foreign investment and technology, Tajikistan has offered to establish free economic zones in which firms receive advantages on taxes, fees, and customs. In 2004, the parliament passed a law on free economic zones and in 2008 passed a decree creating two zones: the Panj Free Economic Zone and the Sughd Free Economic Zone. In 2003 foreign direct investment totaled US$41 million; it increased to US$272 million in 2004 because of the debt-reduction transaction with Russia. In the first half of 2005, the figure was US$16 million. Beginning in 2005, the Russian Rusal aluminium company resumed operations to complete the hydroelectric station at Rogun on the Vakhsh River and expand aluminium production at the Tursunzade plant. That plant was scheduled for possible sale to Rusal in 2007. Also in 2005, Russia and Iran resumed work on the Vakhsh River Sangtuda hydroelectric project. Gazprom, the Russian natural gas monopoly, allocated US$12 million for oil and gas exploration in Tajikistan in 2007 after spending US$7 million in 2006. In 2005 the Russian telecommunications company VimpelCom bought a controlling share of Tajikistan's Tacom mobile telephone company. As of 2006, Turkey tentatively planned to invest in a luxury hotel and a cotton processing plant.\nWTO.\nTajikistan joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 2 March 2013, becoming the 159th country to join the organization. The Working Party on the accession of Tajikistan was established by the General Council on 18 July 2001. Tajikistan completed its membership negotiations on 26 October 2012, when the Working Party adopted the accession package. The General Council approved the accession on 10 December 2012. The Working Party held its sixth meeting in July 2011 to continue the examination of Tajikistan's foreign trade regime. As part of bilateral market access negotiations, Tajikistan agreed to lower tariffs on cooking equipment, refrigerators, ovens and water heaters in discussions to gain Thailand's backing. Earlier, the government of Tajikistan confirmed that it had concluded negotiations with Japan, and had received support from the nation for its accession in an agreement signed on July 31, 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30114", "revid": "24827452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30114", "title": "Telecommunications in Tajikistan", "text": " \nThe spread of telecommunications services in Tajikistan\u00a0\u2013 telephony, radio, television and internet\u00a0\u2013 has not been as extensive as in many other countries.\nTelephone.\nThe conventional telephone system is in poor condition because it has received little investment in the post-Soviet era. As of 2007[ [update]] there were 340,000 telephone lines in use, a ratio of one per 21 people. Many towns are not connected to the national network. In the early 2000s, the state telecommunications agency, Tajik Telecom, received international aid to upgrade the telephone system. In 2007 there were 3.5 million mobile telephones in use, compared with only 47,300 in 2003. This makes Tajikistan the 90th most cellular-capable country in the world. Among several cellular networks, the Babilon Mobile Company, a US-Tajik joint venture, claimed to have 40 percent of the market in 2006. The June 2006 launch of the KazSat communications satellite from Kazakhstan was expected to reduce the dependence of all the Central Asian countries on European and U.S. telecommunications satellites. Launch of a second KazSat is planned for 2009. The country's international calling code is 992.\nRadio.\nThere are 20 radio broadcast stations: 8 AM, 10 FM, and 2 shortwave as of 2009. Only 10 are estimated to be transmitting. There were an estimated 1.291 million radios in Tajikistan in 1991, approximately 1 for every 3.9 people.\nTelevision.\nThere are 24 licensed television broadcasting stations as of 2012, though only 15 are thought to be actively broadcasting. There were an estimated 860,000 televisions in Tajikistan in 1991, approximately 1 for every 5.9 people. Televizioni Tojikiston is the state television channel of Tajikistan, a successor to the Soviet republican program of the Central Soviet Television.\nThe head of the Committee for TV and Radio-broadcasting, Nouriddin Said, told reporters in Dushanbe on July 22, 2020 that 13 national TV channels, 35 private TV stations, 10 national radio stations, 24 private radio stations and 14 audiovisual production studios now operate in the country. \nTo-date, only 65 percent of Tajikistan\u2019s population has access to digital television, he noted.\nInternet.\nInternet use has grown slowly - in 2004 only seven Internet service providers were in operation. However, there were 1,158 Tajikistani internet hosts in 2008, placing Tajikistan 150th in the world. As of 2005, there were 19,500 internet users in Tajikistan, making it the 190th internet-connected country in the world at the time. Tajikistan's internet country code is .tj.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. "}
{"id": "30115", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30115", "title": "Transport in Tajikistan", "text": " \nMost of rugged Tajikistan's transportation system was built during the Soviet era, and since that time the system has deteriorated badly because of insufficient investment and maintenance. In 2013, Tajikistan, like many of the other Central Asian countries, was experiencing major development in its transportation sector. Beginning in 2005, a series of major transportation projects begun. The first such project, the Anzob Tunnel, was inaugurated in 2006, providing a year-round road link from Dushanbe to northern Tajikistan.\nAirports.\nIn 2009 Tajikistan had 26 airports, 18 of which had paved runways, of which two had runways longer than 3,000 meters. Tajikistan has two domestic airlines (Tajik Air and Somon Air) and is also serviced by foreign air companies (mainly Russian). The country's main airport is Dushanbe International Airport which, as of May 2014, had regularly scheduled flights to such major cities as Almaty, Baku, Bishkek, Delhi, Dubai, Frankfurt, Istanbul, Kabul, Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Sharjah, Tehran, and \u00dcr\u00fcmqi among others.\nNo flights connect Dushanbe with Tashkent. The next largest airports behind Dushanbe are at Khujand and Kulob. As of 2007 air transport was said to be unreliable.\nRailways.\nThe railroad system totals only of track, all of it broad gauge. The principle segments are in the southwestern region and connect the capital with the industrial areas of the Gissar and Vakhsh valleys and with Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Russia. In 2000 a new line, the Bokhtar \u2013 Kulyab railway, was completed and connected the Kulyab District with the central area of the country. Passenger transit through Tajikistan has been hindered by periodic failures of Tajik Railways to pay transit tariffs and by safety issues. Most international freight traffic is carried by train.\nIt is hoped that a 2009 agreement between the heads of state of Pakistan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan will modernize parts of Tajikistan's rail system to allow more trade between Central Asian countries.\nHighways.\nThe total length of roads in the country is 27,800 kilometers, nearly all of which were built before 1991. Automobiles account for more than 90% of the total volume of passenger transportation and more than 80% of domestic freight transportation.\nAs of 2014 many highway and tunnel construction projects were underway or recently completed. Major projects include rehabilitation of the Dushanbe \u2013 Chanak (Uzbek border), Dushanbe \u2013 Kulma (Chinese border), Kurgan-Tube \u2013 Nizhny Pyanj (Afghan border) highways and construction of tunnels under the mountain passes of Anzob, Shakhristan, Shar-Shar and Chormazak. These were supported by international donor countries. China has invested approximately $720 million for infrastructure improvements in Tajikistan, including the rebuilding, widening and improvement of the road between Dushanbe and Khujand which as of August 2007 is proceeding using equipment, labor, and oversight from China.\nIn mid-2005 construction began on a bridge across the Panj River to Afghanistan which was funded by the United States and opened in August 2007 and plans called for construction of several other bridges ultimately connecting Tajikistan to warm-water ports to the south.\nThe Pakistan-Afghanistan-Tajikistan Highway, a new long road is planned to pass through the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province and Dushanbe and in 2013 Tajikistan announced that all road construction on its side of the border had been completed. According to President Zardari of Pakistan, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPipelines.\nTajikistan's 549 kilometers of gas pipeline bring natural gas from Uzbekistan to Dushanbe and transport gas between points in Uzbekistan across northwestern Tajikistan. Tajikistan also has 38 kilometers of oil pipeline.\nPorts and waterways.\nTajikistan has no access to the sea and no navigable inland waterways.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "30116", "revid": "39566278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30116", "title": "Armed Forces of Tajikistan", "text": "Combined military forces of the republic of Tajikistan\nThe Republic of Tajikistan Armed Forces, also known as the Tajik National Army is the national military of the Republic of Tajikistan. It consists of Ground Forces, Mobile Forces, and the Air Force, with closely affiliated forces including the national guard, border and internal troops.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nUnlike the other former Soviet states of Central Asia, Tajikistan did not form armed forces based upon former Soviet units on its territory. Instead, the Russian Ministry of Defence took control of the Dushanbe-based 201st Motor Rifle Division. Control simply shifted from the former district headquarters in Tashkent, which was in now-independent Uzbekistan, to Moscow. Also present in Tajikistan was a large contingent of Soviet border guards, which transitioned into a Russian-officered force with Tajik conscripts. For a long period a CIS peacekeeping force, built around the 201st MRD, were in place in the country.\nEstablishment and the Civil War.\nOn 18 December 1992, the Chairman of the Supreme Council of Tajikistan Emomali Rahmon signed the Resolution \"On the Establishment of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Tajikistan\" on the basis of the Popular Front and the forces supporting the constitutional government. The Popular Front sported paramilitary formations who were armed by former President Rahmon Nabiyev. On 23 February 1993, in the center of Dushanbe, the first military parade of militants of the Popular Front was held, which has since been considered the day the military formed. Due to the presence of Russian forces in the country and the Tajikistani Civil War, Tajikistan only formally legalised the existence of its armed forces in April 1994. During the 1990s, the armed forces were often suffered from a poor commanded structure and poor discipline while their equipment was under-maintained. Draft-dodging and desertion was commonplace. Reflecting the fragmented militia group origin of the army's units, in late 1995 the 1st (led by Mahmud Khudoiberdiyev) and 11th Brigades (led by Faizali Saidov) of the Army exchanged fire several times, and fighting again broke out between the Army Rapid Reaction Brigade (formerly the Mahmud Brigade) and the Presidential Guard in June 1996. Colonel Khudoiberdiev, commander of the Rapid Reaction Brigade was relieved of his command as a result.\u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0\nPost-war to present.\nFollowing a 1997 treaty between the Rahmon government and the United Tajik Opposition, several UTO units became part of the National Army, becoming some of its most experienced units. Popular Front units also were incorporated into the Tajik regular army, although many units, such as the First Brigade, maintained its autonomy. Russian military advisors formed a committee in the Ministry of Defense that year that established a system of operational training throughout the armed forces.\nIn 1999, the first military exercises of the Armed Forces were held in the Khatlon Garrison. In 2001, military regulations were introduced. In October 2005, a military doctrine was also introduced.\nIn September 2013, the Russian government has given the Tajik military $200 million worth of weapons and hardware, in return for letting them continue to use the 201st base. In late April 2021, forces of the military fought the Kyrgyz military on the Kyrgyzstan\u2013Tajikistan border near K\u00f6k-Tash, utilizing heavy artillery. The Kyrgyz Prosecutor General's Office on 30 April accused the Tajik Armed Forces of invading the country and seizing their sovereign territory.\nIn July 2021, the Tajik military held its largest training exercise in response to the Taliban offensive coming near their borders.\nIt is reported by Russian Ambassador to Tajikistan Igor Lyakin-Frolov that at the end of 2021, large-scale supplies of Russian military hardware, equipment, weapons and munitions were made to Tajikistan.\nOverview.\nCommand.\nThe Security Council advises the President of Tajikistan on matters of national security. As Supreme Commander-in-Chief, the President of Tajikistan is entitled to use the Center for the Management of the Armed Forces (opened on National Army Day in 2018), which would serve as the main military command center for the president, similarly to the Russian Armed Forces National Defense Management Center.\nThe main body of operational command and control of troops is the General Staff, which is responsible for developing mobilization plans and proposals on the military doctrine of the Republic. The plan for the deployment of troops is also developed by the General Staff in agreement with the Government.\nPersonnel.\nMilitary education.\nRussia provided much support toward the creation of the national army, and trained command and engineer personnel. An institute of higher military education was created in Tajikistan. Despite the large budget and the adequate training of personnel, the national army was still far from a professional service. Currently, over 100 Tajik military cadets have undergone training at National Defense Academy and the Indian Military Academy in India. Tajiks also study in Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, China, Pakistan, and the Czech Republic to study, retrain, and improve their professional skills.\nThe following are higher military educational institutions that are part of the Ministry of Defence and/or other militarized institutions:\nMilitary faculties operate in the armed forces:\nThe following is for mid-tier officers:\nSecondary institutions:\nPersonnel training and conscription.\nTajik men aged 18\u201327 are eligible to be drafted in the armed forces, and are expected to serve up to two years. Public servants such as educators have been exempt from the conscription since the early 2000s. The Armed Forces annually has two training sessions.\nRegional areas.\nThe National Army has five Territorial Defense Zones (), divided among the Regions of Tajikistan and Dushanbe:\nThey are led by their elected governors.\nMilitary Justice.\nMilitary courts are run by the Ministry of Defense and the National Guard. They are established on a territorial basis at the location of garrisons. Their activity is aimed at protecting the rights and freedoms of servicemen, as well as the interests of military units. A military court consists of the chairman, deputy chairman, judges and people's deputies.\nBranches.\nArmy.\nDuring the Tajik civil war (1992\u20131993), the Russian government had around 22,000 to 25,000 troops stationed in Tajikistan to help the regime as part of a defense agreement, which is why the Tajik government was able to survive the war. The war was often thought to have been started by Islamic fundamentalists, but more accurately, it was a war between the regional clans and ethnic groups.\nBy the mid-1990s, the National Army numbered to around 3,000. The majority of the officer corps were Russian, mostly veterans of the war in Afghanistan. The Ministry of Defense of Russia continued providing material support for the National Army. It was especially difficult for the Army to create its own military force because many Tajiks preferred to serve in the Russian Army, due to the higher pay. Because of military opposition in the country, the regime had the largest military buildup in the Central Asian region. As of 1997, Tajikistan had two motorized rifle brigades (one of them is a training brigade), a special operations brigade and detachment (all primarily intended for the protection of the ruling regime), and a combined aviation squadron. Tajikistan further had a basic set of units and sub-units that provide operational, technical, and logistic support.\nThe Tajikistan army in 2007 had two motorized rifle brigades, one mountain brigade, one artillery brigade, one airborne assault brigade, one airborne assault detachment, and one surface-to-air missile regiment.\nAir Force.\nThroughout the 1990s, the military did not have an air force and relied on the Russian Air Force for air defense, however, the government planned on making one aviation squadron. In 2007, the Air Force had 800 troops and 12 helicopters. The organizational structure of the Air Force is unknown. Tajik airspace is patrolled by the Russian Air Force.\nThe Tajik Air Force remains small as Dushanbe doesn't expect an attack on Tajikistan from the air, and that Russian Air Force units at Gissar in Tajikistan and other such Russian contingents in Kazakhstan would detect any such assault. Tajikistan is also patrolled by Russian aircraft as part of the Joint CIS Air Defense System. The air force is mostly used for search and rescue missions, transportation, and the occasional attack on militant groups.\nFor funding, the government relied upon modest foreign funds. In February 2013, a 20th anniversary parade occurred in Dushanbe, celebrating the creation of the armed forces. During the parade, 20 helicopters flew over the city. India made a deal in which the Tajik and Russian Air Forces share an air base. The base is commanded jointly by Indian, Tajik, and Russian personnel, who rotate units there periodically.Because of the civil war, air force development was slow. The first equipment to arrive was 10 MI-8MTBs and 5 MI-24 in 1993 based at Dushanbe. The first transport aircraft were AN-24s(?) and AN-26s(?) were supplied in 1996. A plan from the 1990s to acquire SU-25s from Belarus to form an attack squadron did not occur. However, Moscow did help bolster the Tajik's helicopter contingents in 2006\u201307 by giving them six Mil Mi-8 and Mil Mi-24 Hind attack helicopters. It also provided four L-39 Albatros.\nAn accident occurred on 6 October 2010 when a Mi-8, military helicopter from the Tajik National Guard crashed in the Rasht Valley close to Ezgand and Tavildara. The helicopter got caught in some power lines while attempting to land. The helicopter caught fire and crashed without survivors. This is the deadliest accident in Tajik aviation since 1997.\nMobile Forces.\nThe Mobile Forces are the airborne troops of the armed forces. Similar to the Russian Airborne Troops, whom they perform training with, the Mobile Forces were created with no increase in military personnel by transferring a unit of the National Army. Although they are called paratroopers, the Mobile Forces often deploy out of helicopters, as the Tajik Air Force has few planes. On 4 August 2007, the Ministry of Defence created a Paratroopers' Day to celebrate the Mobile Forces.\nSecurity Forces.\nNational Guard.\nThe Tajik National Guard is a special task force under direct command of the President of Tajikistan. Formed on 4 December 1992, it was originally a special forces unit known as the Brigade of Special Mission during the 16th session of the Supreme Council of Tajikistan, under the Tajik Interior Ministry. During its first years, the Guard underwent serious testing, which earned the trust of the President and the people. It was the reason why the President changed it from the Special Mission to the Presidential National Guard.\nTheir primary task is ensuring public safety and security. Within two years, four additional units were formed in the towns of Chkalovsk, Kalinin, and Obigarm. They had a similar structure to the rest of the military. Worthy of note is the honesty that the National Guard has exhibited. The Rapid Reaction Force, also called the First Brigade, under Colonel Mahmud Khudoiberdiyev, took part in the Tajik civil war, as part of the Guard and the regular Army. The colonel and his men fled into Uzbekistan. On 26 January 2004, the Presidential Guard was transformed into the National Guard.\nBorder Troops.\nThe Border Troops of Tajikistan are responsible for border security and operate often with the Afghan Border Police. Development of the border guard is overseen by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. A Border Troops Academy is located in Dushanbe, while a Border Troops Training Centre is found to the south in the Rudaki District. In 2011, the Border Troops, along with the National Army and Mobile Forces, took part in a joint war game with Kyrgyzstan on the Kyrgyz-Tajik border. The operation involved eliminating two attacking groups of terrorists.\nInternal Troops.\nThe Internal Troops, whose constituting document was passed on 28 December 1993, are tasked with state security, operating under the Interior Ministry. The also act as a reserve for the military, and are similar to the National Guard. They have a similar structure to the military.\nCommittee of Emergency Situations and Civil Defense.\nThe Committee of Emergency Situations and Civil Defense is the emergencies and civil defense ministry of Tajikistan. The ministry is authorized to make decisions on the protection of the Tajik population/territory from natural disasters and other geological processes.\nForeign forces.\nOutside the Tajik military, there are also significant foreign forces in the country, principally the Russian 201st Military Base of the Russian Armed Forces. As of 2021, 5000 Russian troops are deployed at 201st Military Base. Stationed at the base are 40 T-72B1, 60 BMP-2, 80 BTR-82A, 40 MT-LB, 18 2S1 Gvozdika, 36 2S3 Akatsiya, 6 2S12 Sani, and 12 9P140 Uragan. A helicopter squadron consisting of 4 Mi-24P Hind, 4 Mi-8MTV Hip, and 2 Mi-8MTV-5-1 Hip is stationed at the base as well. Russia claims to be sending additional tanks and armored vehicles by the end of 2021 after the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan to bolster its forces in Tajikistan. Another country with a military presence in Tajikistan is France, which formerly the Operational Transport Group of the French Air Force. It was designed to provide support to the French contingent in Afghanistan. The base was operated since 2002. In 2005, two French military transport aircraft and about 150 technicians/soldiers were deployed at the Dushanbe International Airport. France used the space free of charge as a result of a bilateral cooperation agreement signed by Presidents Rahmon and Nicolas Sarkozy. The contingent began to pull out in April 2013.\nIn 2010, India took part in a multimillion-dollar renovation of the Soviet-era Hisar Air Base near the Tajik capital. The completion of the renovation work at the base was marked by a military parade and a visit by President Rahmon. Farkhor Air Base is directly operated by the Indian Air Force. It is the first military base outside its territory. In 2003, Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf raised concerns to the Tajik government over the fact that Indian planes coming from the base would be able reach the border with Pakistan within minutes. The United States government has decided that after ISAF troops pull out of Afghanistan, tens of millions of dollars' worth of equipment will be given to the army of Tajikistan, because the Afghan National Army has ties to the Taliban and is not stable.\nTajik-Pakistan military cooperation began in 2009.\nRelations between Iran and Tajikistan have made great progress since 2020. On May 17, 2022, Iran inaugurated a drone factory in neighboring Tajikistan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences and links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30117", "revid": "50670311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30117", "title": "Foreign relations of Tajikistan", "text": "Foreign relations of Tajikistan are based on a desire to secure foreign investment and promote regional security while ensuring Tajikistan's independence. Sirojiddin Muhriddin is the current Foreign\u2019s Minister of Tajikistan.\nDisputes.\nOutstanding boundary negotiations include talks begun with Uzbekistan to demine and delimit borders; however, disputes in Isfara Valley delay completion of delimitation with Kyrgyzstan.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Tajikistan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInter-governmental organisation membership.\nTajikistan is a member of the following international organisations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n. State.gov (2010-09-22). Retrieved on 2010-10-21."}
{"id": "30118", "revid": "50759661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30118", "title": "Tanzania", "text": "Country in East Africa\nTanzania, officially the United Republic of Tanzania, is a country in East Africa within the African Great Lakes region. It is bordered by Uganda to the northwest; Kenya to the northeast; the Indian Ocean to the east; Mozambique and Malawi to the south; Zambia to the southwest; and Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west. According to a 2024 estimate, Tanzania has a population of around 67.5 million, making it the most populous country located entirely south of the equator.\nMany important hominid fossils have been found in Tanzania. In the Stone and Bronze Age, prehistoric migrations into Tanzania included Southern Cushitic speakers similar to modern day Iraqw people, who moved south from present-day Ethiopia; Eastern Cushitic people who moved into Tanzania from north of Lake Turkana about 2,000 and 4,000 years ago; and the Southern Nilotes, including the Datoog, who originated from the present-day South Sudan\u2013Ethiopia border region between 2,900 and 2,400 years ago. These movements took place at about the same time as the settlement of the Mashariki Bantu from West Africa in the Lake Victoria and Lake Tanganyika areas. In the late 19th century, the mainland came under German rule as German East Africa. This was followed by British rule after World War I when it was governed as Tanganyika, with the Zanzibar Archipelago remaining a separate colonial jurisdiction. Following their gaining respective independence in 1961 and 1963, the two entities merged in 1964 to form the United Republic of Tanzania. \nTanganyika joined the British Commonwealth and Tanzania remains a member of the Commonwealth as a unified republic. Today, the country is a presidential constitutional republic with the federal capital located in Government City (Dodoma); the former capital, Dar es Salaam, retains most government offices and is the country's largest city, principal port, and leading commercial centre. For decades, Tanzania has been ruled by the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) as a \"de facto\" one-party state. \nTanzania's population comprises about 120 ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups. Christianity is the largest religion in Tanzania, with substantial Muslim and Animist minorities. Over 100 languages are spoken in Tanzania, making it the most linguistically diverse country in East Africa. The country does not have a \"de jure\" official language, although the national language is Swahili. English is used in foreign trade, in diplomacy, in higher courts, and as a medium of instruction in secondary and higher education. Arabic is widely spoken in Zanzibar, reflecting its history as a trading center dominated by Arabs.\nTanzania is mountainous and densely forested in the north-east, where Mount Kilimanjaro, the highest mountain in Africa and the highest single free-standing mountain above sea level in the world, is located. Three of the African Great Lakes are partly within Tanzania. To the north and west lie Lake Victoria, Africa's largest lake, and Lake Tanganyika, the continent's deepest lake, known for its unique species of fish. To the south lies Lake Malawi. The eastern shore is hot and humid, with the Zanzibar Archipelago just offshore. The Menai Bay Conservation Area is Zanzibar's largest marine protected area. The Kalambo Falls, located on the Kalambo River at the Zambian border, is the second-highest uninterrupted waterfall in Africa. Tanzania is one of the most visited tourist destinations for safaris.\nEtymology.\nThe name Tanzania was created as a clipped compound of the names of the two states that unified to create the country: Tanganyika and Zanzibar. When Zanzibar and Tanganyika were uniting, national newspaper \"The Standard\" ran a contest for a new name, which was won by Mohammed Iqbal Dar. Iqbal claimed he formulated the name by taking \"Tan\" and \"zan\" from the uniting states, \"i\" from his own name, and adding \"a\" as a reference to Ahmadiyya.\nThe name Tanganyika is derived from the Swahili words \"tanga\" \"sail\" and \"nyika\" \"uninhabited plain, wilderness\", creating the phrase \"sail in the wilderness\". It is sometimes understood as a reference to Lake Tanganyika.\nThe name of Zanzibar derives from \"Zanj\", the name of a local people, and Arabic \"barr\" \"coast\" or \"shore.\" Zanj comes from Al-Zanjia, the Arabic name for the East African coast. This word is related to Azania, the Greek name (possibly derived from a Sabaic name) for the same coast, mentioned in \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\", a book written in the first-century CE. Azania is described as ruled by the Mapharitis - an ethnic group residing (at the time) in what is today southwest Yemen.\nHistory.\nAncient.\nTanzania is one of the oldest continuously inhabited areas on Earth. The Olduvai Gorge, in the Ngorongoro Conservation Area, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, features a collection with remnants of tools that document the development and use of transitional technology.\nThe indigenous populations of eastern Africa are thought to be the linguistically isolated Hadza and Sandawe hunter-gatherers of Tanzania.\nThe first wave of migration was by Southern Cushitic speakers who moved south from Ethiopia and Somalia into Tanzania. They are ancestral to the Iraqw, Gorowa, and Burunge. Based on linguistic evidence, there may also have been two movements into Tanzania of Eastern Cushitic people at about 4,000 and 2,000 years ago, originating from north of Lake Turkana.\nArchaeological evidence supports the conclusion that Southern Nilotes, including the Datoog, moved south from the present-day South Sudan / Ethiopia border region into central northern Tanzania between 2,900 and 2,400 years ago.\nThese movements took place at approximately the same time as the settlement of the iron-making Mashariki (Eastern) Bantu from West Africa in the Lake Victoria and Lake Tanganyika areas, as part of the centuries-long Bantu expansion. The Bantu peoples brought with them the west African planting tradition and the primary staple of yams. They subsequently migrated out of these regions across the rest of Tanzania between 2,300 and 1,700 years ago.\nEastern Nilotic peoples, including the Maasai, represent a more recent migration from present-day South Sudan within the past 500 to 1,500 years.\nThe people of Tanzania have been associated with the production of iron and steel. The Pare people were the main producers of sought-after iron for peoples who occupied the mountain regions of north-eastern Tanzania. The Haya people on the western shores of Lake Victoria invented a type of high-heat blast furnace, which allowed them to forge carbon steel at temperatures exceeding more than 1,500 years ago.\nTravellers and merchants from the Persian Gulf and India have visited the east African coast since early in the first millennium AD. Islam was practiced by some on the Swahili Coast as early as the eighth or ninth century AD.\nMedieval.\nBantu-speakers built farming and trade villages along the Tanzanian coast from the outset of the first millennium. Archaeological finds at Fukuchani, on the north-west coast of Zanzibar, indicate a settled agricultural and fishing community from the 6th century CE at the latest. The considerable amount of daub found indicates timber buildings, and shell beads, bead grinders, and iron slag have been found at the site. There is evidence for limited engagement in long-distance trade: a small amount of imported pottery has been found, less than 1% of total pottery finds, mostly from the Gulf and dated to the 5th to 8th century. The similarity to contemporary sites such as Mkokotoni and Dar es Salaam indicate a unified group of communities that developed into the first centre of coastal maritime culture. The coastal towns appear to have been engaged in Indian Ocean and inland African trade at this early period. Trade rapidly increased in importance and quantity beginning in the mid-8th century and by the close of the 10th century Zanzibar was one of the central Swahili trading towns.\nGrowth in Egyptian and Persian shipping from the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf revitalised Indian Ocean trade, particularly after the Fatimid Caliphate relocated to Fustat (Cairo). Swahili agriculturalists built increasingly dense settlements to tap into trade, these forming the earliest Swahili city-states. The Venda-Shona Kingdoms of Mapungubwe and Zimbabwe in South Africa and Zimbabwe, respectively, became a major producer of gold around this same period. Economic, social, and religious power was increasingly vested in Kilwa, Tanzania's major medieval city-state. Kilwa controlled a number of smaller ports stretching down to modern-day Mozambique. Sofala became the major gold emporium and Kilwa grew rich off the trade, lying at the southern end of the Indian Ocean Monsoons. Kilwa's major rivals lay to the north, in modern-day Kenya, namely Mombasa and Malindi. Kilwa remained the major power in East Africa until the arrival of the Portuguese at the end of the 15th century.\nColonial.\nClaiming the coastal strip, Omani Sultan Said bin Sultan moved his capital to Zanzibar City in 1840. During this time, Zanzibar became the centre for the east African slave trade. Between 65 and 90 per cent of the African population of Zanzibar was enslaved. One of the most infamous slave traders on the East African coast was Tippu Tip. The Nyamwezi slave traders operated under the leadership of Msiri and Mirambo. According to Timothy Insoll, \"Figures record the exporting of 718,000 slaves from the Swahili coast during the 19th century, and the retention of 769,000 on the coast.\" In the 1890s, slavery was abolished.\nIn 1863, the Holy Ghost Mission established an early reception center and depot at Zanzibar. In 1877, responding to appeals of Henry Stanley following his trans-Africa expedition, and permission being given to Stanley by King Mutessa I of Buganda, the Church Missionary Society sent missionaries Edward Baxter and Henry Cole to establish inland missions. In 1885, Germany conquered the regions that are now Tanzania (minus Zanzibar) and incorporated them into German East Africa (GEA). \nThe Maji Maji Rebellion, between 1905 and 1907, was an uprising of several African tribes in German East Africa against the colonial authorities, in particular because of forced labour and deportation of certain tribes. It was the subject of a bloody repression, which combined with famine caused 300,000 deaths among the population, out of a Tanganyikan population of about four million.\nThe Supreme Council of the 1919 Paris Peace Conference awarded all of GEA to Britain on 7 May 1919, over the strenuous objections of Belgium. The British colonial secretary, Alfred Milner, and Belgium's minister plenipotentiary to the conference, Pierre Orts, then negotiated the Anglo-Belgian agreement of 30 May 1919 where Britain ceded the north-western GEA provinces of Ruanda and Urundi to Belgium. The conference's Commission on Mandates ratified this agreement on 16 July 1919. The Supreme Council accepted the agreement on 7 August 1919. On 12 July 1919, the Commission on Mandates agreed that the small Kionga Triangle south of the Rovuma River would be given to Portuguese Mozambique, with it eventually becoming part of independent Mozambique. The commission reasoned that Germany had virtually forced Portugal to cede the triangle in 1894. The Treaty of Versailles was signed on 28 June 1919, although the treaty did not take effect until 10 January 1920. On that date, the GEA was transferred officially to Britain, Belgium, and Portugal. Also on that date, \"Tanganyika\" became the name of the British territory. In the mid-1920s, the British implemented a system of indirect rule in Tanzania.\nDuring World War II, about 100,000 people from Tanganyika joined the Allied forces and were among the 375,000 Africans who fought with those forces. Tanganyikans fought in units of the King's African Rifles during the East African Campaign in Somalia and Abyssinia against the Italians, in Madagascar against the Vichy French during the Madagascar Campaign, and in Burma against the Japanese during the Burma Campaign. Tanganyika was an important source of food during this war, and its export income increased greatly compared to the pre-war years of the Great Depression. Wartime demand, however, caused increased commodity prices and massive inflation within the colony.\nIn 1954, Julius Nyerere transformed an organisation into the politically-oriented Tanganyika African National Union (TANU). TANU's main objective was to achieve national sovereignty for Tanganyika. A campaign to register new members was launched, and within a year, TANU had become the leading political organisation in the country. Nyerere became Minister of British-administered Tanganyika in 1960 and continued as prime minister when Tanganyika became independent in 1961.\nModern.\nBritish rule came to an end on 9 December 1961. Elizabeth II, who had acceded to the British throne in 1952, continued to reign through the first year of Tanganyika's independence, but now distinctly as Queen of Tanganyika, represented by the governor general. Tanganyika also joined the British Commonwealth in 1961. On 9 December 1962, Tanganyika became a democratic republic under an executive president.\nAfter the Zanzibar Revolution overthrew the Arab dynasty in neighbouring Zanzibar, accompanied with the slaughter of thousands of Arab Zanzibaris, which had become independent in 1963, the archipelago merged with mainland Tanganyika on 26 April 1964. The new country was then named the \"United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar\". On 29 October of the same year, the country was renamed the United Republic of Tanzania (\"Tan\" comes from Tanganyika and \"Zan\" from Zanzibar). The union of the two hitherto separate regions was controversial among many Zanzibaris (even those sympathetic to the revolution) but was accepted by both the Nyerere government and the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar owing to shared political values and goals.\nFollowing Tanganyika's independence and unification with Zanzibar leading to the state of Tanzania, President Nyerere emphasised a need to construct a national identity for the citizens of the new country. To achieve this, Nyerere provided what is regarded as one of the most successful cases of ethnic repression and identity transformation in Africa. With more than 130 languages spoken within its territory, Tanzania is one of the most ethnically diverse countries in Africa. Despite this obstacle, ethnic divisions remained rare in Tanzania when compared to the rest of the continent, notably its immediate neighbour, Kenya. Furthermore, since its independence, Tanzania has displayed more political stability than most African countries, particularly due to Nyerere's ethnic repression methods.\nIn 1967, Nyerere's first presidency took a turn to the left after the Arusha Declaration, which codified a commitment to socialism as well as Pan-Africanism. After the declaration, banks and many large industries were nationalised.\nTanzania was also aligned with China, which from 1970 to 1975 financed and helped build the TAZARA Railway from Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, to Kapiri Mposhi, Zambia. Nonetheless, from the late 1970s, Tanzania's economy took a turn for the worse, in the context of an international economic crisis affecting both developed and developing economies.\nIn 1978, the neighbouring Uganda, under the leadership of Idi Amin, invaded Tanzania. This disastrous invasion would culminate in Tanzania invading Uganda with the aid of Ugandan rebels and deposing Idi Amin as a result. However, the war severely damaged Tanzania's economy.\nTanzania won its first Olympic medal at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. The nation received two silver medals; both in running events.\nThrough the 1980s, conservation-oriented national parks such as Serengeti and Kilimanjaro, with Mount Kilimanjaro as the tallest freestanding summit on Earth, were included on the UNESCO World Heritage List.\nFrom the mid-1980s, the regime financed itself by borrowing from the International Monetary Fund and underwent some reforms. Since then, Tanzania's gross domestic product per capita has grown and poverty has been reduced, according to a report by the World Bank.\nIn September 1990, Pope John Paul II visited Tanzania during his fourth pastoral journey to Africa. His visit focused on the issues of AIDS and poverty and addressed themes of family, faith and solidarity.\nIn 1992, the Constitution of Tanzania was amended to allow multiple political parties. In Tanzania's first multi-party elections, held in 1995, the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi won 186 of the 232 elected seats in the National Assembly, and Benjamin Mkapa was elected as president.\nThe presidents of Tanzania since independence have been Julius Nyerere (1962\u20131985), Ali Hassan Mwinyi (1985\u20131995), Benjamin Mkapa (1995\u20132005), Jakaya Kikwete (2005\u20132015), John Magufuli (2015\u20132021), and Samia Hassan Suluhu since 2021. After the long tenure of President Nyerere, the Constitution has a term limit: a president can serve a maximum of two terms. Each term is five years. Every president has represented the ruling party Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM). President Magufuli won a landslide victory and re-election in October 2020. According to the opposition, the election was full of fraud and irregularities.\nOn 17 March 2021, President John Magufuli died in office. Magufuli's vice president, Samia Suluhu Hassan, became Tanzania's first female president. A series of demonstrations and civil unrest began in October 2025, coinciding with Tanzania's general elections. President Suluhu was declared the winner with 98% of the vote.\nGeography.\nAt , Tanzania is the 13th largest country in Africa and the 31st largest in the world, ranked between the larger Egypt and smaller Nigeria. It borders Kenya and Uganda to the north; Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west; and Zambia, Malawi, and Mozambique to the south. Tanzania is located on the eastern coast of Africa and has an Indian Ocean coastline approximately long. It also incorporates several offshore islands, including Unguja (Zanzibar), Pemba, and Mafia. The country is the site of Africa's highest and lowest points: Mount Kilimanjaro, at above sea level, and the floor of Lake Tanganyika, at below sea level, respectively.\nTanzania is mountainous and densely forested in the northeast, where Mount Kilimanjaro is located. Three of Africa's Great Lakes are partly within Tanzania. To the north and west lie Lake Victoria, Africa's largest lake, and Lake Tanganyika, the continent's deepest lake, known for its unique species of fish. To the southwest lies Lake Nyasa. Central Tanzania is a large plateau, with plains and arable land. The eastern shore is hot and humid, with the Zanzibar Archipelago just offshore.\nKalambo Falls in the southwestern region of Rukwa is the second highest uninterrupted waterfall in Africa, and is located near the southeastern shore of Lake Tanganyika on the border with Zambia. The Menai Bay Conservation Area is Zanzibar's largest marine protected area.\nClimate.\nClimate varies greatly within Tanzania. In the highlands, temperatures range between during cold and hot seasons respectively. The rest of the country has temperatures rarely falling lower than . The hottest period extends between November and February () while the coldest period occurs between May and August (). Annual temperature is . The climate is cool in high mountainous regions.\nTanzania has two major rainfall periods: one is uni-modal (October\u2013April) and the other is bi-modal (October\u2013December and March\u2013May). The former is experienced in southern, central, and western parts of the country, and the latter is found in the north from Lake Victoria extending east to the coast. The bi-modal rainfall is caused by the seasonal migration of the Intertropical Convergence Zone.\nTanzania infrequently experiences land-falling tropical cyclones which can have severe impacts, Cyclone Hidaya for instance. There are recorded examples of such cyclones back as far as 1872.\nClimate change in Tanzania is resulting in rising temperatures with a higher likelihood of intense rainfall events (resulting in flooding) and of dry spells (resulting in droughts). Climate change is already impacting the sectors in Tanzania of agriculture, water resources, health and energy. Sea level rise and changes in the quality of water are expected to impact fisheries and aquaculture.\nTanzania produced a National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs) in 2007 as mandated by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. In 2012, Tanzania produced a National Climate Change Strategy in response to the growing concern of the negative impacts of climate change and climate variability on the country's social, economic and physical environment.\nWildlife and conservation.\nTanzania contains around 20% of the species of Africa's enormous warm-blooded animal populace, found over its 21 National parks, reserves, 1 conservation area, and 3 marine parks. Spread over a zone of in excess of 42,000 square kilometres (16,000 sq. mi) and shaping around 38% of the nation's area. Tanzania has 21 national parks, plus a variety of game and forest reserves, including the Ngorongoro Conservation Area, however the local human population still has an impact on the environment. In western Tanzania, Gombe Stream National Park was the site of Jane Goodall's study of chimpanzee behaviour, which started in 1960.\nTanzania is highly biodiverse and contains a wide variety of animal habitats. On Tanzania's Serengeti plain, white-bearded wildebeest (\"Connochaetes taurinus mearnsi\"), other bovids and zebra participate in a large-scale annual migration. Tanzania is home to about 130 amphibian and over 275 reptile species, many of them strictly endemic and included in the International Union for Conservation of Nature's Red Lists of countries. Tanzania has the largest lion population in the world.\nTanzania had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.13/10, ranking it 54th globally out of 172 countries.\nPolitics.\nConstitution and elections.\nTanzania is a one-party dominant state with the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) party in power. From its formation until 1992, it was the only legally permitted party in the country. This changed on 1 July 1992, when the constitution was amended. It has held power since independence in 1961, and is the longest-serving ruling party in Africa.\nJohn Magufuli won the October 2015 presidential election and secured a two-thirds majority in parliament. The main opposition party in Tanzania since multiparty politics in 1992 is called Chama cha Demokrasia na Maendeleo (Chadema) (Swahili for \"Party for Democracy and Progress\"). The leader of Chadema party is Freeman Mbowe.\nIn Zanzibar, the country's semi-autonomous state, The Alliance for Change and Transparency-Wazalendo (ACT-Wazalendo) is considered the main opposition political party. The constitution of Zanzibar requires the party that comes in second in the polls to join a coalition with the winning party. ACT-Wazalendo joined a coalition government with the islands' ruling party Chama Cha Mapinduzi in December 2020 after Zanzibar disputed elections.\nIn November 2020, Magufuli once again was declared the winner for his second term as president. Electoral fraud was suspected. The national electoral commission announced that Magufuli received 84%, or about 12.5 million votes and the top opposition candidate, Tundu Lissu received 13%, about 1.9\u00a0million votes.\nIn March 2021, it was announced that Magufuli had died whilst serving in office, meaning that his vice president, Samia Suluhu Hassan, became the country's president.\nTanzania was autocratising in year 2024 according to the V-Dem Democracy Indices.\nIn the 2025 election, Samia Suluhu Hassan was reelected for another term as president, after she barred the 2 main opposition parties from participating in the election. Protests erupted following the election results, and the protests were handled by the authorities with lethal forces that resulted in hundreds killed and many more maimed.\nExecutive.\nThe president of Tanzania and the members of the National Assembly are elected concurrently by direct popular vote for five-year terms. The vice-president is elected for a five-year term at the same time as the president and on the same ticket. Neither the president nor the vice-president may be a member of the National Assembly. The president appoints a prime minister from among the members of the National Assembly, subject to confirmation by the assembly, to serve as the government's leader in the assembly. The president selects her cabinet from assembly members. Law enforcement in Tanzania is under the executive branch of government and is administered by the Tanzania Police Force.\nLegislature.\nAll legislative power relating to mainland Tanzania and union matters is vested in the National Assembly, which is unicameral and has 393 members. These include members elected to represent constituencies, the attorney general, five members elected by the Zanzibar house of representatives from among its own members, the special women's seats that constitute at least 30% of the seats that any party has in the assembly, the speaker of the assembly (if not otherwise a member of the assembly), and the persons (not more than ten) appointed by the president. The Tanzania Electoral Commission demarcates the mainland into constituencies in the number determined by the commission with the consent of the president.\nJudiciary.\nTanzania's legal system is based on English common law.\nTanzania has a four-level judiciary. The lowest-level courts on the Tanzanian mainland are the Primary Courts. In Zanzibar, the lowest-level courts are the Kadhi's Courts for Islamic family matters and the Primary Courts for all other cases. On the mainland, appeal is to either the District Courts or the Resident Magistrates Courts. In Zanzibar, appeal is to the Kadhi's Appeal Courts for Islamic family matters and the Magistrates Courts for all other cases. From there, appeal is to the High Court of Mainland Tanzania or Zanzibar. No appeal regarding Islamic family matters can be made from the High Court of Zanzibar. Otherwise, the final appeal is to the Court of Appeal of Tanzania.\nThe High Court of mainland Tanzania has three divisions \u2013 commercial, labour, and land \u2013 and 15 geographic zones. The High Court of Zanzibar has an industrial division, which hears only labour disputes.\nMainland and union judges are appointed by the Chief Justice of Tanzania, except for those of the Court of Appeal and the High Court, who are appointed by the president of Tanzania.\nTanzania is a party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.\nLaw enforcement.\nPublic safety and border control is the responsibility of the Tanzania Police Force. Oversight of the force is shared by the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Police and the Inspector-General of Police.\nZanzibar.\nThe legislative authority in Zanzibar over all non-union matters is vested in the House of Representatives (per the Tanzania constitution) or the Legislative Council (per the Zanzibar constitution).\nThe Legislative Council has two parts: the president of Zanzibar and the House of Representatives. The president is Zanzibar's head of government and the chairman of the Revolutionary Council, in which the executive authority of Zanzibar is invested. Zanzibar has two vice-presidents, with the first being from the main opposition party in the house. The second is from the party in power and is the leader of government business in the House.\nThe president and the members of the House of Representatives have five-year terms and can be elected for a second term.\nThe president selects ministers from members of the House of Representatives, with the ministers allocated according to the number of House seats won by political parties. The Revolutionary Council consists of the president, both vice-presidents, all ministers, the attorney general of Zanzibar, and other house members deemed fit by the president.\nThe House of Representatives is composed of elected members, ten members appointed by the president, all the regional commissioners of Zanzibar, the attorney general, and appointed female members whose number must be equal to 30 per cent of the elected members. The House determines the number of its elected members with the Zanzibar Electoral Commission determining the boundaries of each election constituency. In 2013, the House had 81 members: fifty elected members, five regional commissioners, the attorney general, ten members appointed by the president, and fifteen appointed female members.\nAdministrative subdivisions.\nIn 1972, local government on the mainland was abolished and replaced with direct rule from the central government. Local government, however, was reintroduced in the beginning of the 1980s, when the rural councils and rural authorities were re-established. Local government elections took place in 1983, and functioning councils started in 1984. In 1999, a Local Government Reform Programme was enacted by the National Assembly, setting \"a comprehensive and ambitious agenda ... [covering] four areas: political decentralization, financial decentralization, administrative decentralization and changed central-local relations, with the mainland government having overriding powers within the framework of the Constitution.\"\nTanzania is divided into thirty-one regions (\"mikoa\"), twenty-six on the mainland and five in Zanzibar (three on Unguja, two on Pemba). The thirty-one regions are divided into 195 districts (\"wilaya\"), also known as local government authorities. Of those districts, 45 are urban units, which are further classified as three city councils (Arusha, Mbeya, and Mwanza), twenty municipal councils, and twenty-two town councils.\nThe urban units have an autonomous city, municipal, or town council and are subdivided into wards and sub-wards (\"mitaa)\". The non-urban units have an autonomous district council but are subdivided into village councils or township authorities (first level) and then into hamlets (\"vitongoji)\".\nThe city of Dar es Salaam is unique because it has a city council whose area of jurisdiction overlaps three municipal councils. The mayor of the city council is elected by that council. The twenty-member city council is composed of eleven persons elected by the municipal councils, seven members of the National Assembly, and \"Nominated members of parliament under 'Special Seats' for women\". Each municipal council also has a mayor. \"The City Council performs a coordinating role and attends to issues cutting across the three municipalities\", including security and emergency services. The city of Mwanza has a city council whose areal jurisdiction overlaps two municipal councils.\nForeign policies and partnerships.\nForeign policies of Tanzania are in process of review to replace the current New Foreign Policy of 2001, which was the first official foreign policy of Tanzania. Before 2001, Tanzanian foreign policy was dictated by the various presidential declarations of Julius Nyerere, specifically Circular No. 2 of 1964, the Arusha Declaration, and Policy of Foreign Affairs of 1967. These declarations had focused foreign policy primarily on independence and sovereignty, human rights, and African unity. The current New Foreign Policy of 2001 was established to better address the end of colonialism and the Cold War, globalization, market economics and liberalization, and the multi-party state of Tanzania. Its primary focus is economic diplomacy and development.\nNew Foreign Policy of 2001, which is still used today, has a foundation of seven principles; sovereignty, liberalism, good neighborliness, African unity, non-alignment, economic diplomacy, and global cooperation for economic development and peace. The primary objectives are outlined as the protection and promotion of cultural and economic interests, establishment of relations with other nations driven by economic interest, economic self-sufficiency, internal and global peace, and regional political and economic integration.\nA review of current foreign policy is being undertaken by the sixth phase government to replace the current New Foreign Policy of 2001. Foreign Affairs Minister Liberata Mulamula has stated the new policies will maintain the priority of and non-alignment of the 2001 policy while making additional top priorities the climate change and refocusing economic diplomacy with a greater focus on value-added exports and the digital economy.\nInternational partnerships.\nTanzania is a member of many international organizations such as the United Nations (UN), African Union (AU), East African Community (EAC), and Southern African Development Community (SADC) among many others. Additionally, due to the strength of Tanzania's non-alignment, unity and internal peace since independence, Tanzania frequently acts as a mediator and location of treaties and agreements between other nations, such as the Arusha Agreement with Europe, as well as the Arusha Accords with Rwanda (1993) and Burundi (2000).\nThe United Nations has a large current and historical presence in Tanzania and acts as an important partner in itself, and associated IGOs and NGOs, in many functions in the country, as well as functions based in Tanzania and implemented throughout the Great Lakes and Africa as a whole. Of the many functions, the UN and Tanzania partner or the UN works with outside countries, most notably human rights and justice courts and reporting, education, development, climate change, health, and wildlife conservation. While the UN primary offices are in Oysterbay, Dar es Salaam, many other offices, courts, and NGOs are based in Arusha, TZ. The most well-known example is the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda genocide.\nThe African Union consists of 55 nations in Africa. Tanzania is a founding member of the AU in 2001, and its predecessor the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) by the predecessors of Tanzania, Tanganyika and Zanzibar, in 1963. The Judicial Branch of the AU and its courts are located in Tanzania. Originally the Court of Justice of the African Union, it has been combined with the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights to form the African Court of Justice and Human Rights (ACJHR) which is located in Arusha. Tanzania ratified and joined the AU-brokered African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) on 17 January 2022, the largest free trade area in the world.\nThe East African Community consisting of Tanzania, Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is headquartered in Arusha. Tanzania, along with Kenya and Uganda, is a founding member of the EAC in 2000. Following the German defeat in World War I Tanzania joined the London-based East African Currency Board (EACB) that was a customs union and provider of currency for Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya from 1919 to 1948, the East Africa High Commission (EAHC) from 1948 to 1961, and East African Common Services Organization (EACSO) from 1961 to 1966. In 1966 all three countries formed the first East African Community which lasted until 1976, then the East African Co-operation from 1993 to 2000, before becoming reestablished as the East African Community in 2000.\nThe EAC has had a customs union since 2005, with a free trade zone between member states and unified tariffs and trade agreements with non-member states and multinational organizations. The customs union also established a unified organization and sets of rules, such as rules of origin, for all trade within, into, and passing through member states. In 2010 a common market was established within the EAC for the free movement of labor, goods, people, capital, and services, as well as established rights of establishment. The East African Monetary Union (EAMU) is proposed to be established in 2024 that will create a single common currency by the East African Central Bank. From the original reestablishment of the EAC, as laid out in Article 5(2) of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, the final goal for the EAC is always the political federation of all member states. In 2017 all member states adopted the confederation of EAC as a transitional precursor to the final federation.\nThe Southern African Development Community consists of 16 nations, including all countries of southern Africa plus Tanzania and the DRC from the Great Lakes. Tanzania is a founding member of SADC in 1994, as well as its predecessor the Frontline States (FLS), from 1960 to 1994. While FLS aimed to end apartheid, its successor SADC has the aims of furthering peace and security along with the economic and political integration of member states.\nMilitary.\nThe Tanzania People's Defence Force (TPDF) (Kiswahili: Jeshi la Wananchi wa Tanzania (JWTZ)) is the armed forces of Tanzania, operating as a people's force under civilian control. It is composed of five branches or commands: Land Force (army), Air Force, Naval Command, National Service, Headquarter (MMJ). Tanzanian citizens are able to volunteer for military service from 15 years of age, and 18 years of age for compulsory National military service upon graduation from advanced secondary school. Conscript service obligation was 2 years as of 2004. https://\nHuman rights.\nThroughout Tanzania, same sex acts are illegal and carry a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, though the law is rarely enforced, and gay people do meet up. According to a 2007 Pew Research Centre survey, 95 percent of Tanzanians believed that homosexuality should not be accepted by society.\nPeople with albinism living in Tanzania are often attacked, killed or mutilated because of superstitions related to the black-magical practice known as muti that say body parts of albinos have magical properties. Tanzania has the highest occurrence of this human rights violation among 27 African countries where muti is known to be practised.\nIn December 2019, Amnesty International reported that the Tanzanian government annulled the right of NGOs (voluntary citizens groups) as well as individuals to directly file any case against it at the Arusha-based African Court for Human and Peoples' Rights.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], according to the IMF, Tanzania's gross domestic product (GDP) was an estimated $71 billion (nominal), or $218.5 billion on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis. GDP per capita (PPP) was $3,574.\nFrom 2009 through to 2013, Tanzania's per capita GDP (based on constant local currency) grew an average of 3.5% per year, higher than any other member of the East African Community (EAC) and exceeded by only nine countries in Sub-Saharan Africa: the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Lesotho, Liberia, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.\nTanzania's largest trading partners in 2017 for its US$5.3\u00a0billion in exports were India, Vietnam, South Africa, Switzerland, and China. Its imports totalled US$8.17\u00a0billion, with India, Switzerland, Saudi Arabia, China, and the United Arab Emirates being the biggest partners.\nTanzania weathered the Great Recession, which began in late 2008 or early 2009, relatively well. Strong gold prices, bolstering the country's mining industry, and Tanzania's poor integration into global markets helped to insulate the country from the downturn. Since the recession ended, the Tanzanian economy has expanded rapidly thanks to strong tourism, telecommunications, and banking sectors.\nAccording to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), however, recent growth in the national economy has benefited only the \"very few\", leaving out the majority of the population. As of the latest survey in 2015/2016, 57.1 percent of the population is considered to be affected by multidimensional poverty. Tanzania's 2013 Global Hunger Index was worse than any other country in the EAC except Burundi. The proportion of persons who were undernourished in 2010\u201312 was also worse than any other EAC country except Burundi.\nIn 2020, the World Bank declared the rise of the Tanzanian economy from low income to lower middle income country, as its GNI per capita increased from US$1,020 in 2018 to US$1,080 in 2019.\nTanzania's economy grew 4.6 percent in 2022, and 5.2 percent in 2023.\nHunger and poverty.\nThe Global Hunger Index previously ranked the situation as \"alarming\" with a score of 42 in the year 2000; since then the GHI has declined to 23.2. Children in rural areas suffer substantially higher rates of malnutrition and chronic hunger, although urban-rural disparities have narrowed as regards both stunting and underweight. Low rural sector productivity arises mainly from inadequate infrastructure investment; limited access to farm inputs, extension services and credit; limited technology as well as trade and marketing support; and heavy dependence on rain-fed agriculture and natural resources.\nApproximately 68 percent of Tanzania's 61.1\u00a0million citizens live below the poverty line of $1.25 a day. 32 percent of the population are malnourished. The most prominent challenges Tanzania faces in poverty reduction are unsustainable harvesting of its natural resources, unchecked cultivation, climate change and water source encroachment, according to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).\nThere are very few resources for Tanzanians in terms of credit services, infrastructure or availability to improved agricultural technologies, which further exacerbates hunger and poverty in the country according to the UNDP. Tanzania ranks 159 out of 187 countries in poverty according to the United Nation's Human Development Index (2014).\nThe 2019 World Bank report showed that in the last 10 years, poverty has reduced by 8 percentage points, from 34.4% in 2007 to 26.4% in 2018. A further report showed a reduction to 25.7% in 2020.\nAgriculture.\nThe Tanzanian economy is heavily based on agriculture, which in 2013 accounted for 24.5 per cent of gross domestic product, provides 85% of exports, and accounted for half of the employed workforce. The agricultural sector grew 4.3 percent in 2012, less than half of the Millennium Development Goal target of 10.8%. 16.4 per cent of the land is arable, with 2.4 percent of the land planted with permanent crops. Tanzania's economy relies on farming, but climate change has impacted their farming.\nMaize was the largest food crop on the Tanzania mainland in 2013 (5.17\u00a0million tonnes), followed by cassava (1.94\u00a0million tonnes), sweet potatoes (1.88\u00a0million tonnes), beans (1.64\u00a0million tonnes), bananas (1.31\u00a0million tonnes), rice (1.31\u00a0million tonnes), and millet (1.04\u00a0million tonnes). Sugar was the largest cash crop on the mainland in 2013 (296,679 tonnes), followed by cotton (241,198 tonnes), cashew nuts (126,000 tonnes), tobacco (86,877 tonnes), coffee (48,000 tonnes), sisal (37,368 tonnes), and tea (32,422 tonnes). Beef was the largest meat product on the mainland in 2013 (299,581 tonnes), followed by lamb/mutton (115,652 tonnes), chicken (87,408 tonnes), and pork (50,814 tonnes).\nAccording to the 2002 National Irrigation Master Plan, 29.4\u00a0million hectares in Tanzania are suitable for irrigation farming; however, only 310,745 hectares were actually being irrigated in June 2011.\nIndustry, energy and construction.\nIndustry and construction is a major and growing component of the Tanzanian economy, contributing 22.2 per cent of GDP in 2013. This component includes mining and quarrying, manufacturing, electricity and natural gas, water supply, and construction. Mining contributed 3.3 per cent of GDP in 2013. The vast majority of the country's mineral export revenue comes from gold, accounting for 89 per cent of the value of those exports in 2013. Tanzania's gold production is 46 metric tonnes in 2015. It also exports sizeable quantities of gemstones, including diamonds and tanzanite. All of Tanzania's coal production, which totalled 106,000 short tons in 2012, is used domestically.\nOnly 15 percent of Tanzanians had access to electric power in 2011, rising to 35.2 per cent in 2018. The government-owned Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO) dominates the electric supply industry in Tanzania. The country generated 6.013\u00a0billion kilowatt hours (kWh) of electricity in 2013, a 4.2 per cent increase over the 5.771\u00a0billion kWh generated in 2012. Generation increased by 63 percent between 2005 and 2012; Almost 18 percent of the electricity generated in 2012 was lost because of theft and transmission and distribution problems. The electrical supply varies, particularly when droughts disrupt hydropower electric generation; rolling blackouts are implemented as necessary. The unreliability of the electrical supply has hindered the development of Tanzanian industry. In 2013, 49.7 percent of Tanzania's electricity generation came from natural gas, 28.9 percent from hydroelectric sources, 20.4 percent from thermal sources, and 1.0 percent from outside the country. The government has built a gas pipeline from Mnazi Bay to Dar es Salaam. This pipeline was expected to allow the country to double its electricity generation capacity to 3,000 megawatts by 2016. The government's goal is to increase capacity to at least 10,000 megawatts by 2025.\nAccording to PFC Energy, 25 to 30\u00a0trillion cubic feet of recoverable natural gas resources have been discovered in Tanzania since 2010, bringing the total reserves to over 43\u00a0trillion cubic feet by the end of 2013. The value of natural gas actually produced in 2013 was US$52.2\u00a0million, a 42.7 percent increase over 2012.\nCommercial production of gas from the Songo Songo Island field in the Indian Ocean commenced in 2004, thirty years after it was discovered there. Over 35\u00a0billion cubic feet of gas was produced from this field in 2013, with proven, probable, and possible reserves totalling 1.1\u00a0trillion cubic feet. The gas is transported by pipeline to Dar es Salaam. As of 27 August 2014, TANESCO owed the operator of this field, Orca Exploration Group Inc.\nA newer natural gas field in Mnazi Bay in 2013 produced about one-seventh of the amount produced near Songo Songo Island but has proven, probable, and possible reserves of 2.2\u00a0trillion cubic feet. Virtually all of that gas is being used for electricity generation in Mtwara.\nThe Ruvuma and Kiliwani areas of Tanzania have been explored mostly by the discovery company that holds a 75 percent interest, Aminex, and has shown to hold in excess of 3.5\u00a0trillion cubic feet of natural gas. A pipeline connecting offshore natural gas fields to Tanzania's commercial capital Dar es Salaam was completed at the end of April 2015.\nTourism.\nTravel and tourism contributed 17.5 per cent of Tanzania's gross domestic product in 2016 and employed 11.0 per cent of the country's labour force (1,189,300 jobs) in 2013. Overall receipts rose from US$1.74\u00a0billion in 2004 to US$4.48\u00a0billion in 2013, and receipts from international tourists rose from US$1.255\u00a0billion in 2010 to US$2\u00a0billion in 2016. In 2016, 1,284,279 tourists arrived at Tanzania's borders compared to 590,000 in 2005. The vast majority of tourists visit Zanzibar or a \"northern circuit\" of Serengeti National Park, the Ngorongoro Conservation Area, Tarangire National Park, Lake Manyara National Park, and Mount Kilimanjaro. In 2013, the most visited national park was Serengeti (452,485 tourists), followed by Manyara (187,773) and Tarangire (165,949).\nBanking.\nThe Bank of Tanzania is the central bank of Tanzania and is primarily responsible for maintaining price stability, with a subsidiary responsibility for issuing the banknotes and coins of the Tanzanian shilling. At the end of 2013, the total assets of the Tanzanian banking industry were TSh\u00a019.5\u00a0trillion, a 15 per cent increase over 2012.\nTransport.\nMost transport in Tanzania is by road, with road transport constituting over 75 per cent of the country's freight traffic and 80 percent of its passenger traffic. The Cairo-Cape Town Highway passes through Tanzania. The road system is in generally poor condition. Tanzania has two railway companies: TAZARA, which provides service between Dar es Salaam and Kapiri Mposhi (in a copper-mining district in Zambia), and Tanzania Railways Limited, which connects Dar es Salaam with central and northern Tanzania. Rail travel in Tanzania often entails slow journeys with frequent cancellations or delays, and the railways have a deficient safety record.\nIn Dar es Salaam, there is a huge project of rapid buses, Dar Rapid Transit (DART) which connects suburbs of Dar es Salaam city. The development of the DART system consists of six phases and is funded by the African Development Bank, the World Bank and the Government of Tanzania. The first phase began in April 2012, and it was completed in December 2015 and launched operations in May 2016.\nTanzania has four international airports, along with over 120 small airports or landing strips. Airport infrastructure tends to be in poor condition. Airlines in Tanzania include Air Tanzania, Precision Air, Fastjet, Coastal Aviation, and ZanAir.\nCommunications.\nIn 2013, the communications sector was the fastest growing in Tanzania, expanding 22.8 per cent; however, the sector accounted for only 2.4 per cent of gross domestic product that year.\nAs of 2011, Tanzania had 56 mobile telephone subscribers per 100 inhabitants, a rate slightly above the sub-Saharan average. Very few Tanzanians have fixed-line telephones. Approximately 12 per cent of Tanzanians used the internet as of 2011[ [update]], though this number is growing rapidly. The country has a fibre-optic cable network that replaced unreliable satellite service, but internet bandwidth remains very low.\nEconomic statistics controversy.\nTwo articles in the \"Economist\" in July 2020 raised doubts about official claims of economic growth: \"If Tanzania's economy grew by almost 7% in the fiscal year to the end of June 2019, why did tax revenue fall by 1%? And why has bank lending to companies slumped? Private data are bad, too. In 2019 sales at the biggest brewer fell by 5%. Sales of cement by the two biggest producers were almost flat. None of these things is likely if growth is storming ahead. The discrepancies are so large that it is hard to avoid the conclusion that the government is lying.\"\nTim Staermose, a proponent of African investment, took issue with these data: \"Some of these statements by \"The Economist\", based on the evidence I have gathered from primary sources \u2013 namely, the statutory financial reports that listed companies in Tanzania are legally obligated to release \u2013 are simply not true. Bank lending to companies as far as I can see has not, 'slumped.' The two biggest banks in Tanzania, which between them account for approximately 40% of the banking sector, both reported strong loan growth in 2019. ... As for cement sales being 'almost flat,' again, this is total nonsense. ... In 2019 Twiga sold 6% more cement by volume than it did in 2018. In the first six months of 2020, Twiga already sold 8% more cement than it had done by the same stage in 2019. Again, these numbers are very consistent with an economy that's reported to be growing at around 7% per annum. ... [On] the 5% fall in beer sales in 2019 ... the published 2019 annual report by Tanzania Breweries Limited (TBL) will tell you there were one-off circumstances that largely drove the decline ... [which] resulted in sales falling. But TBL's profits actually rose in 2019.\"\nFood and nutrition.\nPoor nutrition remains a persistent problem within Tanzania and varies hugely throughout the country's regions. USAID reports that 16% of children are underweight and 34% experience stunted growth as a result of malnutrition. 10 regions house 58% of children suffering from stunted growth while 50% of acutely malnourished children can be found in 5 regions. Over a 5-year period, the Mara district of Tanzania saw a 15% reduction in stunting in children under 5 years old, falling from 46% to 31% in 2005 and 2010 respectively. Dodoma, on the other hand, saw a 7% increase in the prevalence of stunting in this age group, rising from 50% in 2005 to 57% in 2010. Overall availability of food does not necessarily contribute to overall stunting figures. Iringa, Mbeya and Rukwa regions, where overall availability of food is considered acceptable, still experience stunting incidents in excess of 50%. In some areas where food shortages are common, such as in the Tabora and Singida regions, stunting instances remain comparatively less than those seen in Iringa, Mbeya and Rukwa. The Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre attributes these discrepancies to variance in maternal malnutrition, poor infant feeding practices, hygiene practices and poor healthcare services. Periods of drought can have significant impacts on the production of crops in Tanzania. Drought in East Africa has resulted in massive increases in the prices of food staples such as maize and sorghum, crops crucial to the nutrition of the majority of Tanzania's population. From 2015 to 2017 the price of maize when bought wholesale more than tripled, from TSh\u00a0400/ per kilogramme to 1,253/ per kilogramme.\nTanzania remains heavily agricultural, with 80% of the total population engaging in subsistence farming. Rural areas are subjected to increased food shortages in comparison to urbanised areas, with a survey carried out within the country in 2017 finding 84% of people in rural areas suffering food shortages over a 3-month period compared to 64% of residents in cities. This disparity between rural and city nutrition can be attributed to various factors; increased nutritional needs due to manual labour, more limited access to food as a result of poor infrastructure, high-susceptibility to the damaging effects of nature and the \"Agricultural Productivity Gap\". The Agricultural Productivity Gap postulates that \"value added per worker\" is often much lower within the agricultural sector than that found within non-agricultural sectors. Furthermore, allocation of labour within the agricultural sector is largely allocated ineffectively.\nProgrammes targeting hunger.\nUSAID programmes focusing on nutrition operate within the Morogoro, Dodoma, Iringa, Mbeya, Manyara, Songwe and Zanzibar regions of Tanzania. These \"Feed the Future\" programmes heavily invest in nutrition, infrastructure, policy, capacity of institutions and agriculture which is identified by the organisation as a key area of economic growth in the country. A Tanzanian government led initiative \"Kilimo Kwanza\" or \"Agriculture First\" aims to encourage investment into agriculture within the private sector and hopes to improve agricultural processes and development within the country by seeking the knowledge of young people and the innovation that they can potentially provide. During the 1990s, around 25% of Tanzania's population were provided access to iodised oil aimed to target iodine deficiency within expecting mothers, as result of studies showing the negative effects of in-utero iodine deficiency on cognitive development in children. Research showed that children of mothers with access to the supplement achieved on average greater than a third of a year more education than those who did not.\nProgrammes led by the World Food Programme operate within Tanzania. The Supplementary Feeding Programme (SFP) aims to target acute malnutrition by supplying blended food fortified with vitamins to pregnant women and mothers to children under 5 on a monthly basis. Pregnant women and mothers to children under 2 have access to the Mother and Child Health and Nutrition Programme's \"Super Cereal\" which is supplied with the intent of reducing stunting in children. World Food Programme supplementation remains the main food source for Tanzania's refugees. Super Cereal, Vegetable Oil, Pulses and Salt are supplied as part of the Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation to meet the average person's minimum daily caloric requirement of 2,100 kcal. UNICEF state that continued investment in nutrition within Tanzania is of the utmost importance: Estimates predict that Tanzania stands to lose $20 billion by 2025 if nutrition within the country remains at its current level, however improvements in nutrition could produce a gain of around $4.7 billion\nSave the Children, with the help of UNICEF and Irish Aid funding created the Partnership for Nutrition in Tanzania (PANITA), in 2011. PANITA aims to use civil society organisations to target nutrition within the country. Alongside this, various sectors associated with nutrition are targeted such as agriculture, water, sanitation, education, economic development and social progress. PANITA is responsible for ensuring significant attention is given to nutrition in development plans and budgets created on national and regional levels within Tanzania. Since its conception, PANITA has grown from 94 to 306 participating civil society organisations nationwide. Agriculture within Tanzania is targeted by the Irish Aid led initiative Harnessing Agriculture for Nutrition Outcomes (HANO), which aims to merge nutrition initiatives with agriculture in the Lindi District of the country. The project aims to reduce stunting by 10% in children aged 0 to 23 months.\nScience and technology.\nTanzania's first \"National Science and Technology Policy\" was adopted in 1996. The objective of the government's \"Vision 2025\" (1998) document was to \"transform the economy into a strong, resilient and competitive one, buttressed by science and technology\".\nUnder the umbrella of the One UN Initiative, UNESCO and Tanzanian government departments and agencies formulated a series of proposals in 2008 for revising the \"National Science and Technology Policy\". The total reform budget of US$10\u00a0million was financed from the One UN fund and other sources. UNESCO provided support for mainstreaming science, technology, and innovation into the new \"National Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy\" for the mainland and Zanzibar namely, Mkukuta II and Mkuza II, including in the field of tourism.\nTanzania's revised science policy was published in 2010. Entitled \"National Research and Development Policy\", it recognises the need to improve the process of prioritisation of research capacities, develop international co-operation in strategic areas of research and development, and improve planning for human resources. It also makes provisions for the establishment of a National Research Fund. This policy was, in turn, reviewed in 2012 and 2013.\nIn 2010, Tanzania devoted 0.38 per cent of GDP to research and development. The global average in 2013 was 1.7 per cent of GDP. Tanzania had 69 researchers (in head counts) per million population in 2010. In 2014, Tanzania counted 15 publications per million inhabitants in internationally catalogued journals, according to Thomson Reuters' Web of Science (Science Citation Index Expanded). The average for sub-Saharan Africa was 20 publications per million inhabitants and the global average 176 publications per million inhabitants. Tanzania was ranked 121st in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, down from 97th in 2019.\nDemographics.\nAccording to a 2024 estimate, Tanzania has a population of around 67.5 million; according to the 2012 census, the total population of Tanzania was 44,928,923. The under-15 age group represented 44.1% of the population.\nThe population distribution in Tanzania is significantly uneven. Most people live on the northern border or the coast, with much of the remainder of the country being sparsely populated. Density varies from in the Katavi Region to in the Dar es Salaam Region.\nApproximately 70% of the population is rural, although this percentage has been declining since at least 1967. Dar es Salaam (population 4,364,541) is the largest city and commercial capital. The capital of the country and economic centre of Tanzania, Dodoma (population 410,956) is located in central Tanzania, and hosts the National Assembly.\nAt the time of the foundation of the United Republic of Tanzania in 1964, the child mortality rate was 335 deaths per 1,000 live births. Since independence, the rate of child deaths has declined to 62 per 1,000 births.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe population consists of about 125 ethnic groups. The Sukuma, Nyamwezi, Chagga, and Haya peoples each have a population exceeding 1 million. Most Tanzanians are of native African descent. Tanzanian citizens of Indian descent constitute a significant demographic minority which is particularly prominent in business and entrepreneurship. There are also Tanzanians of Chinese descent. Many Tanzanians identify as Shirazis. Some Tanzanians are of Arab descent. The majority of Tanzanians, including the Sukuma and the Nyamwezi, are Bantu.\nThousands of Arabs and Indians were massacred during the Zanzibar Revolution of 1964. As of 1994, the Asian community numbered 50,000 on the mainland and 4,000 on Zanzibar. An estimated 70,000 Arabs and 10,000 Europeans lived in Tanzania. As of 2015, the Indian community numbered 60,000.\nSome albinos in Tanzania have been the victims of violence in recent years. Attacks are often to hack off the limbs of albinos in the superstitious belief that possessing the bones of albinos will bring wealth. The country has banned witch doctors to try to prevent the practice, but it has continued and albinos remain targets.\nAccording to 2010 Tanzanian government statistics, the total fertility rate in Tanzania was 5.4 children born per woman, with 3.7 in urban mainland areas, 6.1 in rural mainland areas, and 5.1 in Zanzibar. For all women aged 45\u201349, 37.3 per cent had given birth to eight or more children, and for currently married women in that age group, 45.0 per cent had given birth to that many children.\nReligion.\nOfficial statistics on religion are unavailable because religious surveys were eliminated from government census reports after 1967. Tanzania's religious field is dominated by Christianity, Islam and African traditional religions connected to ethnic customs. The word for religion in Swahili, \"dini,\" is generally applied to the world religions of Christianity and Islam, meaning that followers of traditional African religions are considered to be of \"no religion\". Religious belonging is often ambiguous, with some people adhering to multiple religious identities at the same time (for instance being Christian but also following African traditional rituals), something which suggests that religious boundaries are flexible and contextual.\nAccording to a 2020 estimate by the \"CIA World Factbook\", 63.1% of the population was Christian, 34.1% was Muslim, 1.1% practised traditional African religions and 1.6% did not specify. However, according to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), 55.3% of the population is Christian, 31.5% is Muslim, 11.3% practices traditional faiths, while 1.9% of the population is non-religious or adheres to other faiths as of 2020. The ARDA estimates that most Tanzanian Muslims are Sunni, with a small Shia minority, as of 2020. Nearly the entire population of Zanzibar is Muslim. Of Muslims, 16% are Ahmadiyya, 20% are non-denominational Muslims, 40% are Sunni, 20% are Shia, and 4% are Sufi. Most Shias in Tanzania are from Asian/Indian descent. Notable Shias of Indian/Khoja heritage in Tanzania are Mohammed Dewji or Amir H. Jamal.\nWithin the Christian community, the Catholic Church is the largest group (51% of all Christians). Among the Protestants, the large number of Lutherans and Moravians points to the German missionary past of the country, while the number of Anglicans point to the British missionary history of Tanganyika. A growing number have adopted Pentecostalism, and Adventists likewise have an increasing presence because of external missionary activities from Scandinavia and the United States, especially during the first part of the 20th century. All of them have had some influence in varying degrees from the Walokole movement (East African Revival), which has also been fertile ground for the spread of charismatic and Pentecostal groups. The country also has around 20,000 Jehovah's Witnesses.\nThere are also active communities of other religious groups, primarily on the mainland, such as Buddhists, Hindus, and Bah\u00e1'\u00eds.\nLanguages.\nMore than 100 languages are spoken in Tanzania, making it the most linguistically diverse country in East Africa. Among the languages spoken are four of Africa's language families: Bantu, Cushitic, Nilotic, and Khoisan. There are no \"de jure\" official languages in Tanzania, with Kiswahili serving as the national language.\nKiswahili, an endonym meaning Swahili language, is used in parliamentary debate, in the lower courts, and as a medium of instruction in primary school. English is used in foreign trade, in diplomacy, in higher courts, and as a medium of instruction in secondary and higher education. The Tanzanian government, however, has plans to discontinue English as a language of instruction. In connection with his Ujamaa social policies, President Nyerere encouraged the use of Swahili to help unify the country's many ethnic groups. Approximately 10 per cent of Tanzanians speak Swahili as a first language, and up to 90 per cent speak it as a second language. Many educated Tanzanians are trilingual, also speaking English. The widespread use and promotion of Swahili is contributing to the decline of smaller languages in the country. Young children increasingly speak Swahili as a first language, particularly in urban areas. Ethnic community languages (ECL) other than Kiswahili are not allowed as a language of instruction. Nor are they taught as a subject, though they might be used unofficially in some cases in initial education. Television and radio programmes in an ECL are prohibited, and it is nearly impossible to get permission to publish a newspaper in an ECL. There is no department of local or regional African Languages and Literatures at the University of Dar es Salaam.\nThe Sandawe people speak a language that may be related to the Khoe languages of Botswana and Namibia, while the language of the Hadzabe people, although it has similar click consonants, is arguably a language isolate. The language of the Iraqw people is Cushitic.\nEducation and libraries.\nIn 2015, the literacy rate in Tanzania was 77.9% for people aged 15 and over (83.2% males, 73.1% females). Education is compulsory until children reach age 15. In 2020, 97% completed primary (98.4% females and 95.5% males), 28.3% completed secondary (30% females and 27% males), and 8% completed tertiary education (7% females and 8.5% males).\nThe Tanzania Library Services Board operates twenty-one regional, eighteen district, and one divisional library.\nHealthcare.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], life expectancy at birth was 61 years. The under-five mortality rate in 2012 was 54 per 1,000 live births. The maternal mortality rate in 2013 was estimated at 410 per 100,000 live births. Prematurity and malaria were tied in 2010 as the leading cause of death in children under five years old. The other leading causes of death for these children were, in decreasing order, malaria, diarrhoea, HIV, and measles.\nMalaria in Tanzania causes death and disease and has a \"huge economic impact\". There were approximately 11.5\u00a0million cases of clinical malaria in 2008. In 2007\u201308, malaria prevalence among children aged 6 months to five years was highest in the Kagera Region (41.1 per cent) on the western shore of Lake Victoria and lowest in the Arusha Region (0.1 per cent).\nAccording to the 2010 \"Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2010\", 15 per cent of Tanzanian women had undergone female genital mutilation (FGM) and 72 per cent of Tanzanian men had been circumcised. FGM is most common in the Manyara, Dodoma, Arusha, and Singida regions and nonexistent in Zanzibar. The prevalence of male circumcision was above 90 per cent in the eastern (Dar es Salaam, Pwani, and Morogoro regions), northern (Kilimanjaro, Tanga, Arusha, and Manyara regions), and central areas (Dodoma and Singida regions) and below 50 per cent only in the southern highlands zone (Mbeya, Iringa, and Rukwa regions).\n2012 data showed that 53 per cent of the population used improved drinking water sources (defined as a source that \"by nature of its construction and design, is likely to protect the source from outside contamination, in particular from faecal matter\") and 12 per cent used improved sanitation facilities (defined as facilities that \"likely hygienically separates human excreta from human contact\" but not including facilities shared with other households or open to public use). On 21 January 2025, Tanzania's President, Samia Suluhu Hassan, has confirmed an outbreak of the Marburg virus, a highly infectious disease similar to Ebola. She expressed confidence in the country's ability to overcome the outbreak, emphasizing the importance of public awareness and adherence to health guidelines. The government is implementing measures to contain the virus's spread and is collaborating with international health organizations to manage the situation.\nWomen.\nWomen and men have equality before the law.\nThe government signed the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1985.\nNearly three out of ten women reported having experienced sexual violence before the age of 18.\n The prevalence of female genital mutilation has decreased.\nSchool girls are reinstated back to school after giving birth.\nThe Police Force administration strives to separate the Gender Desks from normal police operations to enhance confidentiality of the processing of women victims of abuse.\nMost of the abuses and violence against women and children occurs at the family level.\nThe Constitution of Tanzania requires that women constitute at least 30% of all elected members of National Assembly. The gender differences in education and training have implications later in life of these women and girls.\nUnemployment is higher for females than for males. The right of a female employee to maternity leave is guaranteed in labour law.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nAs in other countries, the music in Tanzania is constantly undergoing changes, and varies by location, people, settings and occasion. The five music genres in Tanzania, as defined by BASATA are, ngoma, dansi, kwaya, and taarab, with bongo flava being added in 2001. Singeli has since the mid-2000s been an unofficial music of \"uswahilini\", unplanned communities in Dar es Salaam, and is the newest mainstream genre since 2020.\nNgoma \"(Bantu, meaning dance, drum and event)\" is a traditional dance music that has been the most widespread music in Tanzania. Dansi is urban jazz or band music. Taarab is sung Kiswahili poetry accompanied by a band, typically string, in which audience is often, but not always, encouraged to dance and clap. Kwaya was choir music originally limited to church during colonization, but is now a secular part of educational, social, and political events.\nBongo flava is Tanzanian pop music originating in the early 2000s from \"muziki wa kizazi kipya\", meaning \"Music of the new generation\", which originated in the late 1980s. Kizazi kipya's dominant influences were reggae, RnB, and hip hop, where as the later bongo flava's dominant influences are taarab and dansi. Three recent influence on bongo flava are Afropop in the 2010s, as well as amapiano from South Africa and singeli from Tanzania, both since 2020. Singeli is a ngoma music that originated in Manzese, an uswahilini in north-west Dar es Salaam. A MC performs over fast tempo taarab music, often at between 200 and 300 beats per minute (BPM) while females dance. Styles between MC gender typically differ significantly. Male MCs usually perform in fast-paced rap, while female MCs usually perform kwaya.\nFrom independence until 1993, all recording and distribution of music was strictly managed by BASATA, primarily through Radio Tanzania Dar es Salaam (RTD). Only the four Tanzanian genres were permitted to be recorded or broadcast, which at the time was ngoma, taarab, kwaya and dansi. The Broadcasting Services Act of 1993 allowed private broadcast networks and recording studios. In the few years prior to the 1993 Act hip hop had been getting somewhat established in Dar es Salaam, Arusha and Mwanza. It was transitioning from English performances of hip hop originating in uzunguni, rich areas like Oysterbay and Masaki with international schools, to Kiswahili performances of kizazi kipya, originating in uswahilini. Following the opening of the radio waves, bongo flava spreading throughout the country, and the rest of the Great Lakes.\nNational anthem.\nThe Tanzanian national anthem is \"Mungu Ibariki Africa\" (God Bless Africa). It has kiswahili lyrics adapted for \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\" composed by South African composer Enoch Sontonga in 1897. \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\" became a pan-African song adapted into the current national anthems for Tanzania, Zambia, and following the end of apartheid South Africa. It was previously used in the national anthems for Zimbabwe and Namibia, but has since been replaced by original new anthems. Another patriotic song is Tanzania, Tanzania.\nLiterature.\nTanzania's literary culture is primarily oral. Major oral literary forms include folktales, poems, riddles, proverbs, and songs. The greatest part of Tanzania's recorded oral literature is in Swahili, even though each of the country's languages has its own oral tradition. The country's oral literature has been declining because of the breakdown of the multigenerational social structure, making transmission of oral literature more difficult, and because increasing modernisation has been accompanied by the devaluation of oral literature.\nBooks in Tanzania are often expensive and hard to come by. Most Tanzanian literature is in Swahili or English. Major figures in Tanzanian written literature include Shaaban Robert (considered the father of Swahili literature), Aniceti Kitereza, Muhammed Saley Farsy, Faraji Katalambulla, Adam Shafi Adam, Muhammed Said Abdalla, Peter K. Palangyo, Said Ahmed Mohammed Khamis, Mohamed Suleiman Mohamed, Euphrase Kezilahabi, Gabriel Ruhumbika, Ebrahim Hussein, May Materru Balisidya, Fadhy Mtanga, Abdulrazak Gurnah, and Penina O. Mlama.\nPainting and sculpture.\nTwo Tanzanian art styles have achieved international recognition. The Tingatinga school of painting, founded by Edward Said Tingatinga, consists of brightly coloured enamel paintings on canvas, generally depicting people, animals, or daily life. After Tingatinga's death in 1972, other artists adopted and developed his style, with the genre now being the most important tourist-oriented style in East Africa.\nHistorically, there were limited opportunities for formal European art training in Tanzania and many aspiring Tanzanian artists left the country to pursue their vocation.\nSports.\nFootball is very popular throughout the country. The most popular professional football clubs in Dar es Salaam are the Young Africans F.C. and Simba S.C. The Tanzania Football Federation is the governing body for football in the country.\nOther popular sports include basketball, netball, boxing, volleyball, athletics, and rugby. The National Sports Council also known as Baraza la Michezo la Taifa is the governing body for sports in the country under the Ministry of Information, Youth, Sports and Culture.\nCinema.\nTanzania has a popular film industry known as \"Bongo Movie\". It also hosts an international film festival, the Zanzibar International Film Festival.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
