{"id": "37789", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37789", "title": "Mosquito", "text": "Family of flies\nMosquitoes, the Culicidae, are a family of small flies consisting of 3,600 species. The word \"mosquito\" (formed by \"mosca\" and diminutive \"-ito\") is Spanish and Portuguese for \"little fly\". Mosquitoes have a slender segmented body, one pair of wings, three pairs of long hair-like legs, and specialized, highly elongated, piercing-sucking mouthparts. All mosquitoes drink nectar from flowers; females of many species have adapted to also drink blood. The group diversified during the Cretaceous period. Evolutionary biologists view mosquitoes as micropredators, small animals that parasitise larger ones by drinking their blood without immediately killing them. Medical parasitologists view mosquitoes as vectors of disease, carrying protozoan parasites or bacterial or viral pathogens from one host to another.\nThe mosquito life cycle consists of four stages: egg, larva, pupa, and adult. Eggs are laid on the water surface; they hatch into motile larvae that feed on aquatic algae and organic material. These larvae are important food sources for many freshwater animals, such as dragonfly nymphs, many fish, and some birds. Adult females of many species have mouthparts adapted to pierce the skin of a host and feed on blood of a wide range of vertebrate hosts, and some invertebrates, primarily other arthropods. Some species only produce eggs after a blood meal.\nThe mosquito's saliva is transferred to the host during the bite, and can cause an itchy rash. In addition, blood-feeding species can ingest pathogens while biting, and transmit them to other hosts. Those species include vectors of parasitic diseases such as malaria and filariasis, and arboviral diseases such as yellow fever and dengue fever. By transmitting diseases, mosquitoes cause the deaths of over one million people each year.\nDescription and life cycle.\nLike all flies, mosquitoes go through four stages in their life cycles: egg, larva, pupa, and adult. The first three stages\u2014egg, larva, and pupa\u2014are largely aquatic, the eggs usually being laid in stagnant water. They hatch to become larvae, which feed, grow, and molt until they change into pupae. The adult mosquito emerges from the mature pupa as it floats at the water surface. Mosquitoes have adult lifespans ranging from as short as a week to around a month. Some species overwinter as adults in diapause.\nAdult.\nMosquitoes have one pair of wings, with distinct scales on the surface. Their wings are long and narrow, while the legs are long and thin. The body, usually grey or black, is slender, and typically 3\u20136\u00a0mm long. When at rest, mosquitoes hold their first pair of legs outwards, whereas the somewhat similar Chironomid midges hold these legs forwards. \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes can fly for up to four hours continuously at , traveling up to in a night. Males beat their wings between 450 and 600 times per second, driven indirectly by muscles which vibrate the thorax. Mosquitoes are mainly small flies; the largest are in the genus \"Toxorhynchites\", at up to in length and in wingspan. Those in the genus \"Aedes\" are much smaller, with a wingspan of .&lt;ref name=\"UF/IFAS A. gambiae\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMosquitoes can develop from egg to adult in hot weather in as few as five days, but it may take up to a month. At dawn or dusk, within days of pupating, males assemble in swarms, mating when females fly in. The female mates only once in her lifetime, attracted by the pheromones emitted by the male. In species that need blood for the eggs to develop, the female finds a host and drinks a full meal of blood. She then rests for two or three days to digest the meal and allow her eggs to develop. She is then ready to lay the eggs and repeat the cycle of feeding and laying. Females can live for up to three weeks in the wild, depending on temperature, humidity, their ability to obtain a blood meal, and avoiding being killed by their vertebrate hosts.\nEggs.\nThe eggs of most mosquitoes are laid in stagnant water, which may be a pond, a marsh, a temporary puddle, a water-filled hole in a tree, or the water-trapping leaf axils of a bromeliad. Some lay near the water's edge while others attach their eggs to aquatic plants. A few, like \"Opifex fuscus\", can breed in salt-marshes. \"Wyeomyia smithii\" breeds in the pitchers of pitcher plants, its larvae feeding on decaying insects that have drowned there.\nOviposition, egg-laying, varies between species. \"Anopheles\" females fly over the water, touching down or dapping to place eggs on the surface one at a time; their eggs are roughly cigar-shaped and have floats down their sides. A female can lay 100\u2013200 eggs in her lifetime. \"Aedes\" females drop their eggs singly, on damp mud or other surfaces near water; their eggs hatch only when they are flooded. Females in genera such as \"Culex\", \"Culiseta\", and \"Uranotaenia\" lay their eggs in floating rafts. \"Mansonia\" females in contrast lay their eggs in arrays, attached usually to the under-surfaces of waterlily pads.\nClutches of eggs of most mosquito species hatch simultaneously, but \"Aedes\" eggs in diapause hatch irregularly over an extended period.\nLarva.\nThe mosquito larva's head has prominent mouth brushes used for feeding, a large thorax with no legs, and a segmented abdomen. It breathes air through a siphon on its abdomen, so must come to the surface frequently. It spends most of its time feeding on algae, bacteria, and other microbes in the water's surface layer. It dives below the surface when disturbed. It swims either by propelling itself with its mouth brushes, or by jerkily wriggling its body. It develops through several stages, or instars, molting each time, after which it metamorphoses into a pupa. \"Aedes\" larvae, except when very young, can withstand drying; they go into diapause for several months if their pond dries out.\nPupa.\nThe head and thorax of the pupa are merged into a cephalothorax, with the abdomen curving around beneath it. The pupa or \"tumbler\" can swim actively by flipping its abdomen. Like the larva, the pupa of most species must come to the surface frequently to breathe, which they do through a pair of respiratory trumpets on their cephalothoraxes. They do not feed; they pass much of their time hanging from the surface of the water by their respiratory trumpets. If alarmed, they swim downwards by flipping their abdomens in much the same way as the larvae. If undisturbed, they soon float up again. The adult emerges from the pupa at the surface of the water and flies off.\nFeeding by adults.\nDiet.\nBoth male and female mosquitoes feed on nectar, aphid honeydew, and plant juices, but in many species the females are also hematophagous (blood-sucking) ectoparasites. In some of those species, a blood meal is essential for egg production; in others, it just enables the female to lay more eggs. Both plant materials and blood are useful sources of energy in the form of sugars. Blood supplies more concentrated nutrients, such as lipids, but the main function of blood meals is to obtain proteins for egg production. Disease vector mosquitoes like \"Anopheles\" and \"Aedes\" are anautogenous, requiring blood to lay eggs. Some \"Culex\" species are partially autogenous, needing blood only for their second and subsequent clutches of eggs. The three genera of \"Malaya\", \"Topomyia\" and \"Toxorhynchites\", together comprising a small percentage of mosquitoes species, reproduce autogenously, never taking blood.\nHost animals.\nBlood-sucking mosquitoes favour particular host species, though they are less selective when food is short. Different mosquito species favour amphibians, reptiles including snakes, birds, and mammals. For example, \"Culiseta melanura\" sucks the blood of passerine birds, but as mosquito numbers rise they attack mammals including horses and humans, causing epidemics of Eastern equine encephalitis virus in North America. Loss of blood from many bites can add up to a large volume, occasionally causing the death of livestock as large as cattle and horses. Malaria-transmitting mosquitoes seek out caterpillars and feed on their haemolymph, impeding their development.\nFinding hosts.\nMost mosquito species are crepuscular, feeding at dawn or dusk, and resting in a cool place through the heat of the day. Some species, such as the Asian tiger mosquito, are known to fly and feed during daytime. Female mosquitoes hunt for hosts by smelling substances such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and 1-octen-3-ol (mushroom alcohol, found in exhaled breath) produced from the host, and through visual recognition. The semiochemical that most strongly attracts \"Culex quinquefasciatus\" is nonanal. Another attractant is sulcatone. A large part of the mosquito's sense of smell, or olfactory system, is devoted to sniffing out blood sources. Of 72 types of odor receptors on its antennae, at least 27 are tuned to detect chemicals found in perspiration. In \"Aedes\", the search for a host takes place in two phases. First, the mosquito flies about until it detects a host's odorants; then it flies towards them, using the concentration of odorants as its guide. Mosquitoes prefer to feed on people with type O blood, an abundance of skin bacteria, high body heat, and pregnant women. Individuals' attractiveness to mosquitoes has a heritable, genetically controlled component.\nThe multitude of characteristics in a host observed by the mosquito allows it to select a host to feed on. It activates odour and visual search behaviours that it otherwise would not use, when in presence of CO2. In terms of a mosquito's olfactory system, chemical analysis has revealed that people who are highly attractive to mosquitoes produce significantly more carboxylic acids. A human's unique body odour indicates that the target is actually a human host rather than some other living warm-blooded animal (as the presence of CO2 shows). Body odour, composed of volatile organic compounds emitted from the skin of humans, is the most important cue used by mosquitoes. Variation in skin odour is caused by body weight, hormones, genetic factors, and metabolic or genetic disorders. Infections such as malaria can influence an individual's body odour. People infected by malaria produce relatively large amounts of \"Plasmodium\"-induced aldehydes in the skin, creating large cues for mosquitoes as it increases the attractiveness of an odour blend, imitating a \"healthy\" human odour. Infected individuals produce larger amounts of aldehydes heptanal, octanal, and nonanal. These compounds are detected by mosquito antennae. Thus, people infected with malaria are more prone to mosquito biting.\nContributing to a mosquito's ability to activate search behaviours, a mosquito's visual search system includes sensitivity to wavelengths from different colours. Mosquitoes are attracted to longer wavelengths, correlated to the colours of red and orange as seen by humans, and range through the spectrum of human skin tones. In addition, they have a strong attraction to dark, high-contrast objects, because of how longer wavelengths are perceived against a lighter-coloured background.\nDifferent species of mosquitoes have evolved different methods of identifying target hosts. Study of a domestic form and an animal-biting form of the mosquito \"Aedes aegypti\" showed that the evolution of preference for human odour is linked to increases in the expression of the olfactory receptor AaegOr4. This recognises a compound present at high levels in human odour called sulcatone. However, the malaria mosquito \"Anopheles gambiae\" also has OR4 genes strongly activated by sulcatone, yet none of them are closely related to AaegOr4, suggesting that the two species have evolved to specialise in biting humans independently.\nMouthparts.\nFemale mosquito mouthparts are highly adapted to piercing skin and sucking blood. Males only drink sugary fluids, and have less specialized mouthparts.\nExternally, the most obvious feeding structure of the mosquito is the proboscis, composed of the labium, U-shaped in section like a rain gutter, which sheaths a bundle (fascicle) of six piercing mouthparts or stylets. These are two mandibles, two maxillae, the hypopharynx, and the labrum. The labium bends back into a bow when the mosquito begins to bite, staying in contact with the skin and guiding the stylets downwards. The extremely sharp tips of the labrum and maxillae are moved backwards and forwards to saw their way into the skin, with just one thousandth of the force that would be needed to penetrate the skin with a needle, resulting in a painless insertion.\nSaliva.\nMosquito saliva contains enzymes that aid in sugar feeding, and antimicrobial agents that control bacterial growth in the sugar meal.\nFor a mosquito to obtain a blood meal, it must circumvent its vertebrate host's physiological responses. Mosquito saliva blocks the host's hemostasis system, with proteins that reduce vascular constriction, blood clotting, and platelet aggregation, to ensure the blood keeps flowing. It modulates the host's immune response via a mixture of proteins which lower angiogenesis and immunity; create inflammation; suppress tumor necrosis factor release from activated mast cells; suppress interleukin (IL)-2 and IFN-\u03b3 production; suppress T cell populations; decrease expression of interferon\u2212\u03b1/\u03b2, making virus infections more severe; increase natural killer T cells in the blood; and decrease cytokine production.\nEgg development and blood digestion.\nFemales of many blood-feeding species need a blood meal to begin the process of egg development. A sufficiently large blood meal triggers a hormonal cascade that leads to egg development. Upon completion of feeding, the mosquito withdraws her proboscis, and as the gut fills up, the stomach lining secretes a peritrophic membrane that surrounds the blood. This keeps the blood separate from anything else in the stomach. Like many Hemiptera that survive on dilute liquid diets, many adult mosquitoes excrete surplus liquid even when feeding. This permits females to accumulate a full meal of nutrient solids. The blood meal is digested over a period of several days. Once blood is in the stomach, the midgut synthesizes protease enzymes, primarily trypsin assisted by aminopeptidase, that hydrolyze the blood proteins into free amino acids. These are used in the synthesis of vitellogenin, which in turn is made into egg yolk protein.\nDistribution.\nCosmopolitan.\nMosquitoes have a cosmopolitan distribution, occurring in every land region except Antarctica and a few islands. The polar or subpolar climate of these regions is unpredictable, freezing but often warming suddenly in mid-winter, making mosquitoes emerge from pupae in diapause, and then freezing again before they can complete their life cycle.\nEggs of temperate zone mosquitoes are more tolerant of cold than the eggs of species indigenous to warmer regions. Many can tolerate subzero temperatures, while adults of some species can survive winter by sheltering in microhabitats such as buildings or hollow trees. In warm and humid tropical regions, some mosquito species are active for the entire year, but in temperate and cold regions they hibernate or enter diapause. Arctic or subarctic mosquitoes, like some other arctic midges in families such as Simuliidae and Ceratopogonidae may be active for only a few weeks annually as melt-water pools form on the permafrost. During that time, though, they emerge in huge numbers in some regions; a swarm may take up to 300 ml of blood per day from each animal in a caribou herd.\nEffect of climate change.\nFor a mosquito to transmit disease, there must be favorable seasonal conditions, primarily humidity, temperature, and precipitation. El Ni\u00f1o affects the location and number of outbreaks in East Africa, Latin America, Southeast Asia and India. Climate change impacts the seasonal factors and in turn the dispersal of mosquitoes. Climate models can use historic data to recreate past outbreaks and to predict the risk of vector-borne disease, based on an area's forecasted climate.\nMosquito-borne diseases have long been most prevalent in East Africa, Latin America, Southeast Asia, and India. An emergence in Europe was observed early in the 21st century. It is predicted that by 2030, the climate of southern Great Britain will be suitable for transmission of \"Plasmodium vivax\" malaria by \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes for two months of the year, and that by 2080, the same will be true for southern Scotland.\nDengue fever, too, is spreading northwards with climate change. The vector, the Asian tiger mosquito \"Aedes albopictus\", has by 2023 established across southern Europe and as far north as much of northern France, Belgium, Holland, and both Kent and West London in England.\nIn 2025, some specimens of \"Culiseta annulata\" were found in Kj\u00f3sarhreppur in Iceland, a country that had been free of mosquitoes but is warming four times than the global average.\nEcology.\nPredators and parasites.\nMosquito larvae are among the commonest animals in ponds, and they form an important food source for freshwater predators. Among the many aquatic insects that catch mosquito larvae are dragonfly and damselfly nymphs, whirligig beetles, and water striders. Vertebrate predators include fish such as catfish and the mosquitofish, amphibians including the spadefoot toad and the giant tree frog, freshwater turtles such as the red-eared slider, and birds such as ducks.\nEmerging adults are consumed at the pond surface by predatory flies including Empididae and Dolichopodidae, and by spiders. Flying adults are captured by dragonflies and damselflies, by birds such as swifts and swallows, and by vertebrates including bats.\nMosquitoes are parasitised by hydrachnid mites, ciliates such as \"Glaucoma\", microsporidians such as \"Thelania\", and fungi including species of Saprolegniaceae and Entomophthoraceae.\nPollination.\nSeveral flowers including members of the Asteraceae, Rosaceae and Orchidaceae are pollinated by mosquitoes, which visit to obtain sugar-rich nectar. A few plant associations are specialized for mosquito pollination, such as the \"Platanthera\" orchids which are pollinated by \"Aedes\" species. They are attracted to flowers by a range of semiochemicals such as alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, and terpenes. They may also use visual cues including UV reflectivity. Mosquitoes have visited and pollinated flowers since the Cretaceous period. It is possible that plant-sucking exapted mosquitoes to blood-sucking.\nParasitism.\nEcologically, blood-feeding mosquitoes are micropredators, small animals that feed on larger animals without immediately killing them. Evolutionary biologists see this as a form of parasitism; in Edward O. Wilson's phrase \"Parasites ... are predators that eat prey in units of less than one.\" Micropredation is one of six major evolutionarily stable strategies within parasitism. It is distinguished by leaving the host still able to reproduce, unlike the activity of parasitic castrators or parasitoids; and having multiple hosts, unlike conventional parasites. From this perspective, mosquitoes are ectoparasites, feeding on blood from the outside of their hosts, using their piercing mouthparts, rather than entering their bodies. Unlike some other ectoparasites such as fleas and lice, mosquitoes do not remain constantly on the body of the host, but visit only to feed.\nEvolution.\nFossil record.\nA 2023 study suggested that \"Libanoculex intermedius\" found in Lebanese amber, dating to the Barremian age of the Early Cretaceous, around 125 million years ago was the oldest known mosquito. However its identification as a mosquito is disputed, with other authors considering it to be a chaoborid fly instead. Three other unambiguous species of Cretaceous mosquito are known. \"Burmaculex antiquus\" and \"Priscoculex burmanicus\" are known from Burmese amber from Myanmar, which dates to the earliest part of the Cenomanian age of the Late Cretaceous, around 99 million years ago. \"Paleoculicis minutus\", is known from Canadian amber from Alberta, Canada, which dates to the Campanian age of the Late Cretaceous, around 79 million years ago. \"P. burmanicus\" has been assigned to the Anophelinae, indicating that the split between this subfamily and the Culicinae took place over 99 million years ago. Molecular estimates suggest that this split occurred 197.5 million years ago, during the Early Jurassic, but that major diversification did not take place until the Cretaceous.\nTaxonomy.\nThere are over 3,700 species of mosquitoes; 112 genera have been described. They are traditionally divided into two subfamilies, the Anophelinae and the Culicinae, which carry different diseases. Roughly speaking, protozoal diseases like malaria are transmitted by anophelines, while viral diseases such as yellow fever and dengue fever are transmitted by culicines.\nThe name Culicidae was introduced by the German entomologist Johann Wilhelm Meigen in his seven-volume classification published in 1818\u20131838. Mosquito taxonomy was advanced in 1901 when the English entomologist Frederick Vincent Theobald published his 5-volume monograph on the Culicidae. He had been provided with mosquito specimens sent in to the British Museum (Natural History) from around the world, on the 1898 instruction of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Joseph Chamberlain, who had written that \"in view of the possible connection of Malaria with mosquitoes, it is desirable to obtain exact knowledge of the different species of mosquitoes and allied insects in the various tropical colonies. I will therefore ask you ... to have collections made of the winged insects in the Colony which bite men or animals.\"\nPhylogeny.\nExternal.\nMosquitoes are members of a family of the true flies (order Diptera): the Culicidae (from the Latin , genitive , meaning \"midge\" or \"gnat\"). They are members of the infraorder Culicomorpha and superfamily Culicoidea. The phylogenetic tree is based on the FLYTREE project.\nInternal.\nThe two subfamilies of mosquitoes are Anophelinae, containing three genera and approximately 430 species, and Culicinae, which contains 11 tribes, 108 genera and 3,046 species. Kyanne Reidenbach and colleagues analysed mosquito phylogenetics in 2009, using both nuclear DNA and morphology of 26 species. They note that Anophelinae is confirmed to be rather basal, but that the deeper parts of the tree are not well resolved.\nInteractions with humans.\nVectors of disease.\nMosquitoes are vectors for many disease-causing microorganisms including bacteria, viruses, and protozoan parasites. Nearly 700 million people acquire a mosquito-borne illness each year, resulting in over one million deaths. Common mosquito-borne viral diseases include yellow fever, chikungunya and dengue fever, all transmitted mostly by \"Aedes aegypti\". Parasitic diseases transmitted by mosquitoes include malaria and lymphatic filariasis. The \"Plasmodium\" parasites that cause malaria are carried by female \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes. Lymphatic filariasis, the main cause of elephantiasis, is spread by a wide variety of mosquitoes. A bacterial disease spread by \"Culex\" and \"Culiseta\" mosquitoes is tularemia.\nControl.\nMany measures have been tried for mosquito control, including the elimination of breeding places, exclusion via window screens and mosquito nets, biological control with parasites such as fungi and nematodes, or predators such as fish, copepods, dragonfly nymphs and adults, and some species of lizard and gecko. Another approach is to introduce large numbers of sterile males. Genetic modification methods including cytoplasmic incompatibility, chromosomal translocations, sex distortion and gene replacement, solutions seen as inexpensive and not subject to vector resistance, have been explored. Control of disease-carrying mosquitoes using gene drives has been proposed.\nRepellents.\nInsect repellents are applied on skin and give short-term protection against mosquito bites. The chemical DEET repels some mosquitoes and other insects. Some CDC-recommended repellents are picaridin, eucalyptus oil (PMD), and ethyl butylacetylaminopropionate (IR3535). Pyrethrum (from \"Chrysanthemum\" species, particularly \"C. cinerariifolium\" and \"C. coccineum\") is an effective plant-based repellent. Electronic insect repellent devices that produce ultrasounds intended to keep away insects (and mosquitoes) are marketed. No EPA or university study has shown that these devices prevent humans from being bitten by a mosquito.\nBites.\nMosquito bites lead to a variety of skin reactions and more seriously to mosquito bite allergies. Such hypersensitivity to mosquito bites is an excessive reaction to mosquito saliva proteins. Numerous species of mosquito can trigger such reactions, including \"Aedes aegypti\", \"A. vexans\", \"A. albopictus\", \"Anopheles sinensis\", \"Culex pipiens\", \"Aedes communis\", \"Anopheles stephensi\", \"C. quinquefasciatus\", \"C. tritaeniorhynchus\", and \"Ochlerotatus triseriatus\". Cross-reactivity between salivary proteins of different mosquitoes implies that allergic responses may be caused by virtually any mosquito species. Treatment can be with anti-itch medications, including some taken orally, such as diphenhydramine, or applied to the skin like antihistamines or corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone. Aqueous ammonia (3.6%) also provides relief. Both topical heat and cold may be useful as treatments.\nIn human culture.\nGreek mythology.\nAncient Greek beast fables including \"The Elephant and the Mosquito\" and \"The Bull and the Mosquito\", with the general moral that the large beast does not even notice the small one, derive ultimately from Mesopotamia.\nOrigin myths.\nThe peoples of Siberia have origin myths surrounding the mosquito. One Ostiak myth tells of a man-eating giant, \"Punegusse\", who is killed by a hero but will not stay dead. The hero eventually burns the giant, but the ashes of the fire become mosquitoes that continue to plague mankind. Other myths from the Yakuts, Goldes (Nanai people), and Samoyed have the insect arising from the ashes or fragments of some giant creature or demon. Similar tales found in Native North American myth, with the mosquito arising from the ashes of a man-eater, suggest a common origin. The Tatars of the Altai had a variant of the same myth, involving the fragments of the dead giant, \"Andalma-Muus\", becoming mosquitoes and other insects.\nLafcadio Hearn tells that in Japan, mosquitoes are seen as reincarnations of the dead, condemned by the errors of their former lives to the condition of \"Jiki-ketsu-gaki\", or \"blood-drinking pretas\".\nModern era.\nWinsor McCay's 1912 film \"How a Mosquito Operates\" was one of the earliest works of animation. It has been described as far ahead of its time in technical quality. It depicts a giant mosquito tormenting a sleeping man.\nTwelve ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS \"Mosquito\" or the archaic form of the name, HMS \"Musquito\".\nThe de Havilland Mosquito was a high-speed aircraft manufactured between 1940 and 1950, and used in many roles.\nThe Russian city of Berezniki annually celebrates its mosquitoes from the 17th of July to the 20th in a \"most delicious girl\" competition. In the competition, women stand for 20 minutes in their shorts and vests, and the one who receives the most bites wins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37790", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37790", "title": "CTEA", "text": ""}
{"id": "37793", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37793", "title": "Feliks Edmundovich Dzerzhinksiy", "text": ""}
{"id": "37794", "revid": "48708993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37794", "title": "Felix Dzerzhinsky", "text": "Soviet revolutionary and politician (1877\u20131926)\nFelix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky (; ; 11 September\u00a0[O.S. 30 August]\u00a01877 \u2013 20 July 1926), nicknamed Iron Felix (), was a Soviet revolutionary and politician of Polish origin. From 1917 until his death in 1926, he led the first three Soviet secret police organizations, the Cheka, the GPU and the OGPU, establishing state security organs for the Bolshevik government. He was a key architect of the Red Terror and de-Cossackization.\nBorn to a Polish family of noble descent in their Ozhyemblovo Estate (in 1881 named Dzerzhinovo), in Russian Poland, Dzerzhinsky embraced revolutionary politics from a young age, and was active in the Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania party. Active in Kaunas and Warsaw, he was frequently arrested and underwent several exiles to Siberia, from which he escaped every time. He evaded the tsarist secret police, the Okhrana, whose work he took interest in. Dzerzhinsky participated in the failed 1905 Revolution, and after a final arrest in 1912, was imprisoned until the February Revolution of 1917. He then joined Vladimir Lenin's Bolshevik party, and played an active role in the October Revolution which brought them to power.\nIn December 1917, Lenin named Dzerzhinsky head of the newly established All-Russian Extraordinary Commission (Cheka), tasking him with the suppression of counter-revolutionary activities in Soviet Russia. The Russian Civil War saw a vast expansion of the Cheka's authority, inaugurating a campaign of mass arrests, detentions (including in newly founded Gulag forced labour camps), and executions known as the Red Terror. An estimated 50,000 to 200,000 people were executed by the Cheka during the years of the civil war. The agency was reorganized as the State Political Directorate (GPU) in 1922, and then as the Joint State Political Directorate (OGPU) a year later, with Dzerzhinsky remaining as head of the powerful organization. He served as director of the Supreme Soviet of the National Economy (VSNKh) from 1924.\nDzerzhinsky died of a heart attack in 1926, and was buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis. He was remembered by secret police agents (known as \"Chekists\" throughout the Soviet era) as a hero of the revolution. A large statue of him stood in front of the security service headquarters at Moscow's Lubyanka Building until 1991. He also became a prominent symbol of repression and brutality to critics of the Soviet Union.\nEarly life.\nFelix Dzerzhinsky was born on 11 September 1877 to ethnically Polish parents of noble descent at the Ozhyemblovo family estate, about , from the small town of Ivyanets in the Minsk Governorate of Russian Poland (Polish territory after partition by Russian Empire; now Belarus) In the Russian Empire, his family was of a type known as \"column-listed nobility\" (, stolbovoe dvorianstvo), whose nobility was formally acknowledged, but so old that they did not enjoy the privileges of the new nobility. His sister Wanda died at the age of 12, when she was accidentally shot with a hunting rifle on the family estate by one of her brothers. At the time of the incident, there were conflicting claims as to whether Felix or his brother Stanis\u0142aw was responsible for the accident.\nHis father, Edmund-Rufin Dzier\u017cy\u0144ski graduated from the Saint Petersburg Imperial University in 1863 and moved to Vilnius, where he worked as a home teacher for a professor of Saint Petersburg University named Januszewski and eventually married Januszewski's daughter Helena Ignatievna, who also was of Polish origin. In 1868, after a short period in Kherson gymnasium, he worked as a gymnasium teacher of physics and mathematics at the schools of Taganrog in the Don Host Province, Russia, particularly the Chekhov Gymnasium. In 1875, Edmund Dzier\u017cy\u0144ski retired due to health conditions and moved with his family to his estate near Ivyanets and Raka\u016d. In 1882, Felix's father died from tuberculosis.\nAs a youngster Dzerzhinsky became a polyglot, speaking Polish, Russian, German and Latin. He attended the Vilnius Gymnasium from 1887 to 1895. One of the older students at this gymnasium was his future arch-enemy, J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski. Years later, as Marshal of Poland, Pi\u0142sudski recalled that Dzerzhinsky \"distinguished himself as a student with delicacy and modesty. He was rather tall, thin and demure, making the impression of an ascetic with the face of an icon... Tormented or not, this is an issue history will clarify; in any case this person did not know how to lie.\" School documents show that Dzerzhinsky attended his first year in school twice, while he was not able to finish his eighth year. Dzerzhinsky received a school diploma which stated: \"Dzerzhinsky Feliks, who is 18 years of age, of Catholic faith, along with a satisfactory attention and satisfactory diligence showed the following successes in sciences, namely: Divine law\u2014\"good\"; Logic, Latin, Algebra, Geometry, Mathematical geography, Physics, History (of Russia), French\u2014\"satisfactory\"; Russian and Greek\u2014\"unsatisfactory\".\nPolitical affiliations and arrests.\nTwo months before he expected to graduate, the gymnasium expelled Dzerzhinsky for \"revolutionary activity\" and for posting signs with socialist slogans at the school. He had joined a Marxist group, the Union of Workers (Socjaldemokracja Kr\u00f3lestwa Polskiego \"SDKP\"), in 1895. In late April 1896, he was one of 15 delegates at the first congress of the Lithuanian Social Democratic Party (LSDP). In 1897, he attended the second congress of the LSDP, where it rejected independence in favor of national autonomy. On 18 March 1897, he was sent to Kaunas to take advantage of the arrest of the Polish Socialist Party (PPS) branch. He worked in a book-binding factory and set up an illegal press. As an organizer of a shoemakers' strike, Dzerzhinsky was arrested for \"criminal agitation among the Kaunas workers\"; the police files from this time state: \"Felix Dzerzhinsky, considering his views, convictions and personal character, will be very dangerous in the future, capable of any crime.\" Dzerzhinsky envisioned merging the LSDP with the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) and took the same position as influential Social Democrat Rosa Luxemburg on what was referred to in contemporary writings as \"The National Question,\" i.e., the right of nations to self determination.\nHe was arrested on a denunciation for his revolutionary activities for the first time in 1897, after which he served almost a year in the Kaunas prison. In 1898, Dzerzhinsky was exiled for three years to the Vyatka Governorate (city of Nolinsk) where he worked at a local tobacco factory. There Dzerzhinsky was arrested for agitating for revolutionary activities and was sent north to the village of Kaigorod. In August 1899, he returned to Vilnius. Dzerzhinsky subsequently became one of the founders of Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania (, SDKPiL) in 1899. In February 1900, he was arrested again and served his time at first in the Alexander Citadel in Warsaw and later at the Siedlce prison. In 1902, Dzerzhinsky was sent deep into Siberia for the next five years to the remote town of Vilyuysk, while \"en route\" being temporarily held at the Alexandrovsk Transitional Prison near Irkutsk. While in exile, he escaped on a boat and later emigrated from the country. He traveled to Berlin, where at the SDKPiL conference Dzerzhinsky was elected a secretary of its party committee abroad (, KZ) and met with several prominent leaders of the Polish Social Democratic movement, including Rosa Luxemburg and Leo Jogiches. They gained control of the party organization through the creation of a committee called the \"Komitet Zagraniczny\" (KZ), which dealt with the party's foreign relations. As secretary of the KZ, Dzerzhinsky was able to dominate the SDKPiL. In Berlin, he organized publication of the newspaper \"Czerwony Sztandar\" (\"Red Banner\"), and transportation of illegal literature from Krak\u00f3w into Congress Poland. Being a delegate to the IV Congress of SDKPiL in 1903, Dzerzhinsky was elected as a member of its General Board.\nDzerzhinsky visited Switzerland, where his fianc\u00e9e Julia Goldman, the sister of Boris Gorev and Mikhail Liber, was undergoing treatment for tuberculosis. She died in his arms on 4 June 1904. Her illness and death depressed him \u2013 in letters to his sister, Dzerzhinsky explained that he no longer saw any meaning for his life. That changed with the Russian Revolution of 1905, as Dzerzhinsky became involved with work again. After the revolution failed he was again jailed in July 1905, this time by the Okhrana. In October, he was released on amnesty. As a delegate to the 4th Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party in Stockholm, Dzerzhinsky entered the central body of the party. From July through September 1906, he lived in Saint Petersburg and then returned to Warsaw, where he was arrested again in December of the same year. In June 1907, Dzerzhinsky was released on bail. At the 5th Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party in London in May\u2013June 1907, he was elected \"in absentia\" as a member of the Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party. In April 1908, Dzerzhinsky was arrested once again in Warsaw and again exiled to Siberia (Yeniseysk Governorate) in 1909. As before, Dzerzhinsky managed to escape (by November 1909). In 1910, he reached Italy, where he met Maxim Gorky on Capri; he then returned to Poland.\nBack in Krak\u00f3w in 1910, Dzerzhinsky married RSDLP party member Zofia Muszkat, who was already pregnant. A month later she was arrested; she gave birth to their son Janek in Pawiak prison. In 1911, Zofia was sentenced to permanent Siberian exile, and she left the child with her father. Dzerzhinsky saw his son for the first time in March 1912 in Warsaw. In attending the welfare of his child, Dzerzhinsky repeatedly exposed himself to the danger of arrest. On one occasion, Dzerzhinsky narrowly escaped an ambush that the police had prepared at the apartment of his father-in-law.\nDzerzhinsky continued to direct the Social Democratic Party (SDKPiL), while considering his continued freedom \"only a game of the Okhrana\". The Okhrana, however, was not playing a game; Dzerzhinsky simply was a master of conspiratorial techniques and was therefore extremely difficult to find. A police file from this time says: \"Dzerzhinsky continued to lead the Social Democratic party and at the same time he directed party work in Warsaw, led strikes, published appeals to workers, and traveled on party matters to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a and Krak\u00f3w.\" The police were unable to arrest Dzerzhinsky until the end of 1912, when they found the apartment where he lived in the name of W\u0142adys\u0142aw Ptasi\u0144ski.\nRevolution.\nDzerzhinsky spent the next &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 years in prisons, first at the notorious Tenth Pavilion of the Warsaw Citadel. When World War I began in 1914, all political prisoners were relocated from Warsaw into Russia proper. Dzerzhinsky was taken to Oryol Prison. He was very concerned about the fate of his wife and son, with whom he did not have any communication. Moreover, the Russian guards administered Dzerzhinsky frequent beatings, which caused permanent disfigurement of his jaw and mouth. In 1916, Dzerzhinsky was transferred to the Moscow Butyrka prison, where he was soon hospitalized because the chains that he had been forced to wear were causing severe cramps in his legs. Despite the prospects of amputation, Dzerzhinsky recovered and was put to work sewing military uniforms.\nDzerzhinsky was freed from Butyrka after the February Revolution of 1917. Soon after his release, Dzerzhinsky's goal was to organize Polish refugees in Russia, then return to Poland and fight for the revolution there. He wrote to his wife, \"Together with these masses, we will return to Poland after the war and become one whole with the SDKPiL.\" He remained in Moscow where he joined the Bolshevik party, writing to his comrades that \"the Bolshevik party organization is the only Social Democratic organization of the proletariat, and if we were to stay outside of it, then we would find ourselves outside the proletarian revolutionary struggle.\" By April, he had entered the Moscow Committee of the Bolsheviks and soon thereafter was elected to the executive committee of the Moscow Soviet. Dzerzhinsky endorsed Vladimir Lenin's \"April Theses\", demanding uncompromising opposition to the new Russian Provisional Government, the transfer of all political authority to the Soviets, and the immediate withdrawal of Russia from the war. Dzerzhinsky's brother Stanis\u0142aw was murdered on the Dzerzhinsky estate by deserting Russian soldiers that same year.\nSubsequently, in late July, Dzerzhinsky was elected to the Bolshevik Central Committee at the Sixth Party Congress. He then relocated from Moscow to Petrograd to begin his new responsibilities. In Petrograd, Dzerzhinsky participated in the crucial session of the Central Committee in October, and he strongly endorsed Lenin's demands for the immediate preparation of a coup, after which Felix Dzerzhinsky had an active role with the Military Revolutionary Committee during the October Revolution. With the seizure of power by the Bolsheviks, Dzerzhinsky eagerly assumed responsibility for making security arrangements at the Smolny Institute where the Bolsheviks had their headquarters.\nDirector of Cheka.\nLenin regarded Felix Dzerzhinsky as a revolutionary hero and appointed him to organize a force to combat internal threats. On 20 December 1917, the Council of People's Commissars officially established the All-Russia Extraordinary Commission to Combat Counter-revolution and Sabotage\u2014commonly known as the Cheka (based on the Russian acronym \u0412\u0427\u041a). Dzerzhinsky became its director. The Cheka received extensive resources, and became known for ruthlessly pursuing any perceived counterrevolutionary elements. As the Russian Civil War expanded, Dzerzhinsky also began organizing internal security troops to enforce the Cheka's authority.\nThe Cheka became notorious for mass summary executions, performed especially during the Red Terror and the Russian Civil War. The Cheka undertook drastic measures as tens of thousands of political opponents and saboteurs were shot without trial in the basements of prisons and in public places. Dzerzhinsky said: \"We represent in ourselves organized terror\u2014this must be said very clearly\". In 1922, at the end of the Civil War, the Cheka was dissolved and reorganized as the State Political Directorate (Gosudarstvennoe Politicheskoe Upravlenie, or GPU), a section of the NKVD. With the formation of the Soviet Union later that year, the GPU was again reorganized as the Joint State Political Directorate (Obyedinyonnoye gosudarstvennoye politicheskoye upravleniye, or OGPU), directly under the Council of People's Commissars. These changes did not diminish Dzerzhinsky's power; he was Minister of the Interior, director of the Cheka/GPU/OGPU, Minister for Communications, and director of the Vesenkha (Supreme Council of National Economy) in 1921\u201324. Indeed, while the (O)GPU was theoretically supposed to act with more restraint than the Cheka, in time its \"de facto\" powers grew even greater than those of the Cheka.\nAt his office in Lubyanka, Dzerzhinsky kept a portrait of fellow Polish revolutionary Rosa Luxemburg on the wall. Besides his leadership of the secret police, Dzerzhinsky also took on a number of other roles; he led the fight against typhus in 1918, was chair of the Commissariat for Internal Affairs from 1919 to 1923, initiated a vast orphanage construction program, chaired the Transport Commissariat, organized the embalming of Lenin's body in 1924 and chaired the Society of Friends of Soviet Cinema.\nDzerzhinsky and Lenin.\nDzerzhinsky became a Bolshevik as late as 1917. Therefore, it was wrong to assert (as official Soviet historians did subsequently) that Dzerzhinsky had been one of Lenin's oldest and most reliable comrades, or that Lenin had exercised some sort of spellbinding influence on Dzerzhinsky and the SDKPiL. Lenin and Dzerzhinsky frequently had opposing opinions about many important ideological and political issues of the pre-revolutionary period, and also after the October Revolution. After 1917, Dzerzhinsky would oppose Lenin on such crucial issues as the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the trade unions, and Soviet nationality policy. During the April 1917 Party Conference, when Lenin accused Dzerzhinsky of Great-Russian chauvinism, he replied: \"I can reproach him (Lenin) with standing at the point of view of the Polish, Ukrainian and other chauvinists.\"\nFrom 1917 to his death in 1926, Dzerzhinsky was first and foremost a Russian Communist, and Dzerzhinsky's involvement in the affairs of the Polish Communist Party (which was founded in 1918) was minimal. The energy and dedication that had previously been responsible for the building of the SDKPiL would henceforth be devoted to the priorities of the struggle for Bolshevik power in Russia, to the defence of the revolution during the civil war, and eventually, to the tasks of socialist construction.\nDeath and legacy.\nDzerzhinsky died of a heart attack on 20 July 1926 in Moscow, immediately after a two-hour speech to the Bolshevik Central Committee during which, visibly quite ill, he violently denounced the United Opposition directed by Leon Trotsky, Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev. Upon hearing of his death, Joseph Stalin eulogized Dzerzhinsky as \"a devout knight of the proletariat\". Dzerzhinsky was buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis. Today his grave is one of the twelve individual tombs located between the Lenin Mausoleum and the Kremlin Wall.\nDzerzhinsky was succeeded as chairman of the OGPU by Vyacheslav Menzhinsky.\nDzier\u017cy\u0144szczyzna, one of the two Polish Autonomous Districts in the Soviet Union, was named to commemorate Dzerzhinsky. Located in Belarus, near Minsk and close to the Soviet-Polish border of the time, it was created on 15 March 1932, with the capital at Dzyarzhynsk (in Russian Dzerzhynsk, formerly known as Kojdan\u00f3w), not far from the family estate. The Dzerzhinsky estate itself remained inside Poland from 1921 to the Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939. The district was disbanded in 1935 at the onset of the Great Purge, and most of its administration was executed.\nDzyarzhynskaya Hara (the highest point in Belarus), located near Dzyarzhynsk was named after Dzerzhinsky in 1958.\nHis name and image were used widely throughout the KGB and the Soviet Union and other communist countries; there were numerous places named after him. In Russia, there is the city of Dzerzhinsk, a village of Dzerzhinsk, and three other cities called Dzerzhinskiy; in other former Soviet republics, there was a city named for him in Armenia and the aforementioned Dzyarzhynsk in Belarus. To comply with decommunization laws, the Ukrainian cities Dzerzhynsk and Dniprodzerzhynsk reverted to their historic names Toretsk and Kamianske in February and May 2016. A Ukrainian village in the Zhytomyr Oblast was also named Dzerzhinsk until 2005, when it was renamed to Romaniv. The Dzerzhinskiy Tractor Works in Stalingrad were named in his honor and became a scene of bitter fighting during the Second World War. The FED camera, produced from 1934 to around 1996, is named for him, as was the FD class steam locomotive.\nDuring the Communist era (1945\u20131989) in Poland, Dzerzhinsky was celebrated as a socialist hero. In 1951, a large-scale statue of Dzerzhinsky was designed by Zbigniew Dunajewski and erected in the northern side of Bank Square in Warsaw. The square bore Dzerzhinsky's name () until 1989. The statue was toppled on 16 November 1989, one of the many Soviet-era symbols removed that year to mark the end of Communism in Poland. The square was subsequently renamed Plac Bankowy (Bank Square).\nIron Felix.\nA 15-ton iron monument of Dzerzhinsky, which once dominated the Lubyanka Square in Moscow, near the KGB headquarters, also became known as \"Iron Felix\" ( \u2013 \"Zheleznyj Feliks\"). Sculpted in 1958 by Yevgeny Vuchetich, it served as a Moscow landmark during late Soviet times. Symbolically, the Memorial society erected the Solovetsky Stone, a memorial to the victims of the Gulag (using a simple stone from the Solovki prison camp in the White Sea) beside the Iron Felix statue on 30 October 1990). The Moscow Soviet (Mossovet) had the Dzerzhinsky statue removed to the Fallen Monument Park and laid on its side in August 1991, after the failed coup d'\u00e9tat attempt by hard-line Communist members of the government. A mock-up of the removal of Dzerzhinsky's statue can be found in the entrance hall of the International Spy Museum in Washington, D.C.\nThe figure of Dzerzhinsky remains controversial in Russian society. Between 1999 and 2013, six proposals called for the return of the statue to its plinth. The Monument Art Commission of the Moscow City Duma rejected the proposals due to concerns that the proposed return would cause \"unnecessary tension\" in society. According to a December 2013 VTsIOM poll, 46% of Russians favour the restoration of the statue to the Lubyanka Square, with 17% opposing it. The statue remained in a yard for old Soviet memorials at the Central House of Artists.\nIn April 2012, the Moscow authorities stated that they would renovate the \"Iron Felix\" monument in full and put the statue on a list of monuments to be renovated, as well as officially designating it an object of cultural heritage. On 26 April 2021, it was announced by the prosecutor office of Moscow that the removal of the statue had no legal basis and was therefore illegal.\nFinally, the monument was reerected on 11 September 2023, but this time in front of the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service headquarters outside Moscow.\nOther statues.\nA smaller bust of Dzerzhinsky in the courtyard of the Moscow police headquarters at Petrovka 38 was restored in November 2005 (police officers had removed this bust on 22 August 1991).\nA 10-foot bronze replica of the original Iron Felix statue was placed on the grounds of the military academy in Minsk, Belarus, in May 2006.\nIn 2017, on the 140th anniversary of Dzerzhinsky's birth, a monument to Dzerzhinsky was erected in the city of Ryazan, Russia.\nOn 20 January 2017, the People's Public Security Academy in Hanoi, Vietnam, inaugurated a Dzerzhinsky statue.\nDzerzhinovo.\nIn 1943, the manor house of Dzerzhinovo, where Dzerzhinsky was born, was destroyed and family members (including Dzerzhinsky's brother Kazimierz) were killed by the Germans, because of their support for the Polish Home Army. In 2005, the Government of Belarus rebuilt the house (now on Belarusian territory) and established a museum. The graduating class of their KGB academy holds its annual swearing-in at the manor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37796", "revid": "47947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37796", "title": "West Nile fever", "text": "Human disease caused by West Nile virus infection\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nWest Nile fever is an infection by the West Nile virus, which is typically spread by mosquitoes. In about 80% of infections people have few or no symptoms. About 20% of people develop a fever, headache, vomiting, or a rash. In less than 1% of people, encephalitis or meningitis occurs, with associated neck stiffness, confusion, or seizures. Recovery may take weeks to months. The risk of death among those in whom the nervous system is affected is about 10%.\nWest Nile virus (WNV) is usually spread by mosquitoes that become infected when they feed on infected birds, which often carry the disease. Rarely the virus is spread through blood transfusions, organ transplants, or from mother to baby during pregnancy, delivery, or breastfeeding, but it otherwise does not spread directly between people. Risks for severe disease include being very young, over 60 years old, having a weak immune system, and having other health problems. Diagnosis is typically based on symptoms and blood tests.\nThere is no human vaccine. The best way to reduce the risk of infection is to avoid mosquito bites. Mosquito populations may be reduced by eliminating standing pools of water, such as in old tires, buckets, gutters, and swimming pools. When mosquitoes cannot be avoided, mosquito repellent, window screens, and mosquito nets reduce the likelihood of being bitten. There is no specific treatment for the disease; pain medications may reduce symptoms.\nThe virus was discovered in Uganda in 1937, and was first detected in North America in 1999. WNV has occurred in Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia, and North America. In the United States thousands of cases are reported a year, with most occurring in August and September. It can occur in outbreaks of disease. Severe disease may also occur in horses, for which a vaccine is available. A surveillance system in birds is useful for early detection of a potential human outbreak.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nAbout 80% of those infected with West Nile virus (WNV) show no symptoms and go unreported. About 20% of infected people develop symptoms. These vary in severity, and begin 3 to 14 days after being bitten. Most people with mild symptoms of WNV recover completely, though fatigue and weakness may last for weeks or months. Symptoms may range from mild, such as fever, to severe, such as paralysis and meningitis. A severe infection can last weeks and can, rarely, cause permanent brain damage. Death may ensue if the central nervous system is affected. Medical conditions such as cancer and diabetes, and age over 60 years, increase the risk of developing severe symptoms.\nHeadache can be a prominent symptom of WNV fever, meningitis, encephalitis, meningoencephalitis, and it may or may not be present in poliomyelitis-like syndrome. Thus, headache is not a useful indicator of neuroinvasive disease.\nCause.\nVirology.\nWNV is one of the Japanese encephalitis antigenic serocomplex of viruses.\nImage reconstructions and cryoelectron microscopy reveal a 45\u201350\u00a0nm virion covered with a relatively smooth protein surface. This structure is similar to the dengue fever virus; both belong to the genus \"Flavivirus\" within the family \"Flaviviridae\". The genetic material of WNV is a positive-sense, single strand of RNA, which is between 11,000 and 12,000 nucleotides long; these genes encode seven nonstructural proteins and three structural proteins. The RNA strand is held within a nucleocapsid formed from 12-kDa protein blocks; the capsid is contained within a host-derived membrane altered by two viral membrane proteins.\nWest Nile virus has been seen to replicate faster and spread more easily to birds at higher temperatures; one of several ways climate change could affect the epidemiology of this disease.\nTransmission.\nThe prime method of spread of the West Nile virus (WNV) is the female mosquito. In Europe, cats were identified as being hosts for West Nile virus.\nThe important mosquito vectors vary according to area; in the United States, \"Culex pipiens\" (Eastern United States, and urban and residential areas of the United States north of 36\u201339\u00b0N), \"Culex tarsalis\" (Midwest and West), and \"Culex quinquefasciatus\" (Southeast) are the main vector species. In Europe, \"Culex pipiens\" is the principal vector.\nThe mosquito species that are most frequently infected with WNV feed primarily on birds. Different species of mosquitos take a blood meal from different types of vertebrate hosts, Mosquitoes show further selectivity, exhibiting preference for different species of birds. In the United States, WNV mosquito vectors feed preferentially on members of the Corvidae and thrush family. Among the preferred species within these families are the American crow, a corvid, and the American robin (\"Turdus migratorius\").\nSome species of birds develop sufficient viral levels (&gt;~104.2 log PFU/ml;) after being infected to transmit the infection to biting mosquitoes that in turn go on to infect other birds. In birds that die from WNV, death usually occurs after 4 to 6 days. In mammals and several species of birds, the virus does not multiply as readily and so does not develop high viremia during infection. Mosquitoes biting such hosts are not believed to ingest sufficient virus to become infected, making them so-called dead-end hosts. As a result of the differential infectiousness of hosts, the feeding patterns of mosquitoes play an important role in WNV transmission, and they are partly genetically controlled, even within a species.\nDirect human-to-human transmission initially was believed to be caused only by occupational exposure, such as in a laboratory setting, or conjunctival exposure to infected blood. The US outbreak identified additional transmission methods through blood transfusion, organ transplant, intrauterine exposure, and breast feeding. Since 2003, blood banks in the United States routinely screen for the virus among their donors. As a precautionary measure, the UK's National Blood Service initially ran a test for this disease in donors who donate within 28 days of a visit to the United States, Canada, or the northeastern provinces of Italy, and the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service asks prospective donors to wait 28 days after returning from North America or the northeastern provinces of Italy before donating. There also have been reports of possible transmission of the virus from mother to child during pregnancy or breastfeeding or exposure to the virus in a lab, but these are rare cases and not conclusively confirmed.\nRecently, the potential for mosquito saliva to affect the course of WNV disease was demonstrated. Mosquitoes inoculate their saliva into the skin while obtaining blood. Mosquito saliva is a pharmacological cocktail of secreted molecules, principally proteins, that can affect vascular constriction, blood coagulation, platelet aggregation, inflammation, and immunity. It clearly alters the immune response in a manner that may be advantageous to a virus. Studies have shown it can specifically modulate the immune response during early virus infection, and mosquito feeding can exacerbate WNV infection, leading to higher viremia and more severe forms of disease.\nVertical transmission.\nVertical transmission, the transmission of a viral or bacterial disease from the female of the species to her offspring, has been observed in various West Nile virus studies, amongst different species of mosquitoes in both the laboratory and in nature. Mosquito progeny infected vertically in autumn may potentially serve as a mechanism for WNV to overwinter and initiate enzootic horizontal transmission the following spring, although it likely plays little role in transmission in the summer and fall.\nRisk factors.\nRisk factors independently associated with developing a clinical infection with WNV include infants, having a weak immune system, and a patient history of organ transplantation. For neuroinvasive disease the additional risk factors include older age (&gt;50+), male sex, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus.\nA genetic factor also appears to increase susceptibility to West Nile disease. A mutation of the gene \"CCR5\" gives some protection against HIV but leads to more serious complications of WNV infection. Carriers of two mutated copies of \"CCR5\" made up 4.0 to 4.5% of a sample of people with West Nile disease, while the incidence of the gene in the general population is only 1.0%.\nThe most at risk occupations in the U.S. are outdoor workers, for example farmers, loggers, landscapers/groundskeepers, construction workers, painters, summer camp workers and pavers. Two reports of accidental exposure by laboratory personnel working with infected fluids or tissues have been received. While this appears to be a rare occurrence, it highlights the need for proper handling of infected materials. The World Health Organization states that there are no known cases of health care workers acquiring the virus from infected patients when the appropriate infection control precautions are observed.\nDiagnosis.\nPreliminary diagnosis is often based on the patient's clinical symptoms, places and dates of travel (if patient is from a nonendemic country or area), activities, and epidemiologic history of the location where infection occurred. A recent history of mosquito bites and an acute febrile illness associated with neurologic signs and symptoms should cause clinical suspicion of WNV.\nDiagnosis of West Nile virus infections is generally accomplished by serologic testing of blood serum or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which is obtained via a lumbar puncture. Initial screening could be done using the ELISA technique detecting immunoglobulins in the sera of the tested individuals.\nTypical findings of WNV infection include lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevated protein level, reference glucose and lactic acid levels, and no erythrocytes.\nDefinitive diagnosis of WNV is obtained through detection of virus-specific antibody IgM and neutralizing antibodies. Cases of West Nile virus meningitis and encephalitis that have been serologically confirmed produce similar degrees of CSF pleocytosis and are often associated with substantial CSF neutrophilia.\nSpecimens collected within eight days following onset of illness may not test positive for West Nile IgM, and testing should be repeated. A positive test for West Nile IgG in the absence of a positive West Nile IgM is indicative of a previous flavivirus infection and is not by itself evidence of an acute West Nile virus infection.\nIf cases of suspected West Nile virus infection, sera should be collected on both the acute and\nconvalescent phases of the illness. Convalescent specimens should be collected 2\u20133 weeks after acute specimens.\nIt is common in serologic testing for cross-reactions to occur among flaviviruses such as dengue virus (DENV) and tick-borne encephalitis virus; this necessitates caution when evaluating serologic results of flaviviral infections.\nFour FDA-cleared WNV IgM ELISA kits are commercially available from different manufacturers in the U.S., each of these kits is indicated for use on serum to aid in the presumptive laboratory diagnosis of WNV infection in patients with clinical symptoms of meningitis or encephalitis. Positive WNV test results obtained via use of these kits should be confirmed by additional testing at a state health department laboratory or CDC.\nIn fatal cases, nucleic acid amplification, histopathology with immunohistochemistry, and virus culture of autopsy tissues can also be useful. Only a few state laboratories or other specialized laboratories, including those at CDC, are capable of doing this specialized testing.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nA number of various diseases may present with symptoms similar to those caused by a clinical West Nile virus infection. Those causing neuroinvasive disease symptoms include the enterovirus infection and bacterial meningitis. Accounting for differential diagnoses is a crucial step in the definitive diagnosis of WNV infection. Consideration of a differential diagnosis is required when a patient presents with unexplained febrile illness, extreme headache, encephalitis or meningitis. Diagnostic and serologic laboratory testing using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing and viral culture of CSF to identify the specific pathogen causing the symptoms, is the only currently available means of differentiating between causes of encephalitis and meningitis.\nPrevention.\nMany of the guidelines for preventing occupational West Nile virus exposure are common to all mosquito-borne diseases.\nPublic health measures include taking steps to reduce mosquito populations. Personal recommendations are to reduce the likelihood of being bitten. General measures to avoid bites include:\nMonitoring and control.\nWest Nile virus can be sampled from the environment by the pooling of trapped mosquitoes via ovitraps, carbon dioxide-baited light traps, and gravid traps, testing blood samples drawn from wild birds, dogs, and sentinel monkeys, and testing brains of dead birds found by various animal control agencies and the public.\nTesting of the mosquito samples requires the use of reverse-transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) to directly amplify and show the presence of virus in the submitted samples. When using the blood sera of wild birds and sentinel chickens, samples must be tested for the presence of WNV antibodies by use of immunohistochemistry (IHC) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).\nDead birds, after necropsy, or their oral swab samples collected on specific RNA-preserving filter paper card, can have their virus presence tested by either RT-PCR or IHC, where virus shows up as brown-stained tissue because of a substrate-enzyme reaction.\nWest Nile control is achieved through mosquito control, by elimination of mosquito breeding sites such as abandoned pools, applying larvacide to active breeding areas, and targeting the adult population via lethal ovitraps and aerial spraying of pesticides. With aerial pesticides, there is a rising need to develop new versions as pesticide resistance among mosquitoes can occur.\nEnvironmentalists have condemned attempts to control the transmitting mosquitoes by spraying pesticide, saying the detrimental health effects of spraying outweigh the relatively few lives that may be saved, and more environmentally friendly ways of controlling mosquitoes are available. They also question the effectiveness of insecticide spraying, as they believe mosquitoes that are resting or flying above the level of spraying will not be killed; the most common vector in the northeastern United States, \"Culex pipiens\", is a canopy feeder.\nTreatment.\nNo specific treatment is available for WNV infection. Most people recover without treatment. In mild cases, over-the-counter pain relievers can help ease mild headaches and muscle aches in adults. In severe cases supportive care is provided, often in hospital, with intravenous fluids, pain medication, respiratory support, and prevention of secondary infections.\nPrognosis.\nWhile the general prognosis is favorable, current studies indicate that West Nile Fever can often be more severe than previously recognized, with studies of various recent outbreaks indicating that it may take as long as 60 to 90 days to recover. Patients with milder WNF are just as likely as those with more severe manifestations of neuroinvasive disease to experience multiple somatic complaints such as tremor, and dysfunction in motor skills and executive functions for over a year. People with milder symptoms are just as likely as people with more severe symptoms to experience adverse outcomes. Recovery is marked by a long convalescence with fatigue. One study found that neuroinvasive WNV infection was associated with an increased risk for subsequent kidney disease.\nEpidemiology.\nWNV was first isolated from a feverish 37-year-old woman at Omogo in the West Nile District of Uganda in 1937 during research on yellow fever virus. A series of serosurveys in 1939 in central Africa found anti-WNV positive results ranging from 1.4% (Congo) to 46.4% (White Nile region, Sudan). It was subsequently identified in Egypt (1942) and India (1953), a 1950 serosurvey in Egypt found 90% of those over 40 years in age had WNV antibodies. The ecology was characterized in 1953 with studies in Egypt and Israel. The virus became recognized as a cause of severe human meningoencephalitis in elderly patients during an outbreak in Israel in 1957. The disease was first noted in horses in Egypt and France in the early 1960s and found to be widespread in southern Europe, southwest Asia and Australia.\nThe first appearance of WNV in the Western Hemisphere was in 1999 with encephalitis reported in humans, dogs, cats, and horses, and the subsequent spread in the United States may be an important milestone in the evolving history of this virus. The American outbreak began in College Point, Queens in New York City and was later spread to the neighboring states of New Jersey and Connecticut. The virus is believed to have entered in an infected bird or mosquito, although there is no clear evidence. West Nile virus is now endemic in Africa, Europe, the Middle East, west and central Asia, Oceania (subtype Kunjin), and most recently, North America and is spreading into Central and South America.\nOutbreaks of West Nile virus encephalitis in humans have occurred in Algeria (1994), Romania (1996 to 1997), the Czech Republic (1997), Congo (1998), Russia (1999), the United States (1999 to 2009), Canada (1999\u20132007), Israel (2000), Greece (2010), and Israel (2024).\nEpizootics of disease in horses occurred in Morocco (1996), Italy (1998), the United States (1999 to 2001), and France (2000), Mexico (2003) and Sardinia (2011).\nIn August 2024 in Warsaw the West Nile virus was identified in bodies of dead birds (Corvidae) while investigating an unusually high number of finds.\nOutdoor workers (including biological fieldworkers, construction workers, farmers, landscapers, and painters), healthcare personnel, and laboratory personnel who perform necropsies on animals are at risk of contracting WNV.\nIn 2012, the US experienced one of its worst epidemics in which 286 people died, with the state of Texas being hard hit by this virus.\nWeather.\nDrought has been associated with a higher number of West Nile virus cases in the following year. As drought can decrease fish and other populations that eat mosquito eggs, higher numbers of mosquitoes can result. Higher temperatures are linked to decreased time for replication and increased viral load in birds and mosquitoes.\nResearch.\nA vaccine for horses (ATCvet code: QI05AA10 (https://)) based on killed viruses exists; some zoos have given this vaccine to their birds, although its effectiveness is unknown. Dogs and cats show few if any signs of infection. There have been no known cases of direct canine-human or feline-human transmission; although these pets can become infected, it is unlikely they are, in turn, capable of infecting native mosquitoes and thus continuing the disease cycle. AMD3100, which had been proposed as an antiretroviral drug for HIV, has shown promise against West Nile encephalitis. Morpholino antisense oligos conjugated to cell penetrating peptides have been shown to partially protect mice from WNV disease. There have also been attempts to treat infections using ribavirin, intravenous immunoglobulin, or alpha interferon. GenoMed, a U.S. biotech company, has found that blocking angiotensin II can treat the \"cytokine storm\" of West Nile virus encephalitis as well as other viruses.\nAs of 2019, six vaccines had progressed to human trials but none had been licensed in the United States. Only the two live attenuated vaccines produced strong immunity after a single dose.\nDr. Anthony Fauci, former director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has urged proactive action, including international collaborations for vaccine and antiviral development, emphasizing that we must not wait for a greater crisis to address this virus. His call for increased public awareness and scientific research followed his own recovery as a victim of the West Nile virus himself, which he most likely contracted in his Washington, D.C.\u2013based backyard from a mosquito bite. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37797", "revid": "12782318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37797", "title": "Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel", "text": "Thought experiment of infinite sets\nHilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel (colloquially the Infinite Hotel Paradox or Hilbert's Hotel) is a thought experiment which illustrates a counterintuitive property of infinite sets. It shows that a fully occupied hotel with infinitely many rooms may still accommodate additional guests, even infinitely many of them, and this process may be repeated infinitely often. The idea was introduced by David Hilbert in a 1924-1925 lecture \"\u00dcber das Unendliche\", first printed in , and was popularized through George Gamow's 1947 book \"One Two Three... Infinity\".\nThe paradox.\nHilbert imagines a hypothetical hotel with rooms numbered 1, 2, 3, and so on with no upper limit. This is called a countably infinite number of rooms. Initially every room is occupied, and yet new visitors arrive, each expecting their own room. A normal, finite hotel could not accommodate new guests once every room is full. However, it can be shown that the existing guests and newcomers \u2014 even an infinite number of them \u2014 can each have their own room in the infinite hotel.\nFinitely many new guests.\nWith one additional guest, the hotel can accommodate them and the existing guests if infinitely many guests simultaneously move rooms. The guest currently in room 1 moves to room 2, the guest currently in room 2 to room 3, and so on, moving every guest from their current room \"n\" to room \"n\"+1. The infinite hotel has no final room, so every guest has a room to go to. After this, room 1 is empty and the new guest can be moved into that room. By repeating this procedure, it is possible to make room for any finite number of new guests. In general, when \"k\" guests seek a room, the hotel can apply the same procedure and move every guest from room \"n\" to room \"n + k\".\nInfinitely many new guests.\nIt is also possible to accommodate a \"countably infinite\" number of new guests: just move the person occupying room 1 to room 2, the guest occupying room 2 to room 4, and, in general, the guest occupying room \"n\" to room 2\"n\" (2 times \"n\"), and all the odd-numbered rooms (which are countably infinite) will be free for the new guests.\nInfinitely many coaches with infinitely many guests each.\nIt is possible to accommodate countably infinitely many coachloads of countably infinite passengers each, by several different methods. Most methods depend on the seats in the coaches being already numbered (or use the axiom of countable choice). In general any pairing function can be used to solve this problem. For each of these methods, consider a passenger's seat number on a coach to be formula_1, and their coach number to be formula_2, and the numbers formula_1 and formula_2 are then fed into the two arguments of the pairing function.\nPrime powers method.\nSend the guest in room formula_5 to room formula_6, then put the first coach's load in rooms formula_7, the second coach's load in rooms formula_8; in general for coach number formula_2 we use the rooms formula_10 where formula_11 is the formula_2th odd prime number. This solution leaves certain rooms empty (which may or may not be useful to the hotel); specifically, all numbers that are not prime powers, such as 15 or 847, will no longer be occupied. (So, strictly speaking, this shows that the number of arrivals is \"less than or equal to\" the number of vacancies created. It is easy to show, by a bijection, that the number of arrivals is also \"greater than or equal to\" the number of vacancies, and thus that they are \"equal\", despite having empty rooms.) (The algorithm works equally well if one interchanges formula_1 and formula_2, but whichever choice is made, it must be applied uniformly throughout.)\nPrime factorization method.\nEach person of a certain seat formula_1 and coach formula_2 can be put into room formula_17 (presuming \"c\"=0 for the people already in the hotel, 1 for the first coach, and so on). Because every number has a unique prime factorization, it is easy to see all people will have a room, while no two people will end up in the same room. For example, the person in room 2592 (formula_18) was sitting in the 4th coach, on the 5th seat. Like the prime powers method, this solution leaves certain rooms empty. (In particular, any room with a number divisible by any prime other than 2 and 3 is empty.)\nThis method can also easily be expanded for infinite dates, infinite entrances, etc. ( formula_19 ), since there are infinitely many primes. This will then fill up every room since each number has a unique prime factorization.\nInterleaving method.\nFor each passenger, compare the lengths of formula_1 and formula_2 as written in any positional numeral system, such as decimal. (Treat each hotel resident as being in coach #0.) If either number is shorter, add leading zeroes to it until both values have the same number of digits. Interleave the digits to produce a room number: its digits will be [first digit of coach number]-[first digit of seat number]-[second digit of coach number]-[second digit of seat number]-etc. The hotel (coach #0) guest in room number 1729 moves to room 01070209 (i.e., room 1,070,209). The passenger on seat 1234 of coach 789 goes to room 01728394 (i.e., room 1,728,394). The roles of the two numbers can be reversed (seat-odd and coach-even), so long as it is applied consistently.\nUnlike the prime powers solution, this one fills the hotel completely, and we can reconstruct a guest's original coach and seat by reversing the interleaving process, as follows: First, add a leading zero if the room has an odd number of digits. Then de-interleave the number into two numbers: the coach number consists of the odd-numbered digits and the seat number is the even-numbered ones.\nTriangular number method.\nThose already in the hotel will be moved to room formula_22, or the formula_1th triangular number. Those in a coach will be in room formula_24, or the formula_25 triangular number plus formula_1. In this way all the rooms will be filled by one, and only one, guest. Again, the original coach and seat can be deduced by reversing the process.\nThis pairing function can be demonstrated visually by structuring the hotel as a one-room-deep, infinitely tall pyramid. The pyramid's topmost row is a single room: room 1; its second row is rooms 2 and 3; and so on. The column formed by the set of rightmost rooms will correspond to the triangular numbers. Once they are filled (by the hotel's redistributed occupants), the remaining empty rooms form the shape of a pyramid exactly identical to the original shape. Thus, by induction, the process can be repeated for each coach. Doing this one at a time for each coach would require an infinite number of steps, but by using the prior formulas, each guest can calculate their room number and go there in a finite number of steps.\nArbitrary enumeration method.\nLet formula_27. formula_28 is countable since formula_29 is countable, hence we may enumerate its elements formula_30. Now if formula_31, assign the formula_32th guest of the formula_33th coach to the formula_1th room (consider the guests already in the hotel as guests of the formula_35th coach). Thus we have a function assigning each person to a room; furthermore, this assignment does not skip over any rooms.\nFurther layers of infinity.\nSuppose the hotel is next to an ocean, and an infinite number of car ferries arrive, each bearing an infinite number of coaches, each with an infinite number of passengers. This is a situation involving three \"levels\" of infinity, and it can be solved by extensions of any of the previous solutions.\nThe prime factorization method can be applied by adding a new prime number for every additional layer of infinity ( formula_36, with formula_37 the ferry number).\nThe prime power solution can be applied with further exponentiation of prime numbers, resulting in very large room numbers even given small inputs. For example, the passenger in the second seat of the third bus on the second ferry (address 2-3-2) would raise the 2nd odd prime (5) to 49, which is the result of the 3rd odd prime (7) being raised to the power of his seat number (2). This room number would have over thirty decimal digits.\nThe interleaving method can be used with three interleaved \"strands\" instead of two. The passenger with the address 2-3-2 would go to room 232, while the one with the address 4935-198-82217 would go to room #008,402,912,391,587 (the leading zeroes can be removed).\nAnticipating the possibility of any number of layers of infinite guests, the hotel may wish to assign rooms such that no guest will need to move, no matter how many guests arrive afterward. One solution is to convert each arrival's address into a binary number in which ones are used as separators at the start of each layer, while a number within a given layer (such as a guest's coach number) is represented with that many zeroes. Thus, a guest with the prior address 2-5-1-3-1 (five infinite layers) would go to room 10010000010100010 (decimal 295458).\nAs an added step in this process, one zero can be removed from each section of the number; in this example, the guest's new room is 101000011001 (decimal 2585). This ensures that every room could be filled by a hypothetical guest. If no infinite sets of guests arrive, then only rooms that are a power of two will be occupied.\nAnalysis.\nHilbert's paradox is a veridical paradox: it leads to a counter-intuitive result that is provably true. The statements \"there is a guest to every room\" and \"no more guests can be accommodated\" are not equivalent when there are infinitely many rooms.\nThis paradox is counter-intuitive because the properties of infinite collections of things are quite different from those of finite collections of things. It can be understood by using Cantor's theory of transfinite numbers. Thus, in an ordinary (finite) hotel with more than one room, the number of odd-numbered rooms is obviously smaller than the total number of rooms. However, in Hilbert's Grand Hotel, the quantity of odd-numbered rooms is not smaller than the total \"number\" of rooms. In mathematical terms, the cardinality of the subset containing the odd-numbered rooms is the same as the cardinality of the set of all rooms. Indeed, infinite sets are characterized as sets that have proper subsets of the same cardinality. For countable sets (sets with the same cardinality as the natural numbers) this cardinality is formula_38.\nRephrased, for any countably infinite set, there exists a bijective function which maps the countably infinite set to the set of natural numbers, even if the countably infinite set contains the natural numbers. For example, the set of rational numbers\u2014those numbers which can be written as a quotient of integers\u2014contains the natural numbers as a subset, but is no bigger than the set of natural numbers since the rationals are countable: there is a bijection from the naturals to the rationals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37798", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37798", "title": "Infinite (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "37799", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37799", "title": "Thor Heyerdahl", "text": "Norwegian anthropologist and adventurer (1914\u20132002)\nThor Heyerdahl KStJ (; 6 October 1914 \u2013 18 April 2002) was a Norwegian adventurer and ethnographer with a background in biology with specialization in zoology, botany and geography.\nHeyerdahl is notable for his \"Kon-Tiki\" expedition in 1947, in which he drifted 8,000\u00a0km (5,000\u00a0mi) across the Pacific Ocean in a primitive hand-built raft from South America to the Tuamotu Islands. The expedition was supposed to demonstrate that the legendary sun-worshiping red-haired, bearded, and white-skinned \"Tiki people\" from South America drifted and colonized Polynesia first, before actual Polynesian peoples. His hyperdiffusionist ideas on ancient cultures had been widely rejected by the scientific community, even before the expedition.\nHeyerdahl made other voyages to demonstrate the possibility of contact between widely separated ancient peoples, notably the \"Ra II\" expedition of 1970, when he sailed from the west coast of Africa to Barbados in a papyrus reed boat. He was appointed a government scholar in 1984.\nHe died on 18 April 2002 in Colla Micheri, Italy, while visiting close family members. The Norwegian government gave him a state funeral in Oslo Cathedral on 26 April 2002.\nIn May 2011, the Thor Heyerdahl Archives were added to UNESCO's Memory of the World Register. At the time, this list included 238 collections from all over the world. The Heyerdahl Archives span the years 1937 to 2002 and include his photographic collection, diaries, private letters, expedition plans, articles, newspaper clippings, and original book and article manuscripts. The Heyerdahl Archives are administered by the Kon-Tiki Museum and the National Library of Norway in Oslo.\nYouth and personal life.\nHeyerdahl was born in Larvik, Norway, the son of master brewer Thor Heyerdahl (1869\u20131957) and his wife, Alison Lyng (1873\u20131965). As a young child, Heyerdahl showed a strong interest in zoology, inspired by his mother, who had a strong interest in Charles Darwin's theory of evolution. He created a small museum in his childhood home, with a common adder (\"Vipera berus\") as the main attraction.\nHe studied zoology and geography at the faculty of biological science at the University of Oslo. At the same time, he privately studied Polynesian culture and history, consulting what was then the world's largest private collection of books and papers on Polynesia, owned by Bjarne Kroepelien, a wealthy wine merchant in Oslo. (This collection was later purchased by the University of Oslo Library from Kroepelien's heirs and was attached to the Kon-Tiki Museum research department.)\nAfter seven terms and consultations with experts in Berlin, a project was developed and sponsored by Heyerdahl's zoology professors, Kristine Bonnevie and Hjalmar Broch. He was to visit some isolated Pacific island groups and study how the local animals had found their way there.\nOn the day before they sailed together to the Marquesas Islands in 1936, Heyerdahl married Liv Coucheron-Torp (1916\u20131969), whom he had met at the University of Oslo, and who had studied economics there. He was 22 years old and she was 20 years old. Eventually, the couple had two sons: Thor\u00a0Jr. (1938\u20132024) and Bj\u00f8rn (1940\u20132021). The marriage ended in divorce shortly before the 1947 Kon-Tiki expedition, which Liv had helped to organize.\nAfter the occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany, he served with the Free Norwegian Forces from 1944, in the far north province of Finnmark.\nIn 1949, Heyerdahl married Yvonne Dedekam-Simonsen (1924\u20132006). They had three daughters: Annette, Marian, and Helene Elisabeth. They were divorced in 1979. Heyerdahl blamed their separation on his being away from home and differences in their ideas for bringing up children. In his autobiography, he concluded that he should take the entire blame for their separation.\nIn 1991, Heyerdahl married Jacqueline Beer (born 1932) as his third wife. They lived in Tenerife, Canary Islands, and were very actively involved with archaeological projects, especially in T\u00facume, Peru, and Azov until his death in 2002. He had still been hoping to undertake an archaeological project in Samoa before he died.\nFatu Hiva.\nIn 1936, on the day after his marriage to Liv Coucheron Torp, the young couple set out for the South Pacific Island of Fatu Hiva. They nominally had an academic mission, to research the spread of animal species between islands, but in reality they intended to \"run away to the South Seas\" and never return home.\nAided by expedition funding from their parents, they nonetheless arrived on the island lacking \"provisions, weapons or a radio\". Residents in Tahiti, where they stopped en route, did convince them to take a machete and a cooking pot.\nThey arrived at Fatu Hiva in 1937, in the valley of Omo\u2018a, and decided to cross over the island's mountainous interior to settle in one of the small, nearly abandoned, valleys on the eastern side of the island. There, they made their thatch-covered stilted home in the valley of Uia.\nLiving in such primitive conditions was a daunting task, but they managed to live off the land, and work on their academic goals, by collecting and studying zoological and botanical specimens. They discovered unusual artifacts, listened to the natives' oral history traditions, and took note of the prevailing winds and ocean currents.\nIt was in this setting, surrounded by the ruins of the formerly glorious Marquesan civilization, that Heyerdahl first developed his theories regarding the possibility of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact between the pre-European Polynesians, and the peoples and cultures of South America.\nDespite the seemingly idyllic situation, the exposure to various tropical diseases and other difficulties caused them to return to civilisation a year later. They worked together to write an account of their adventure.\nThe events surrounding his stay on the Marquesas, most of the time on Fatu Hiva, were told first in his book \"P\u00e5 Jakt etter Paradiset\" (\"Hunt for Paradise\") (1938), which was published in Norway but, following the outbreak of World War II, was never translated and remained largely forgotten. Many years later, having achieved notability with other adventures and books on other subjects, Heyerdahl published a new account of this voyage under the title \"Fatu Hiva\" (London: Allen &amp; Unwin, 1974). The story of his time on Fatu Hiva and his side trip to Hivaoa and Mohotani is also related in \"Green Was the Earth on the Seventh Day \" (Random House, 1996).\n\"Kon-Tiki\" expedition.\nIn 1947 Heyerdahl and five fellow adventurers sailed from Peru to the Tuamotu Islands, French Polynesia in a raft that they had constructed from balsa wood and other native materials, christened the \"Kon-Tiki\". The \"Kon-Tiki\" expedition was inspired by old reports and drawings made by the Spanish Conquistadors of Inca rafts, and by native legends and archaeological evidence suggesting contact between South America and Polynesia. The \"Kon-Tiki\" smashed into the reef at Raroia in the Tuamotus on 7 August 1947 after a 101-day, 4,300-nautical-mile (5,000-mile or 8,000\u00a0km) journey across the Pacific Ocean. Heyerdahl had nearly drowned at least twice in childhood and did not take easily to water; he said later that there were times in each of his raft voyages when he feared for his life.\nHeyerdahl's book about \"\" has been translated into 70 languages. The documentary film of the expedition entitled \"Kon-Tiki\" won an Academy Award in 1951. A dramatised version was released in 2012, also called \"Kon-Tiki\", and was nominated for both the Best Foreign Language Oscar at the 85th Academy Awards and a Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 70th Golden Globe Awards. It was the first time that a Norwegian film was nominated for both an Oscar and a Golden Globe.\nExpedition to Easter Island.\nIn 1955\u20131956, Heyerdahl organised the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island. The expedition's scientific staff included Arne Skj\u00f8lsvold, Carlyle Smith, Edwin Ferdon, Gonzalo Figueroa and William Mulloy. Heyerdahl and the professional archaeologists who travelled with him spent several months on Easter Island investigating several important archaeological sites. Highlights of the project include experiments in the carving, transport and erection of the notable moai, as well as excavations at such prominent sites as Orongo and Poike. The expedition published two large volumes of scientific reports (\"Reports of the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific\") and Heyerdahl later added a third (\"The Art of Easter Island\"). Heyerdahl's popular book on the subject, \"Aku-Aku\" was another international best-seller.\nIn \"Easter Island: The Mystery Solved\" (Random House, 1989), Heyerdahl offered a more detailed theory of the island's history. Working with Rapanui archaeologist Sonia Haoa Cardinali and using other Rapanui evidence, he claimed the island was originally colonised by Hanau eepe (\"Long Ears\"), from South America, and that Polynesian Hanau momoko (\"Short Ears\") arrived only in the mid-16th century; they may have come independently or perhaps were imported as workers. According to Heyerdahl, something happened between Admiral Roggeveen's discovery of the island in 1722 and James Cook's visit in 1774; while Roggeveen encountered white, Indian, and Polynesian people living in relative harmony and prosperity, Cook encountered a much smaller population consisting mainly of Polynesians and living in privation. Heyerdahl notes the oral tradition of an uprising of \"Short Ears\" against the ruling \"Long Ears.\" The \"Long Ears\" dug a defensive moat on the eastern end of the island and filled it with kindling. During the uprising, Heyerdahl claimed, the \"Long Ears\" ignited their moat and retreated behind it, but the \"Short Ears\" found a way around it, came up from behind, and pushed all but two of the \"Long Ears\" into the fire. This moat was found by the Norwegian expedition and it was partly cut down into the rock. Layers of fire were revealed but no fragments of bodies.\nTheory on Polynesian origins.\nThe basis of the \"Kon-Tiki\" expedition was Heyerdahl's belief that the original inhabitants of Easter Island (and the rest of Polynesia) were the \"Tiki people\", a race of \"white bearded men\" who supposedly originally sailed from Peru. He described these \"Tiki people\" as being a sun-worshipping fair-skinned people with blue eyes, fair or red hair, tall statures, and beards. He further said that these people were originally from the Middle East, and had crossed the Atlantic earlier to found the great Mesoamerican civilizations. By 500 CE, a branch of these people were supposedly forced out into Tiahuanaco where they became the ruling class of the Inca Empire and set out to voyage into the Pacific Ocean under the leadership of \"Con Ticci Viracocha\".\nHeyerdahl said that when the Europeans first came to the Pacific islands, they were astonished that they found some of the natives to have relatively light skins and beards. There were whole families that had pale skin, hair varying in colour from reddish to blonde. In contrast, most of the Polynesians had golden-brown skin, raven-black hair, and rather flat noses. Heyerdahl claimed that when Jacob Roggeveen discovered Easter Island in 1722, he supposedly noticed that many of the natives were white-skinned. Heyerdahl claimed that these people could count their ancestors who were \"white-skinned\" right back to the time of Tiki and Hotu Matua, when they first came sailing across the sea \"from a mountainous land in the east which was scorched by the sun\". The ethnographic evidence for these claims is outlined in Heyerdahl's book \"Aku-Aku: The Secret of Easter Island\". He argued that the monumental statues known as moai resembled sculptures more typical of pre-Columbian Peru than any Polynesian designs. He believed that the Easter Island myth of a power struggle between two peoples called the Hanau epe and Hanau momoko was a memory of conflicts between the original inhabitants of the island and a later wave of \"Native Americans\" from the Northwest coast, eventually leading to the annihilation of the Hanau epe and the destruction of the island's culture and once-prosperous economy. Heyerdahl described these later \"Native American\" migrants as \"Maori-Polynesians\" who were supposedly Asians who crossed over the Bering land bridge into Northwest America before sailing westward towards Polynesia (the westward direction is because he refused to accept that Polynesians were capable of sailing against winds and currents). He associated them with the Tlingit and Haida peoples and characterized them as \"inferior\" to the Tiki people.\nDespite these claims, DNA sequence analysis of Easter Island's current inhabitants indicates that the 36 people living on Rapa Nui who survived the devastating internecine wars, slave raids, and epidemics of the 19th century and had any offspring were Polynesian. Furthermore, examination of skeletons offers evidence of only Polynesian origins for Rapa Nui living on the island after 1680.\nHeyerdahl's hypothesis of Polynesian origins from the Americas is considered pseudoscientific, racially controversial, and has not gained acceptance among scientists (even prior to the voyage). It is overwhelmingly rejected by scientists today. Archaeological, linguistic, cultural, and genetic evidence all support a western origin (from Island Southeast Asia) for Polynesians via the Austronesian expansion. \"Drift voyaging\" from South America was also deemed \"extremely unlikely\" in 1973 by computer modeling.\nThe 1976 voyage of the \"H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba\", a performance-accurate replica of a Polynesian double-hulled \"wa'a kaulua\" voyaging canoe, from Hawai\u02bbi to Tahiti was partly a demonstration to prove that Heyerdahl was wrong. The \"H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba\" sailed against prevailing winds and exclusively used wayfinding and celestial Polynesian navigation techniques (unlike the modern equipment and charts of the \"Kon-Tiki\"). \"H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba\" also remains fully operational, and has since completed ten other voyages, including a three-year circumnavigation of the planet from 2014 to 2017, with other sister ships.\nHeyerdahl's hypothesis was part of early Eurocentric hyperdiffusionism and the westerner disbelief that (non-white) \"stone-age\" peoples with \"no math\" could colonize islands separated by vast distances of ocean water, even against prevailing winds and currents. He rejected the highly skilled voyaging and navigating traditions of the Austronesian peoples and instead argued that Polynesia was settled from boats following the wind and currents for navigation from South America. As such, the \"Kon-Tiki\" was deliberately a primitive raft and unsteerable, in contrast to the sophisticated outrigger canoes and catamarans of the Austronesian people.\nAnthropologist Robert Carl Suggs included a chapter titled \"The Kon-Tiki Myth\" in his 1960 book on Polynesia, concluding that \"The \"Kon-Tiki\" theory is about as plausible as the tales of Atlantis, Mu, and 'Children of the Sun.' Like most such theories, it makes exciting light reading, but as an example of scientific method it fares quite poorly.\" Anthropologist and National Geographic Explorer-in-Residence Wade Davis also criticized Heyerdahl's theory in his 2009 book \"The Wayfinders\", which explores the history of Polynesia. Davis says that Heyerdahl \"ignored the overwhelming body of linguistic, ethnographic, and ethnobotanical evidence, augmented today by genetic and archaeological data, indicating that he was patently wrong.\" Paul Theroux, in his book \"The Happy Isles of Oceania\", also criticizes Heyerdahl for trying to link the culture of Polynesian islands with the Peruvian culture. \nRecent scientific investigation that compares the DNA of some of the Polynesian islands with natives from Peru suggests that there is some merit to some of Heyerdahl's ideas and that while Polynesia was colonized from Asia, some contact with South America also existed; a number of papers have in the last few years confirmed with genetic data some form of contacts with Easter Island. Responding to one ofthese papers, archaeologist Terry Hunt said \"It is good to see this kind of research, but a definitive answer isn't really possible given the lack of chronological control... Native American genes reaching Rapa Nui with European contact cannot be ruled out.\"\nBoats \"Ra\" and \"Ra II\".\nIn 1969 and 1970, Heyerdahl built two boats from papyrus and attempted to cross the Atlantic Ocean from Morocco in Africa. Based on drawings and models from ancient Egypt, the first boat, named \"Ra\" (after the Egyptian Sun god), was constructed by boat builders from Lake Chad using papyrus reed obtained from Lake Tana in Ethiopia and launched into the Atlantic Ocean from the coast of Morocco. The Ra crew included Thor Heyerdahl (Norway), Norman Baker (US), Carlo Mauri (Italy), Yuri Senkevich (USSR), Santiago Genov\u00e9s (Mexico), Georges Sourial (Egypt), and Abdullah Djibrine (Chad). Only Heyerdahl and Baker had sailing and navigation experience. Genov\u00e9s would go on to head the Acali Experiment.\nAfter a number of weeks, \"Ra\" took on water. The crew discovered that a key element of the Egyptian boatbuilding method had been neglected, a tether that acted like a spring to keep the stern high in the water while allowing for flexibility. Water and storms eventually caused it to sag and break apart after sailing more than 6,400\u00a0km (4,000 miles). The crew was forced to abandon Ra, some hundred miles (160\u00a0km) before the Caribbean islands, and was saved by a yacht.\nThe following year, 1970, a similar vessel, \"Ra II\", was built from Ethiopian papyrus by Bolivian citizens Demetrio, Juan and Jos\u00e9 Limachi of Lake Titicaca, and likewise set sail across the Atlantic from Morocco, this time with great success. The crew was mostly the same; though Djibrine had been replaced by Kei Ohara from Japan and Madani Ait Ouhanni from Morocco. The boat became lost and was the subject of a United Nations search and rescue mission. The search included international assistance including people as far afield as Loo-Chi Hu of New Zealand. The boat reached Barbados, thus demonstrating that mariners could have dealt with trans-Atlantic voyages by sailing with the Canary Current. The \"Ra II\" is now in the Kon-Tiki Museum in Oslo, Norway.\nThe book \"The Ra Expeditions\" and the film documentary \"Ra\" (1972) were made about the voyages. Apart from the primary aspects of the expedition, Heyerdahl deliberately selected a crew representing a great diversity in race, nationality, religion and political viewpoint in order to demonstrate that, at least on their own little floating island, people could co-operate and live peacefully. Additionally, the expedition took samples of marine pollution and presented its report to the United Nations.\n\"Tigris\".\nHeyerdahl built yet another reed boat in 1977, \"Tigris\", which was intended to demonstrate that trade and migration could have linked Mesopotamia with the Indus Valley civilization in what is now Pakistan and western India. Tigris was built in Al Qurnah Iraq and sailed with its international crew through the Persian Gulf to Pakistan and made its way into the Red Sea.\nAfter about five months at sea and still remaining seaworthy, the \"Tigris\" was deliberately burnt in Djibouti on 3 April 1978 as a protest against the wars raging on every side in the Red Sea and Horn of Africa. In his Open Letter to the UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim, Heyerdahl explained his reasons:\nToday we burn our proud ship\u00a0... to protest against inhuman elements in the world of 1978\u00a0... Now we are forced to stop at the entrance to the Red Sea. Surrounded by military airplanes and warships from the world's most civilized and developed nations, we have been denied permission by friendly governments, for reasons of security, to land anywhere, but in the tiny, and still neutral, Republic of Djibouti. Elsewhere around us, brothers and neighbors are engaged in homicide with means made available to them by those who lead humanity on our joint road into the third millennium.\nTo the innocent masses in all industrialized countries, we direct our appeal. We must wake up to the insane reality of our time\u00a0... We are all irresponsible, unless we demand from the responsible decision makers that modern armaments must no longer be made available to people whose former battle axes and swords our ancestors condemned.\nOur planet is bigger than the reed bundles that have carried us across the seas, and yet small enough to run the same risks unless those of us still alive open our eyes and minds to the desperate need of intelligent collaboration to save ourselves and our common civilization from what we are about to convert into a sinking ship.\nIn the years that followed, Heyerdahl was often outspoken on issues of international peace and the environment.\nThe \"Tigris\" had an 11-man crew: Thor Heyerdahl (Norway), Norman Baker (US), Carlo Mauri (Italy), Yuri Senkevich (USSR), Germ\u00e1n Carrasco (Mexico), Hans Petter Bohn (Norway), Rashad Nazar Salim (Iraq), Norris Brock (US), Toru Suzuki (Japan), Detlef Soitzek (Germany), and Asbj\u00f8rn Damhus (Denmark).\n\"The Search for Odin\" in Azerbaijan and Russia.\nBackground.\nHeyerdahl made four visits to Azerbaijan in 1981, 1994, 1999 and 2000. Heyerdahl had long been fascinated with the rock carvings that date back to about \u00a0BCE at Gobustan (about 30 miles/48\u00a0km west of Baku). He was convinced that their artistic style closely resembled the carvings found in his native Norway. The ship designs, in particular, were regarded by Heyerdahl as similar and drawn with a simple sickle-shaped line, representing the base of the boat, with vertical lines on deck, illustrating crew or, perhaps, raised oars.\nBased on this and other published documentation, Heyerdahl proposed that Azerbaijan was the site of an ancient advanced civilization. He believed that natives migrated north through waterways to present-day Scandinavia using ingeniously constructed vessels made of skins that could be folded like cloth. When voyagers travelled upstream, they conveniently folded their skin boats and transported them on pack animals.\nSnorri Sturluson.\nOn Heyerdahl's visit to Baku in 1999, he lectured at the Academy of Sciences about the history of ancient Nordic Kings. He spoke of a notation made by Snorri Sturluson, a 13th-century historian-mythographer in \"Ynglinga Saga\", which relates that \"Odin (a Scandinavian god who was one of the kings) came to the North with his people from a country called Aser.\" (see also House of Ynglings and Mythological kings of Sweden). Heyerdahl accepted Snorri's story as literal truth, and believed that a chieftain led his people in a migration from the east, westward and northward through Saxony, to Fyn in Denmark, and eventually settling in Sweden. Heyerdahl claimed that the geographic location of the mythic Aser or \u00c6sir matched the region of contemporary Azerbaijan\u00a0\u2013 \"east of the Caucasus mountains and the Black Sea\". \"We are no longer talking about mythology,\" Heyerdahl said, \"but of the realities of geography and history. Azerbaijanis should be proud of their ancient culture. It is just as rich and ancient as that of China and Mesopotamia.\"\nIn September 2000 Heyerdahl returned to Baku for the fourth time and visited the archaeological dig in the area of the Church of Kish.\nRevision of hypothesis.\nOne of the last projects of his life, \"Jakten p\u00e5 Odin\", 'The Search for Odin', was a sudden revision of his Odin hypothesis, in furtherance of which he initiated 2001\u20132002 excavations in Azov, Russia, near the Sea of Azov at the northeast of the Black Sea. He searched for the remains of a civilization to match the account of Odin in Snorri Sturlusson, significantly further north of his original target of Azerbaijan on the Caspian Sea only two years earlier. This project generated harsh criticism and accusations of pseudoscience from historians, archaeologists and linguists in Norway, who accused Heyerdahl of selective use of sources, and a basic lack of scientific methodology in his work.\nHis central claims were based on similarities of names in Norse mythology and geographic names in the Black Sea region, e.g. \"Azov\" and \"\u00c6sir\", Udi and Odin, Tyr and Turkey. Philologists and historians reject these parallels as mere coincidences, and also anachronisms, for instance the city of Azov did not have that name until over 1,000 years after Heyerdahl claims the \u00c6sir dwelt there. The controversy surrounding the Search for Odin project was in many ways typical of the relationship between Heyerdahl and the academic community. His theories rarely won any scientific acceptance, whereas Heyerdahl himself rejected all scientific criticism and concentrated on publishing his theories in popular books aimed at the general public.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], Heyerdahl's Odin hypothesis has yet to be validated by any historian, archaeologist or linguist.\nPyramids of G\u00fc\u00edmar.\nIn 1991 he studied the Pyramids of G\u00fc\u00edmar on Tenerife and declared that they were not random stone heaps but pyramids. Based on the discovery made by the astrophysicists Aparicio, Belmonte and Esteban, from the Instituto de Astrof\u00edsica de Canarias that the \"pyramids\" were astronomically orientated and being convinced that they were of ancient origin, he claimed that the ancient people who built them were most likely sun worshippers. \nHeyerdahl hypothesized that the Canarian pyramids formed a temporal and geographic stopping point on voyages between ancient Egypt and the Maya civilization, initiating a controversy in which historians, esoterics, archaeologists, astronomers, and those with a general interest in history took part.\nBetween 1991 and 1998, archaeological excavations of the site were conducted by archaeologists of the University of La Laguna. Preliminary findings were presented at a colloquium in 1996, providing evidence for the dating of the pyramids. According to the preceding geophysical Georadar-Survey eight locations adjacent to the pyramids, each with an area of 25\u00a0m2, were investigated in layers down to the solid lava-floor. In doing so it was possible to establish three specific sediment layers. Starting from the top these were:\nFurthermore, under the border edge of one of the pyramids, a natural lava cave was discovered. It had been walled up and yielded artefacts from the time of the Guanches. Since the pyramids lie stratigraphically above the cave, the Guanche finds from between 600 and 1000\u00a0AD can only support conclusions on the date of human use of the cave. The above survey indicates that the pyramids themselves cannot be older than the 19th century.\nOther projects.\nHeyerdahl also investigated the mounds found on the Maldive Islands in the Indian Ocean. There, he found sun-orientated foundations and courtyards, as well as statues with elongated earlobes. Heyerdahl believed that these finds fit with his theory of a seafaring civilization which originated in what is now Sri Lanka, colonized the Maldives, and influenced or founded the cultures of ancient South America and Easter Island. His discoveries are detailed in his book \"The Maldive Mystery\".\nHeyerdahl was also an active figure in Green politics. He was the recipient of numerous medals and awards. He also received 11 honorary doctorates from universities in the Americas and Europe.\nIn subsequent years, Heyerdahl was involved with other expeditions and archaeological projects. He remained best known for his boatbuilding, and for his emphasis on cultural diffusionism.\nHeyerdahl and racism.\nHistorian Axel Andersson wrote that \"Unfortunately Heyerdahl was almost never challenged when it came to the racism of his theories, neither at the time of the Kon-Tiki nor, surprisingly, at any time later. ... The racism in the Kon-Tiki theory that was so clearly articulated by Heyerdahl became invisible with a disturbing ease. That it also remained equally uncommented on throughout the second half of the twentieth century shows the stubborn persistency of racial theories. Now the time has come not to dismiss Heyerdahl as a racist but to uncover the sooty kernel at the heart of Heyerdahls fantasy, and our fantasy of Heyerdahl.\nGraham Holton of the Institute of Latin American Studies wrote that \"The core of the Kontiki theory is that a white race came from the Middle East to the Americas and then on to Polynesia to teach the dark-skinned people the arts of civilisation (Heyerdahl 1952). Edward Norbeck attacked the book for Heyerdahl's assumptions, and asserted that it was 'difficult for many persons to avoid reading racism from this work' (quoted in Wauchope 1962, 120). Throughout the text, Heyerdahl uses concepts such as 'racial hygiene', 'racial cleansing', and 'race wars'. Heyerdahl's theory holds that a blond/red-haired, blue-eyed, dynastic 'race' of masons and miners migrated around the world civilising the dark-skinned 'races'\"\nDeath.\nHeyerdahl died on 18 April 2002 aged 87 from a brain tumor in Colla Micheri, Liguria, at his family's retreat. After receiving the diagnosis, he prepared for death, by refusing to eat or take medication.\nThe Norwegian government honored him with a state funeral in the Oslo Cathedral on 26 April 2002. Until 2024, he was buried in the garden of the family home in Colla Micheri. In 2024, his urn was moved to a new grave in the graveyard of Larvik Church, the same church he was baptized in. He was an atheist.\nLegacy.\nAlthough much of his work was not accepted by the scientific community for many years, Heyerdahl nevertheless increased public interest in ancient history and anthropology. He also showed that long-distance ocean voyages were possible with ancient designs. As such, he was a major practitioner of experimental archaeology. The Kon-Tiki Museum on the Bygd\u00f8y peninsula in Oslo, Norway houses vessels and maps from the Kon-Tiki expedition, as well as a library with about 8,000 books.\nThe Thor Heyerdahl Institute was established in 2000. Heyerdahl himself agreed to the founding of the institute and it aims to promote and continue to develop Heyerdahl's ideas and principles. The institute is located in Heyerdahl's birth town of Larvik, Norway. In Larvik, the birthplace of Heyerdahl, the municipality began a project in 2007 to attract more visitors. Since then, they have purchased and renovated Heyerdahl's childhood home, arranged a yearly raft regatta in his honour at the end of summer and begun to develop a Heyerdahl centre.\nHeyerdahl's grandson, Olav Heyerdahl, retraced his grandfather's \"Kon-Tiki\" voyage in 2006 as part of a six-member crew. The voyage, organised by Torgeir Higraff and called the Tangaroa Expedition, was intended as a tribute to Heyerdahl, an effort to better understand navigation via centreboards (\"guara\") as well as a means to monitor the Pacific Ocean's environment.\nA book about the Tangaroa Expedition by Torgeir Higraff was published in 2007. The book has numerous photos from the \"Kon-Tiki\" voyage 60 years earlier and is illustrated with photographs by Tangaroa crew member Anders Berg (Oslo: Bazar Forlag, 2007). \"Tangaroa Expedition\" has also been produced as a documentary DVD in English, Norwegian, Swedish and Spanish.\nDecorations and honorary degrees.\nAsteroid 2473 Heyerdahl is named after him, as are HNoMS \"Thor Heyerdahl\", a Norwegian Nansen class frigate, along with \"MS Thor Heyerdahl\" (now renamed \"MS Vana Tallinn\"), and \"Thor Heyerdahl\", a German three-masted sail training vessel originally owned by a participant of the Tigris expedition. Heyerdahl Vallis, a valley on Pluto, and Thor Heyerdahl Upper Secondary School in Larvik, the town of his birth, are also named after him. Google honoured Heyerdahl on his 100th birthday by making a Google Doodle.\nHeyerdahl's numerous awards and honours include the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37800", "revid": "48970003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37800", "title": "Dendrochronology", "text": "Method of dating based on the analysis of patterns of tree rings\nDendrochronology (or tree-ring dating) is the scientific method of dating tree rings (also called growth rings) to the exact year they were formed in a tree. As well as dating them, this can give data for dendroclimatology, the study of climate and atmospheric conditions during different periods in history from the wood of old trees. Dendrochronology derives from the Ancient Greek (), meaning \"tree\", (), meaning \"time\", and (), \"the study of\".\nDendrochronology is useful for determining the precise age of samples, especially those that are too recent for radiocarbon dating, which always produces a range rather than an exact date. However, for a precise date of the death of the tree a full sample to the edge is needed, which most trimmed timber will not provide. It also gives data on the timing of events and rates of change in the environment (most prominently climate) and also in wood found in archaeology or works of art and architecture, such as old panel paintings. It is also used as a check in radiocarbon dating to calibrate radiocarbon ages.\nNew growth in trees occurs in a layer of cells near the bark. A tree's growth rate changes in a predictable pattern throughout the year in response to seasonal climate changes, resulting in visible growth rings. Each ring marks a complete cycle of seasons, or one year, in the tree's life. As of 2023, securely dated tree-ring data for Germany, Bohemia and Ireland are available going back 13,910 years. A new method is based on measuring variations in oxygen isotopes in each ring, and this 'isotope dendrochronology' can yield results on samples which are not suitable for traditional dendrochronology due to too few or too similar rings. Some regions have \"floating sequences\", with gaps which mean that earlier periods can only be approximately dated. As of 2024, only three areas have continuous sequences going back to prehistoric times, the foothills of the Northern Alps, the southwestern United States and the British Isles. Miyake events, which are major spikes in cosmic rays at known dates, are visible in trees rings and can fix the dating of a floating sequence.\nHistory.\nThe Greek botanist Theophrastus (c. 371 \u2013 c. 287 BC) first mentioned that the wood of trees has rings. In his 1651 \"Trattato della Pittura\" (Treatise on Painting), Leonardo da Vinci (1452\u20131519) was the first person to mention that trees form rings annually and that their thickness is determined by the conditions under which they grew. In 1737, French investigators Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau and Georges-Louis Leclerc de Buffon examined the effect of growing conditions on the shape of tree rings. They found that in 1709, a severe winter produced a distinctly dark tree ring, which served as a reference for subsequent European naturalists. In the U.S., Alexander Catlin Twining (1801\u20131884) suggested in 1833 that patterns among tree rings could be used to synchronize the dendrochronology of various trees and thereby to reconstruct past climates across entire regions. The English polymath Charles Babbage proposed using dendrochronology to date the remains of trees in peat bogs or even in geological strata (1835, 1838).\nDuring the later half of the nineteenth century, the scientific study of tree rings and the application of dendrochronology began. In 1859, the German-American Jacob Kuechler (1823\u20131893) used crossdating to examine oaks (\"Quercus stellata\") in order to study the record of climate in western Texas. In 1866, the German botanist, entomologist, and forester Julius Theodor Christian Ratzeburg (1801\u20131871) observed the effects on tree rings of defoliation caused by insect infestations. By 1882, this observation was already appearing in forestry textbooks. In the 1870s, the Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn (1851\u20131922) was using crossdating to reconstruct the climates of the Netherlands and Germany. In 1881, the Swiss-Austrian forester Arthur von Seckendorff-Gudent (1845\u20131886) was using crossdating. From 1869 to 1901, Robert Hartig (1839\u20131901), a German professor of forest pathology, wrote a series of papers on the anatomy and ecology of tree rings. In 1892, the Russian physicist Fedor Nikiforovich Shvedov (1841\u20131905) wrote that he had used patterns found in tree rings to predict droughts in 1882 and 1891.\nDuring the first half of the twentieth century, the astronomer A. E. Douglass founded the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research at the University of Arizona. Douglass sought to better understand cycles of sunspot activity and reasoned that changes in solar activity would affect climate patterns on earth, which would subsequently be recorded by tree-ring growth patterns (\"i.e.\", sunspots \u2192 climate \u2192 tree rings).\nMethods.\nGrowth rings.\nHorizontal cross sections cut through the trunk of a tree can reveal growth rings, also referred to as tree rings or annual rings. Growth rings result from new growth in the vascular cambium, a layer of cells near the bark that botanists classify as a lateral meristem; this growth in diameter is known as secondary growth. Visible rings result from the change in growth speed through the seasons of the year; thus, critical for the title method, one ring generally marks the passage of one year in the life of the tree. Removal of the bark of the tree in a particular area may cause deformation of the rings as the plant overgrows the scar.\nThe rings are more visible in trees which have grown in temperate zones, where the seasons differ more markedly. The inner portion of a growth ring forms early in the growing season, when growth is comparatively rapid (hence the wood is less dense) and is known as \"early wood\" (or \"spring wood\", or \"late-spring wood\"); the outer portion is the \"late wood\" (sometimes termed \"summer wood\", often being produced in the summer, though sometimes in the autumn) and is denser.\nMany trees in temperate zones produce one growth-ring each year, with the newest adjacent to the bark. Hence, for the entire period of a tree's life, a year-by-year record or ring pattern builds up that reflects the age of the tree and the climatic conditions in which the tree grew. Adequate moisture and a long growing season result in a wide ring, while a drought year may result in a very narrow one.\nDirect reading of tree ring chronologies is a complex science, for several reasons. First, contrary to the single-ring-per-year paradigm, alternating poor and favorable conditions, such as mid-summer droughts, can result in several rings forming in a given year. In addition, particular tree species may present \"missing rings\", and this influences the selection of trees for study of long time-spans. For instance, missing rings are rare in oak and elm trees.\nCritical to the science, trees from the same region tend to develop the same patterns of ring widths for a given period of chronological study. Researchers can compare and match these patterns ring-for-ring with patterns from trees which have grown at the same time in the same geographical zone (and therefore under similar climatic conditions). When one can match these tree-ring patterns across successive trees in the same locale, in overlapping fashion, chronologies can be built up\u2014both for entire geographical regions and for sub-regions. Moreover, wood from ancient structures with known chronologies can be matched to the tree-ring data (a technique called 'cross-dating'), and the age of the wood can thereby be determined precisely. Dendrochronologists originally carried out cross-dating by visual inspection; more recently, they have harnessed computers to do the task, applying statistical techniques to assess the matching. To eliminate individual variations in tree-ring growth, dendrochronologists take the smoothed average of the tree-ring widths of multiple tree-samples to build up a 'ring history', a process termed replication. A tree-ring history whose beginning- and end-dates are not known is called a 'floating chronology'. It can be anchored by cross-matching a section against another chronology (tree-ring history) whose dates are known.\nA fully anchored and cross-matched chronology for oak and pine in central Europe extends back 12,460 years, and an oak chronology goes back 7,506 years in Bohemia, 7,429 years in Ireland and 6,939 years in England. Comparison of radiocarbon and dendrochronological ages supports the consistency of these two independent dendrochronological sequences. Another fully anchored chronology that extends back 8,500 years exists for the bristlecone pine in the Southwest US (White Mountains of California).\nDendrochronological equation.\nThe dendrochronological equation defines the law of growth of tree rings. The equation was proposed by Russian biophysicist Alexandr N. Tetearing in his work \"Theory of populations\" in the form:\nformula_1\nwhere \u0394\"L\" is width of annual ring, \"t\" is time (in years), \"\u03c1\" is density of wood, \"kv\" is some coefficient, \"M\"(\"t\") is function of mass growth of the tree.\nIgnoring the natural sinusoidal oscillations in tree mass, the formula for the changes in the annual ring width is:\nformula_2\nwhere \"c\"1, \"c\"2, and \"c\"4 are some coefficients, \"a\"1 and \"a\"2 are positive constants.\nThe formula is useful for correct approximation of samples data before data normalization procedure. The typical forms of the function \u0394\"L\"(\"t\") of annual growth of wood ring are shown in the figures.\nSampling and dating.\nDendrochronology allows specimens of once-living material to be accurately dated to a specific year. Dates are often represented as estimated calendar years B.P., for before present, where \"present\" refers to 1 January 1950.\nTimber core samples are sampled (often using an increment borer) and used to measure the width of annual growth rings; by taking samples from different sites within a particular region, researchers can build a comprehensive historical sequence. The techniques of dendrochronology are more consistent in areas where trees grew in marginal conditions such as aridity or semi-aridity where the ring growth is more sensitive to the environment, rather than in humid areas where tree-ring growth is more uniform (complacent). In addition, some genera of trees are more suitable than others for this type of analysis. For instance, the bristlecone pine is exceptionally long-lived and slow growing, and has been used extensively for chronologies; still-living and dead specimens of this species provide tree-ring patterns going back thousands of years, in some regions more than 10,000 years. Currently, the maximum span for fully anchored chronology is a little over 11,000 years B.P.\nIntCal20 is the 2020 \"Radiocarbon Age Calibration Curve\", which provides a calibrated carbon 14 dated sequence going back 55,000 years. The most recent part, going back 13,900 years, is based on tree rings.\nReference sequences.\nEuropean chronologies derived from wooden structures initially found it difficult to bridge the gap in the fourteenth century when there was a building hiatus, which coincided with the Black Death. However, there do exist unbroken chronologies dating back to prehistoric times, for example the Danish chronology dating back to 352 BC.\nGiven a sample of wood, the variation of the tree-ring growths not only provides a match by year, but can also match location because climate varies from place to place. This makes it possible to determine the source of ships as well as smaller artifacts made from wood, but which were transported long distances, such as panels for paintings and ship timbers.\nMiyake events.\nMiyake events, such as the ones in 774\u2013775 and 993\u2013994, can provide fixed reference points in an unknown time sequence as they are due to cosmic radiation. As they appear as spikes in carbon 14 in tree rings for that year all round the world, they can be used to date historical events to the year. For example, wooden houses in the Viking site at L'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland were dated by finding the layer with the 993 spike, which showed that the wood is from a tree felled in 1021. Researchers at the University of Bern have provided exact dating of a floating sequence in a Neolithic settlement in northern Greece by tying it to a spike in cosmogenic radiocarbon in 5259 BC.\nFrost rings.\nFrost ring is a term used to designate a layer of deformed, collapsed tracheids and traumatic parenchyma cells in tree ring analysis. They are formed when air temperature falls below freezing during a period of cambial activity. They can be used in dendrochronology to indicate years that are colder than usual.\nApplications.\nRadiocarbon dating calibration.\nDates from dendrochronology can be used as a calibration and check of radiocarbon dating. This can be done by checking radiocarbon dates against long master sequences, with Californian bristle-cone pines in Arizona being used to develop this method of calibration as the longevity of the trees (up to c.4900 years) in addition to the use of dead samples meant a long, unbroken tree ring sequence could be developed (dating back to c.\u20096700 BC). Additional studies of European oak trees, such as the master sequence in Germany that dates back to c.\u20098500 BC, can also be used to back up and further calibrate radiocarbon dates.\nClimatology.\nDendroclimatology is the science of determining past climates from trees primarily from the properties of the annual tree rings. Other properties of the annual rings, such as maximum latewood density (MXD) have been shown to be better proxies than simple ring width. Using tree rings, scientists have estimated many local climates for hundreds to thousands of years previous.\nArt history.\nDendrochronology has become important to art historians in the dating of panel paintings. However, unlike analysis of samples from buildings, which are typically sent to a laboratory, wooden supports for paintings usually have to be measured in a museum conservation department, which places limitations on the techniques that can be used.\nIn addition to dating, dendrochronology can also provide information as to the source of the panel. Many Early Netherlandish paintings have turned out to be painted on panels of \"Baltic oak\" shipped from the Vistula region via ports of the Hanseatic League. Oak panels were used in a number of northern countries such as England, France and Germany. Wooden supports other than oak were rarely used by Netherlandish painters.\nSince panels of seasoned wood were used, an uncertain number of years has to be allowed for seasoning when estimating dates. Panels were trimmed of the outer rings, and often each panel only uses a small part of the radius of the trunk. Consequently, dating studies usually result in a \"terminus post quem\" (earliest possible) date, and a tentative date for the arrival of a seasoned raw panel using assumptions as to these factors. As a result of establishing numerous sequences, it was possible to date 85\u201390% of the 250 paintings from the fourteenth to seventeenth century analysed between 1971 and 1982; by now a much greater number have been analysed.\nA portrait of Mary, Queen of Scots in the National Portrait Gallery, London was believed to be an eighteenth-century copy. However, dendrochronology revealed that the wood dated from the second half of the sixteenth century. It is now regarded as an original sixteenth-century painting by an unknown artist.\nOn the other hand, dendrochronology was applied to four paintings depicting the same subject, that of Christ expelling the money-lenders from the Temple. The results showed that the age of the wood was too late for any of them to have been painted by Hieronymus Bosch.\nWhile dendrochronology has become an important tool for dating oak panels, it is not effective in dating the poplar panels often used by Italian painters because of the erratic growth rings in poplar.\nThe sixteenth century saw a gradual replacement of wooden panels by canvas as the support for paintings, which means the technique is less often applicable to later paintings. In addition, many panel paintings were transferred onto canvas or other supports during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.\nArchaeology.\nThe dating of buildings with wooden structures and components is also done by dendrochronology; dendroarchaeology is the term for the application of dendrochronology in archaeology. While archaeologists can date wood and when it was felled, it may be difficult to definitively determine the age of a building or structure in which the wood was used; the wood could have been reused from an older structure, may have been felled and left for many years before use, or could have been used to replace a damaged piece of wood. The dating of building via dendrochronology thus requires knowledge of the history of building technology. Many prehistoric forms of buildings used \"posts\" that were whole young tree trunks; where the bottom of the post has survived in the ground these can be especially useful for dating.\nExamples:\nMeasurement platforms, software, and data formats.\nThere are many different file formats used to store tree ring width data. Effort for standardisation was made with the development of TRiDaS. Further development led to the database software Tellervo, which is based on the new standard format whilst being able to import lots of different data formats. The desktop application can be attached to measurement devices and works with the database server that is installed separately.\nContinuous sequence.\nBard et al write in 2023: \"The oldest tree-ring series are known as floating since, while their constituent rings can be counted to create a relative internal chronology, they cannot be dendro-matched with the main Holocene absolute chronology. However, 14C analyses performed at high resolution on overlapped absolute and floating tree-rings series enable one to link them almost absolutely and hence to extend the calibration on annual tree rings until \u224813\u2009900\u2009cal\u2009yr\u2009BP.\"\nSome of the longest tree-ring timelines, especially those extending earlier than about 4000 BC, are joined by comparing how similar the ring patterns look instead of by directly overlapping pieces of wood from different trees. In those sections only a few samples match, so the connection is less certain.\nRelated chronologies.\nHerbchronology is the analysis of annual growth rings (or simply annual rings) in the secondary root xylem of perennial herbaceous plants. Similar seasonal patterns also occur in ice cores and in varves (layers of sediment deposition in a lake, river, or sea bed). The deposition pattern in the core will vary for a frozen-over lake versus an ice-free lake, and with the fineness of the sediment. Sclerochronology is the study of algae deposits.\nSome columnar cacti also exhibit similar seasonal patterns in the isotopes of carbon and oxygen in their spines (acanthochronology). These are used for dating in a manner similar to dendrochronology, and such techniques are used in combination with dendrochronology, to plug gaps and to extend the range of the seasonal data available to archaeologists and paleoclimatologists.\nA similar technique is used to estimate the age of fish stocks through the analysis of growth rings in the otolith bones.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37802", "revid": "45203574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37802", "title": "Ovid", "text": "Roman poet (43 BC \u2013 AD 17/18)\nPublius Ovidius Naso (; 20 March 43 BC \u2013 AD 17/18), known in English as Ovid ( ), was a Roman poet who lived during the reign of Augustus. He was a younger contemporary of Virgil and Horace, with whom he is often ranked as one of the three canonical poets of Latin literature. The Imperial scholar Quintilian considered him the last of the Latin love elegists. Although Ovid enjoyed enormous popularity during his lifetime, the emperor Augustus exiled him to Tomis, the capital of the newly organised province of Moesia, on the Black Sea, where he remained for the last nine or ten years of his life. Ovid himself attributed his banishment to a \"carmen et error\" (\"poem and a mistake\"), but his reluctance to disclose specifics has resulted in much speculation among scholars.\nOvid is most famous for the \"Metamorphoses\", a continuous mythological narrative in fifteen books written in dactylic hexameters. He is also known for works in elegiac couplets such as (\"The Art of Love\") and \"Fasti\". His poetry was much imitated during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages, and greatly influenced Western art and literature. The \"Metamorphoses\" remains one of the most important sources of classical mythology today.\nLife.\nOvid wrote more about his own life than most other Roman poets. Information about his biography is drawn primarily from his poetry, especially \"Tristia\" 4.10, which gives a lengthy autobiographical account of his life. Other sources include Seneca the Elder and Quintilian.\nBirth, early life, and marriage.\nOvid was born in the Paelignian town of Sulmo (modern-day Sulmona, in the province of L'Aquila, Abruzzo), in an Apennine valley east of Rome, to an important equestrian family, the \"gens Ovidia\", on 20 March 43 BC \u2013 a significant year in Roman politics. Along with his brother, who excelled at oratory, Ovid was educated in rhetoric in Rome under the teachers Arellius Fuscus and Porcius Latro.\nHis father wanted him to study rhetoric so that he might practice law. According to Seneca the Elder, Ovid tended to the emotional, not the argumentative pole of rhetoric. Following the death of his brother at 20 years of age, Ovid renounced law and travelled to Athens, Asia Minor, and Sicily. He held minor public posts, as one of the \"tresviri capitales\", as a member of the Centumviral court and as one of the \"decemviri litibus iudicandis\", but resigned to pursue poetry probably around 29\u201325 BC, a decision of which his father apparently disapproved.\nOvid's first recitation has been dated to around 25 BC, when he was eighteen. He was part of the circle centered on the esteemed patron Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus, and likewise seems to have been a friend of poets in the circle of Maecenas. In \"Tristia\" 4.10.41\u201354, Ovid mentions friendships with Macer, Propertius, Ponticus and Bassus, and claims to have heard Horace recite. He only barely met Virgil and Tibullus, a fellow member of Messalla's circle, whose elegies he admired greatly.\nHe married three times and had divorced twice by the time he was thirty. He had one daughter and grandchildren through her. His last wife was connected in some way to the influential \"gens Fabia\" and helped him during his exile in Tomis (now Constan\u021ba in Romania).\nLiterary success.\nOvid spent the first 25 years of his literary career primarily writing poetry in elegiac meter with erotic themes. The chronology of these early works is not secure, but scholars have established tentative dates. His earliest extant work is thought to be the \"Heroides\", letters of mythological heroines to their absent lovers, which may have been published in 19 BC, although the date is uncertain as it depends on a notice in \"Am.\" 2.18.19\u201326 that seems to describe the collection as an early published work.\nThe authenticity of some of these poems has been challenged, but this first edition probably contained the first 14 poems of the collection. The first five-book collection of the \"Amores\", a series of erotic poems addressed to a lover, Corinna, is thought to have been published in 16\u201315 BC; the surviving version, redacted to three books according to an epigram prefixed to the first book, is thought to have been published c.\u20098\u20133 BC. Between the publications of the two editions of the \"Amores\" can be dated the premiere of his tragedy \"Medea\", which was admired in antiquity but is no longer extant.\nOvid's next poem, the \"Medicamina Faciei\" (a fragmentary work on women's beauty treatments), preceded the (the \"Art of Love\"), a parody of didactic poetry and a three-book manual about seduction and intrigue, which has been dated to AD 2 (Books 1\u20132 would go back to 1 BC). Ovid may identify this work in his exile poetry as the \"carmen\", or song, which was one cause of his banishment. The was followed by the \"Remedia Amoris\" in the same year. This corpus of elegiac, erotic poetry earned Ovid a place among the chief Roman elegists Gallus, Tibullus, and Propertius, of whom he saw himself as the fourth member.\nBy AD 8, Ovid had completed \"Metamorphoses\", a hexameter epic poem in 15 books, which comprehensively catalogs the metamorphoses in Greek and Roman mythology, from the emergence of the cosmos to the apotheosis of Julius Caesar. The stories follow each other in the telling of human beings transformed to new bodies: trees, rocks, animals, flowers, constellations, etc. Simultaneously, he worked on the \"Fasti\", a six-book poem in elegiac couplets on the theme of the calendar of Roman festivals and astronomy. The composition of this poem was interrupted by Ovid's exile, and it is thought that Ovid abandoned work on the piece in Tomis. It is probably in this period that the double letters (16\u201321) in the \"Heroides\" were composed, although there is some contention over their authorship.\nExile to Tomis.\nIn AD 8, Ovid was banished to Tomis, on the Black Sea, by the exclusive intervention of the Emperor Augustus without any participation of the Senate or of any Roman judge. This event shaped all his following poetry. Ovid wrote that the reason for his exile was \"carmen et error\" \u2013 \"a poem and a mistake\", claiming that his crime was worse than murder, more harmful than poetry.\nThe Emperor's grandchildren, Julia the Younger and Agrippa Postumus (the latter adopted by him), were also banished around the same time. Julia's husband, Lucius Aemilius Paullus, was put to death for a conspiracy against Augustus, a conspiracy of which Ovid potentially knew.\nThe Julian marriage laws of 18 BC, which promoted monogamous marriage to increase the population's birth rate, were fresh in the Roman mind. Ovid's writing in the concerned the serious crime of adultery. He may have been banished for these works, which appeared subversive to the emperor's moral legislation. However, in view of the long time that elapsed between the publication of this work (1 BC) and the exile (AD 8), some authors suggest that Augustus used the poem as a mere justification for something more personal.\nIn exile, Ovid wrote two poetry collections, \"Tristia\" and \"Epistulae ex Ponto\", which illustrated his sadness and desolation. Being far from Rome, he had no access to libraries, and thus might have been forced to abandon his \"Fasti\", a poem about the Roman calendar, of which only the first six books exist \u2013 January through June. He learned Sarmatian and Getic.\nThe five books of the elegiac \"Tristia\", a series of poems expressing the poet's despair in exile and advocating his return to Rome, are dated to AD 9\u201312. The \"Ibis\", an elegiac curse poem attacking an unnamed adversary, may also be dated to this period. The \"Epistulae ex Ponto\", a series of letters to friends in Rome asking them to effect his return, are thought to be his last compositions, with the first three books published in AD 13 and the fourth book between AD 14 and 16. The exile poetry is particularly emotive and personal. In the \"Epistulae\" he claims friendship with the natives of Tomis (in the \"Tristia\" they are frightening barbarians) and to have written a poem in their language (\"Ex Ponto\", 4.13.19\u201320).\nYet he pined for Rome \u2013 and for his third wife, addressing many poems to her. Some are also to the Emperor Augustus, yet others are to himself, to friends in Rome, and sometimes to the poems themselves, expressing loneliness and hope of recall from banishment or exile.\nThe obscure causes of Ovid's exile have given rise to much speculation by scholars. The medieval texts that mention the exile offer no credible explanations: their statements seem incorrect interpretations drawn from the works of Ovid. Ovid himself wrote many references to his offense, giving obscure or contradictory clues.\nIn 1923, scholar J. J. Hartman proposed a theory that is little considered among scholars of Latin civilization today: that Ovid was never exiled from Rome and that all of his exile works are the result of his fertile imagination. This theory was supported and rejected in the 1930s, especially by Dutch authors.\nIn 1985, a research paper by Fitton Brown advanced new arguments in support of Hartman's theory. Brown's article was followed by a series of supports and refutations in the short space of five years. Among the supporting reasons Brown presents are: Ovid's exile is only mentioned by his own work, except in \"dubious\" passages by Pliny the Elder and Statius, but no other author until the 4th century; that the author of \"Heroides\" was able to separate the poetic \"I\" of his own and real life; and that information on the geography of Tomis was already known by Virgil, by Herodotus and by Ovid himself in his \"Metamorphoses\".\nMost scholars, however, oppose these hypotheses. One of the main arguments of these scholars is that Ovid would not let his \"Fasti\" remain unfinished, mainly because this poem meant his consecration as an imperial poet.\nDeath.\nOvid died at Tomis in AD 17 or 18. It is thought that the \"Fasti\", which he spent time revising, were published posthumously.\nWorks.\n\"Heroides\" (\"The Heroines\").\nThe \"Heroides\" (\"Heroines\") or \"Epistulae Heroidum\" are a collection of twenty-one poems in elegiac couplets. The \"Heroides\" take the form of letters addressed by famous mythological characters to their partners expressing their emotions at being separated from them, pleas for their return, and allusions to their future actions within their own mythology. The authenticity of the collection, partially or as a whole, has been questioned, although most scholars would consider the letters mentioned specifically in Ovid's description of the work at \"Am.\" 2.18.19\u201326 as safe from objection. The collection comprises a new type of generic composition without parallel in earlier literature.\nThe first fourteen letters are thought to comprise the first published collection and are written by the heroines Penelope, Phyllis, Briseis, Phaedra, Oenone, Hypsipyle, Dido, Hermione, Deianeira, Ariadne, Canace, Medea, Laodamia, and Hypermnestra to their absent male lovers. Letter 15, from the historical Sappho to Phaon, seems spurious (although referred to in \"Am.\" 2.18) because of its length, its lack of integration in the mythological theme, and its absence from Medieval manuscripts. The final letters (16\u201321) are paired compositions comprising a letter to a lover and a reply. Paris and Helen, Hero and Leander, and Acontius and Cydippe are the addressees of the paired letters. These are considered a later addition to the corpus because they are never mentioned by Ovid and may or may not be spurious.\nThe \"Heroides\" markedly reveal the influence of rhetorical declamation and may derive from Ovid's interest in rhetorical \"suasoriae\", persuasive speeches, and \"ethopoeia\", the practice of speaking in another character. They also play with generic conventions; most of the letters seem to refer to works in which these characters were significant, such as the \"Aeneid\" in the case of Dido and Catullus 64 for Ariadne, and transfer characters from the genres of epic and tragedy to the elegiac genre of the \"Heroides\". The letters have been admired for their deep psychological portrayals of mythical characters, their rhetoric, and their unique attitude to the classical tradition of mythology. They also contribute significantly to conversations on how gender and identity were constructed in Augustan Rome.\nA popular quote from the Heroides anticipates Machiavelli's \"the end justifies the means\". Ovid had written \"Exitus acta probat\" \u2013 the result justifies the means.\n\"Amores\" (\"The Loves\").\nThe \"Amores\" is a collection in three books of love poetry in elegiac meter, following the conventions of the elegiac genre developed by Tibullus and Propertius. Elegy originates with Propertius and Tibullus, but Ovid is an innovator in the genre. Ovid changes the leader of his elegies from the poet, to Amor (Love or Cupid). This switch in focus from the triumphs of the poet, to the triumphs of love over people is the first of its kind for this genre of poetry. This Ovidian innovation can be summarized as the use of love as a metaphor for poetry. The books describe the many aspects of love and focus on the poet's relationship with a mistress called Corinna. Within the various poems, several describe events in the relationship, thus presenting the reader with some vignettes and a loose narrative.\nBook 1 contains 15 poems. The first tells of Ovid's intention to write epic poetry, which is thwarted when Cupid steals a metrical foot from him, changing his work into love elegy.\nPoem 4 is didactic and describes principles that Ovid would develop in the . The fifth poem, describing a noon tryst, introduces Corinna by name. Poems 8 and 9 deal with Corinna selling her love for gifts, while 11 and 12 describe the poet's failed attempt to arrange a meeting. Poem 14 discusses Corinna's disastrous experiment in dyeing her hair and 15 stresses the immortality of Ovid and love poets.\nThe second book has 19 pieces; the opening poem tells of Ovid's abandonment of a Gigantomachy in favor of elegy. Poems 2 and 3 are entreaties to a guardian to let the poet see Corinna, poem 6 is a lament for Corinna's dead parrot; poems 7 and 8 deal with Ovid's affair with Corinna's servant and her discovery of it, and 11 and 12 try to prevent Corinna from going on vacation. Poem 13 is a prayer to Isis for Corinna's illness, 14 a poem against abortion, and 19 a warning to unwary husbands.\nBook 3 has 15 poems. The opening piece depicts personified Tragedy and Elegy fighting over Ovid. Poem 2 describes a visit to the races, 3 and 8 focus on Corinna's interest in other men, 10 is a complaint to Ceres because of her festival that requires abstinence, 13 is a poem on a festival of Juno, and 9 a lament for Tibullus. In poem 11 Ovid decides not to love Corinna any longer and regrets the poems he has written about her. The final poem is Ovid's farewell to the erotic muse. Critics have seen the poems as highly self-conscious and extremely playful specimens of the elegiac genre.\n\"Medicamina Faciei Femineae\" (\"Women's Facial Cosmetics\").\nAbout a hundred elegiac lines survive from this poem on beauty treatments for women's faces, which seems to parody serious didactic poetry. The poem says that women should concern themselves first with manners and then prescribes several compounds for facial treatments before breaking off. The style is not unlike the shorter Hellenistic didactic works of Nicander and Aratus.\n\"Ars Amatoria\" (\"The Art of Love\").\n&lt;poem&gt;\n Si quis in hoc artem populo non novit amandi,\n hoc legat et lecto carmine doctus amet.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe \"Ars Amatoria\" is a didactic elegiac poem in three books that sets out to teach the arts of seduction and love. The first book addresses men and teaches them how to seduce women, the second, also to men, teaches how to keep a lover. The third addresses women and teaches seduction techniques. The first book opens with an invocation to Venus, in which Ovid establishes himself as a \"praeceptor amoris\" (1.17)\u00a0\u2013 a teacher of love. Ovid describes the places one can go to find a lover, like the theater, a triumph, which he thoroughly describes, or arena\u00a0\u2013 and ways to get the girl to take notice, including seducing her covertly at a banquet. Choosing the right time is significant, as is getting into her associates' confidence.\nOvid emphasizes care of the body for the lover. Mythological digressions include a piece on the rape of the Sabine women, Pasipha\u00eb, and Ariadne. Book 2 invokes Apollo and begins with a telling of the story of Icarus. Ovid advises men to avoid giving too many gifts, keep up their appearance, hide affairs, compliment their lovers, and ingratiate themselves with slaves to stay on their lover's good side. The care of Venus for procreation is described as is Apollo's aid in keeping a lover; Ovid then digresses on the story of Vulcan's trap for Venus and Mars. The book ends with Ovid asking his \"students\" to spread his fame. Book 3 opens with a vindication of women's abilities and Ovid's resolution to arm women against his teaching in the first two books. Ovid gives women detailed instructions on appearance telling them to avoid too many adornments. He advises women to read elegiac poetry, learn to play games, sleep with people of different ages, flirt, and dissemble. Throughout the book, Ovid playfully interjects, criticizing himself for undoing all his didactic work to men and mythologically digresses on the story of Procris and Cephalus. The book ends with his wish that women will follow his advice and spread his fame saying \"Naso magister erat\", \"Ovid was our teacher\". (Ovid was known as \"Naso\" to his contemporaries.)\n\"Remedia Amoris\" (\"The Cure for Love\").\nThis elegiac poem proposes a cure for the love Ovid teaches in the \"Ars Amatoria\", and is primarily addressed to men. The poem criticizes suicide as a means for escaping love and, invoking Apollo, goes on to tell lovers not to procrastinate and be lazy in dealing with love. Lovers are taught to avoid their partners, not perform magic, see their lover unprepared, take other lovers, and never be jealous. Old letters should be burned and the lover's family avoided. The poem throughout presents Ovid as a doctor and utilizes medical imagery. Some have interpreted this poem as the close of Ovid's didactic cycle of love poetry and the end of his erotic elegiac project.\n\"Metamorphoses\" (\"Transformations\").\nThe \"Metamorphoses\", Ovid's most ambitious and well-known work, consists of a 15-book catalogue written in dactylic hexameter about transformations in Greek and Roman mythology set within a loose mytho-historical framework. The word \"metamorphoses\" is of Greek origin and means \"transformations\". Appropriately, the characters in this work undergo many different transformations. Within an extent of nearly 12,000 verses, almost 250 different myths are mentioned. Each myth is set outdoors where the mortals are often vulnerable to external influences. The poem stands in the tradition of mythological and etiological catalogue poetry such as Hesiod's \"Catalogue of Women\", Callimachus' \"Aetia\", Nicander's \"Heteroeumena\", and Parthenius' \"Metamorphoses\".\nThe first book describes the formation of the world, the ages of man, the flood, the story of Daphne's near rape by Apollo and Io's by Jupiter. The second book opens with Phaethon and continues describing the love of Jupiter with Callisto and Europa. The third book focuses on the mythology of Thebes with the stories of Cadmus, Actaeon, and Pentheus. The fourth book focuses on three pairs of lovers: Pyramus and Thisbe, Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, and Perseus and Andromeda. The fifth book focuses on the song of the Muses, which describes the rape of Proserpina. The sixth book is a collection of stories about the rivalry between gods and mortals, beginning with Arachne and ending with Philomela. The seventh book focuses on Medea, as well as Cephalus and Procris. The eighth book focuses on Daedalus' flight, the Calydonian boar hunt, and the contrast between pious Baucis and Philemon and the wicked Erysichthon. The ninth book focuses on Heracles and the incestuous Byblis. The tenth book focuses on stories of doomed love, such as Orpheus, who sings about Hyacinthus, as well as Pygmalion, Myrrha, and Adonis. The eleventh book compares the marriage of Peleus and Thetis with the love of Ceyx and Alcyone. The twelfth book moves from myth to history describing the exploits of Achilles, the battle of the centaurs, and Iphigeneia. The thirteenth book discusses the contest over Achilles' arms, and Polyphemus. The fourteenth moves to Italy, describing the journey of Aeneas, Pomona and Vertumnus, and Romulus and Hersilia. The final book opens with a philosophical lecture by Pythagoras and the deification of Caesar. The end of the poem praises Augustus and expresses Ovid's belief that his poem has earned him immortality.\nIn analyzing the \"Metamorphoses\", scholars have focused on Ovid's organization of his vast body of material. The ways that stories are linked by geography, themes, or contrasts creates interesting effects and constantly forces the reader to evaluate the connections. Ovid also varies his tone and material from different literary genres; G. B. Conte has called the poem \"a sort of gallery of these various literary genres\". In this spirit, Ovid engages creatively with his predecessors, alluding to the full spectrum of classical poetry. Ovid's use of Alexandrian epic, or elegiac couplets, shows his fusion of erotic and psychological style with traditional forms of epic.\nA concept drawn from the Metamorphoses is the idea of the white lie or pious fraud: \"pia mendacia fraude\".\n\"Fasti\" (\"The Festivals\").\nSix books in elegiacs survive of this second ambitious poem that Ovid was working on when he was exiled. The six books cover the first semester of the year, with each book dedicated to a different month of the Roman calendar (January to June). The project seems unprecedented in Roman literature. It seems that Ovid planned to cover the whole year, but was unable to finish because of his exile, although he did revise sections of the work at Tomis, and he claims at \"Trist.\" 2.549\u201352 that his work was interrupted after six books. Like the \"Metamorphoses\", the \"Fasti\" was to be a long poem and emulated etiological poetry by writers like Callimachus and, more recently, Propertius and his fourth book. The poem goes through the Roman calendar, explaining the origins and customs of important Roman festivals, digressing on mythical stories, and giving astronomical and agricultural information appropriate to the season. The poem was probably dedicated to Augustus initially, but perhaps the death of the emperor prompted Ovid to change the dedication to honor Germanicus. Ovid uses direct inquiry of gods and scholarly research to talk about the calendar and regularly calls himself a \"vates\", a seer. He also seems to emphasize unsavory, popular traditions of the festivals, imbuing the poem with a popular, plebeian flavor, which some have interpreted as subversive to the Augustan moral legislation. While this poem has always been invaluable to students of Roman religion and culture for the wealth of antiquarian material it preserves, it recently has been seen as one of Ovid's finest literary works and a unique contribution to Roman elegiac poetry.\n\"Ibis\" (\"The Ibis\").\nThe \"Ibis\" is an elegiac poem in 644 lines, in which Ovid uses a dazzling array of mythic stories to curse and attack an enemy who is harming him in exile. At the beginning of the poem, Ovid claims that his poetry up to that point had been harmless, but now he is going to use his abilities to hurt his enemy. He cites Callimachus' \"Ibis\" as his inspiration and calls all the gods to make his curse effective. Ovid uses mythical exempla to condemn his enemy in the afterlife, cites evil prodigies that attended his birth, and then in the next 300 lines wishes that the torments of mythological characters befall his enemy. The poem ends with a prayer that the gods make his curse effective.\n\"Tristia\" (\"Sorrows\").\nThe \"Tristia\" consist of five books of elegiac poetry composed by Ovid in exile in Tomis.\nBook 1 contains 11 poems; the first piece is an address by Ovid to his book about how it should act when it arrives in Rome. Poem 3 describes his final night in Rome, poems 2 and 10 Ovid's voyage to Tomis, 8 the betrayal of a friend, and 5 and 6 the loyalty of his friends and wife. In the final poem Ovid apologizes for the quality and tone of his book, a sentiment echoed throughout the collection.\nBook 2 consists of one long poem in which Ovid defends himself and his poetry, uses precedents to justify his work, and begs the emperor for forgiveness.\nBook 3 has 14 poems focusing on Ovid's life in Tomis. The opening poem describes his book's arrival in Rome to find Ovid's works banned. Poems 10, 12, and 13 focus on the seasons spent in Tomis, 9 on the origins of the place, and 2, 3, and 11 his emotional distress and longing for home. The final poem is again an apology for his work.\nThe fourth book has ten poems addressed mostly to friends. Poem 1 expresses his love of poetry and the solace it brings; while 2 describes a triumph of Tiberius. Poems 3\u20135 are to friends, 7 a request for correspondence, and 10 an autobiography.\nThe final book of the \"Tristia\" with 14 poems focuses on his wife and friends. Poems 4, 5, 11, and 14 are addressed to his wife, 2 and 3 are prayers to Augustus and Bacchus, 4 and 6 are to friends, 8 to an enemy. Poem 13 asks for letters, while 1 and 12 are apologies to his readers for the quality of his poetry.\n\"Epistulae ex Ponto\" (\"Letters from the Black Sea\").\nThe \"Epistulae ex Ponto\" is a collection in four books of further poetry from exile. The \"Epistulae\" are each addressed to a different friend and focus more desperately than the \"Tristia\" on securing his recall from exile. The poems mainly deal with requests for friends to speak on his behalf to members of the imperial family, discussions of writing with friends, and descriptions of life in exile. The first book has ten pieces in which Ovid describes the state of his health (10), his hopes, memories, and yearning for Rome (3, 6, 8), and his needs in exile (3). Book 2 contains impassioned requests to Germanicus (1 and 5) and various friends to speak on his behalf at Rome while he describes his despair and life in exile. Book 3 has nine poems in which Ovid addresses his wife (1) and various friends. It includes a telling of the story of Iphigenia in Tauris (2), a poem against criticism (9), and a dream of Cupid (3). Book 4, the final work of Ovid, in 16 poems talks to friends and describes his life as an exile further. Poems 10 and 13 describe Winter and Spring at Tomis, poem 14 is halfhearted praise for Tomis, 7 describes its geography and climate, and 4 and 9 are congratulations on friends for their consulships and requests for help. Poem 12 is addressed to a Tuticanus, whose name, Ovid complains, does not fit into meter. The final poem is addressed to an enemy whom Ovid implores to leave him alone. The last elegiac couplet is translated: \"Where's the joy in stabbing your steel into my dead flesh?/ There's no place left where I can be dealt fresh wounds.\"\nLost works.\nOne loss, which Ovid himself described, is the first five-book edition of the \"Amores\", from which nothing has come down to us. The greatest loss is Ovid's only tragedy, \"Medea\", from which only a few lines are preserved. Quintilian admired the work a great deal and considered it a prime example of Ovid's poetic talent. Lactantius quotes from a lost translation by Ovid of Aratus' \"Phaenomena\", although the poem's ascription to Ovid is insecure because it is never mentioned in Ovid's other works.\nA line from a work entitled \"Epigrammata\" is cited by Priscian.\nEven though it is unlikely, if the last six books of the \"Fasti\" ever existed, they constitute a great loss. Ovid also mentions some occasional poetry (\"Epithalamium\", dirge, even a rendering in Getic) which does not survive. Also lost is the final portion of the \"Medicamina\".\nSpurious works.\n\"Consolatio ad Liviam\" (\"Consolation to Livia\").\nThe \"Consolatio\" is a long elegiac poem of consolation to Augustus' wife Livia on the death of her son Nero Claudius Drusus. The poem opens by advising Livia not to try to hide her sad emotions and contrasts Drusus' military virtue with his death. Drusus' funeral and the tributes of the imperial family are described as are his final moments and Livia's lament over the body, which is compared to birds. The laments of the city of Rome as it greets his funeral procession and the gods are mentioned, and Mars from his temple dissuades the Tiber river from quenching the pyre out of grief.\nGrief is expressed for his lost military honors, his wife, and his mother. The poet asks Livia to look for consolation in Tiberius. The poem ends with an address by Drusus to Livia assuring him of his fate in Elysium. Although this poem was connected to the \"Elegiae in Maecenatem\", it is now thought that they are unconnected. The date of the piece is unknown, but a date in the reign of Tiberius has been suggested because of that emperor's prominence in the poem.\n\"Halieutica\" (\"On Fishing\").\nThe \"Halieutica\" is a fragmentary didactic poem in 134 poorly preserved hexameter lines and is considered spurious. The poem begins by describing how every animal possesses the ability to protect itself and how fish use \"ars\" to help themselves. The ability of dogs and land creatures to protect themselves is described. The poem goes on to list the best places for fishing, and which types of fish to catch. Although Pliny the Elder mentions a \"Halieutica\" by Ovid, which was composed at Tomis near the end of Ovid's life, modern scholars believe Pliny was mistaken in his attribution and that the poem is not genuine.\n\"Nux\" (\"The Walnut Tree\").\nThis short poem in 91 elegiac couplets is related to Aesop's fable of \"The Walnut Tree\" that was the subject of human ingratitude. In a monologue asking boys not pelt it with stones to get its fruit, the tree contrasts the formerly fruitful golden age with the present barren time, in which its fruit is violently ripped off and its branches broken. In the course of this, the tree compares itself to several mythological characters, praises the peace that the emperor provides and prays to be destroyed rather than suffer. The poem is considered spurious because it incorporates allusions to Ovid's works in an uncharacteristic way, although the piece is thought to be contemporary with Ovid.\n\"Somnium\" (\"The Dream\").\nThis poem, traditionally placed at \"Amores\" 3.5, is considered spurious. The poet describes a dream to an interpreter, saying that he sees while escaping from the heat of noon a white heifer near a bull; when the heifer is pecked by a crow, it leaves the bull for a meadow with other bulls. The interpreter interprets the dream as a love allegory; the bull represents the poet, the heifer a girl, and the crow an old woman. The old woman spurs the girl to leave her lover and find someone else. The poem is known to have circulated independently and its lack of engagement with Tibullan or Propertian elegy argue in favor of its spuriousness; however, the poem does seem to be datable to the early empire.\nStyle.\nOvid is traditionally considered the final significant love elegist in the evolution of the genre and one of the most versatile in his handling of the genre's conventions. Like the other canonical elegiac poets Ovid takes on a persona in his works that emphasizes subjectivity and personal emotion over traditional militaristic and public goals, a convention that some scholars link to the relative stability provided by the Augustan settlement. However, although Catullus, Tibullus and Propertius may have been inspired in part by personal experience, the validity of \"biographical\" readings of these poets' works is a serious point of scholarly contention.\nOvid has been seen as taking on a persona in his poetry that is far more emotionally detached from his mistress and less involved in crafting a unique emotional realism within the text than the other elegists. This attitude, coupled with the lack of testimony that identifies Ovid's Corinna with a real person has led scholars to conclude that Corinna was never a real person, and that Ovid's relationship with her is an invention for his elegiac project. Some scholars have even interpreted Corinna as a metapoetic symbol for the elegiac genre itself.\nOvid has been considered a highly inventive love elegist who plays with traditional elegiac conventions and elaborates the themes of the genre; Quintilian even calls him a \"sportive\" elegist. In some poems, he uses traditional conventions in new ways, such as the \"paraklausithyron\" of \"Am.\" 1.6, while other poems seem to have no elegiac precedents and appear to be Ovid's own generic innovations, such as the poem on Corinna's ruined hair (\"Am.\" 1.14). Ovid has been traditionally seen as far more sexually explicit in his poetry than the other elegists.\nHis erotic elegy covers a wide spectrum of themes and viewpoints; the \"Amores\" focus on Ovid's relationship with Corinna, the love of mythical characters is the subject of the \"Heroides\", and the and the other didactic love poems provide a handbook for relationships and seduction from a (mock-)\"scientific\" viewpoint. In his treatment of elegy, scholars have traced the influence of rhetorical education in his enumeration, in his effects of surprise, and in his transitional devices.\nSome commentators have also noted the influence of Ovid's interest in love elegy in his other works, such as the \"Fasti\", and have distinguished his \"elegiac\" style from his \"epic\" style. Richard Heinze, in his famous \"Ovids elegische Erz\u00e4hlung\" (1919), delineated the distinction between Ovid's styles by comparing the \"Fasti\" and \"Metamorphoses\" versions of the same legends, such as the treatment of the Ceres\u2013Proserpina story in both poems. Heinze demonstrated that, \"whereas in the elegiac poems a sentimental and tender tone prevails, the hexameter narrative is characterized by an emphasis on solemnity and awe...\" His general line of argument has been accepted by Brooks Otis, who wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The gods are \"serious\" in epic as they are not in elegy; the speeches in epic are long and infrequent compared to the short, truncated and frequent speeches of elegy; the epic writer conceals himself while the elegiac fills his narrative with familiar remarks to the reader or his characters; above all perhaps, epic narrative is continuous and symmetrical... whereas elegiac narrative displays a marked asymmetry\u00a0...\nOtis wrote that in the Ovidian poems of love, he \"was burlesquing an old theme rather than inventing a new one\". Otis states that the \"Heroides\" are more serious and, though some of them are \"quite different from anything Ovid had done before [...] he is here also treading a very well-worn path\" to relate that the motif of females abandoned by or separated from their men was a \"stock motif of Hellenistic and neoteric poetry (the classic example for us is, of course, Catullus 66)\".\nOtis also states that Phaedra and Medea, Dido and Hermione (also present in the poem) \"are clever re-touchings of Euripides and Vergil\". Some scholars, such as Kenney and Clausen, have compared Ovid with Virgil. According to them, Virgil was ambiguous and ambivalent while Ovid was defined and, while Ovid wrote only what he could express, Virgil wrote for the use of language.\nLegacy.\nCriticism.\nOvid's works have been interpreted in various ways over the centuries with attitudes that depended on the social, religious and literary contexts of different times. It is known that since his own lifetime, he was already famous and criticized. In the \"Remedia Amoris\", Ovid reports criticism from people who considered his books insolent. Ovid responded to this criticism with the following:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em\"&gt;\nGluttonous Envy, burst: my name's well known already\nit will be more so, if only my feet travel the road they've started.\nBut you're in too much of a hurry: if I live you'll be more than sorry:\nmany poems, in fact, are forming in my mind.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAfter such criticism subsided, Ovid became one of the best known and most loved Roman poets during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.\nWriters in the Middle Ages used his work as a way to read and write about sex and violence without orthodox \"scrutiny routinely given to commentaries on the Bible\". In the Middle Ages the voluminous \"Ovide moralis\u00e9\u200a\", a French work that moralizes 15 books of the \"Metamorphoses\", was composed. This work then influenced Chaucer. Ovid's poetry provided inspiration for the Renaissance idea of humanism, and more specifically, for many Renaissance painters and writers.\nLikewise, Arthur Golding moralized his own translation of the full 15 books, and published it in 1567. This version was the same version used as a supplement to the original Latin in the Tudor-era grammar schools that influenced such major Renaissance authors as Christopher Marlowe and William Shakespeare. Many non-English authors were heavily influenced by Ovid's works as well. Montaigne, for example, alluded to Ovid several times in his \"Essais\", specifically in his comments on \"Education of Children\" when he says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first taste I had for books came to me from my pleasure in the fables of the \"Metamorphoses\" of Ovid. For at about seven or eight years of age I would steal away from any other pleasure to read them, inasmuch as this language was my mother tongue, and it was the easiest book I knew and the best suited by its content to my tender age. Miguel de Cervantes also used the \"Metamorphoses\" as a platform of inspiration for his prodigious novel \"Don Quixote.\" Ovid is both praised and criticized by Cervantes in his \"Don Quixote\", where he warns against satires that can exile poets, as happened to Ovid.\nIn the 16th century, some Jesuit schools of Portugal cut several passages from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". While the Jesuits saw his poems as elegant compositions worthy of being presented to students for educational purposes, they also felt his works as a whole might corrupt students. The Jesuits took much of their knowledge of Ovid to the Portuguese colonies. According to Serafim Leite (1949), the \"ratio studiorum\" was in effect in Colonial Brazil during the early 17th century, and in this period Brazilian students read works like the \"Epistulae ex Ponto\" to learn Latin grammar.\nIn the 16th century, Ovid's works were criticized in England. The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London ordered that a contemporary translation of Ovid's love poems be publicly burned in 1599. The Puritans of the following century viewed Ovid as a pagan, thus as an immoral influence. John Dryden composed a famous translation of the \"Metamorphoses\" into stopped rhyming couplets during the 17th century, when Ovid was \"refashioned [...] in its own image, one kind of Augustanism making over another\".\nThe Romantic movement of the 19th century, in contrast, considered Ovid and his poems \"stuffy, dull, over-formalized and lacking in genuine passion\". Romantics might have preferred his poetry of exile. The picture \"Ovid among the Scythians\", painted by Delacroix, portrays the last years of the poet in exile in Scythia, and was seen by Baudelaire, Gautier and Edgar Degas. Baudelaire took the opportunity to write a long essay about the life of an exiled poet like Ovid. This shows that the exile of Ovid had some influence in 19th-century Romanticism since it makes connections with its key concepts such as wildness and the misunderstood genius.\nThe exile poems were once viewed unfavorably in Ovid's oeuvre. They have enjoyed a resurgence of scholarly interest in recent years, though critical opinion remains divided on several qualities of the poems, such as their intended audience and whether Ovid was sincere in the \"recantation of all that he stood for before\".\nIn 1992, classical scholar Amy Richlin published an influential article critiquing the prevalence of rape within Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", and there has been renewed focus on sexual assault within Ovid's poetry since the #MeToo Movement in 2017. In the 21st century, there have been several feminist reinterpretations of Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" which directly or indirectly criticize his treatment of women in his texts. Ali Smith's novel \"Girl Meets Boy\" (2007), published as part of the Canongate Myth Series, reimagines the lesbian relationship between Iphis and Ianthe in Book 9 of the \"Metamorphoses\". Madeleine Miller's novella \"Galatea\" (2013) is a retelling of a passage from Book 10 of the \"Metamorphoses\", in which sculptor Pygmalion carves a statue (Galatea) and falls in love with her after she is brought to life by the gods. In \"Galatea\", Miller imagines Galatea grappling with her identity as a statue-turned-woman and gives her the space to exhibit her resilience and resistance to her husband's oppressive control. In Fiona Benson's Forward Prize-winning poetry anthology \"Vertigo and Ghost\" (2019), the poet experiments with different forms to represent Ovid's depictions of the female victims of Zeus' rape and sexual violence in the \"Metamorphoses\", including Dana\u00eb, Semele, Cyane and Io. Nina MacLaughlin likewise focused on the theme of sexual assault in Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" for her collection of short stories, \"Wake Siren\" (2019).\nWorks, authors, and artists influenced by Ovid.\nLiterary and artistic.\nDante twice mentions him in:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nhttp:// "}
{"id": "37803", "revid": "50152862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37803", "title": "Cubism", "text": "20th-century avant-garde art movement\nCubism is an early-20th-century avant-garde art movement which began in Paris. It revolutionized painting and the visual arts, and sparked artistic innovations in music, ballet, literature, and architecture.\nCubist subjects are analyzed, broken up, and reassembled in an abstract form. Instead of depicting objects from a single perspective, the artist depicts the subject from multiple perspectives to represent the subject in a greater context. Cubism has been considered the most influential art movement of the 20th century. The term \"cubism\" is broadly associated with a variety of artworks produced in Paris (Montmartre and Montparnasse) or near Paris (Puteaux) during the 1910s and throughout the 1920s.\nThe movement was pioneered in partnership by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, and joined by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Juan Gris, and Fernand L\u00e9ger. One primary influence that led to Cubism was the representation of three-dimensional form in the late works of Paul C\u00e9zanne. A retrospective of C\u00e9zanne's paintings was held at the of 1904, current works were displayed at the 1905 and 1906 , followed by two commemorative retrospectives after his death in 1907.\nIn France, offshoots of Cubism developed, including Orphism, abstract art and later Purism. The impact of Cubism was far-reaching and wide-ranging in the arts and in popular culture. Cubism introduced collage as a modern art form. In France and other countries Futurism, Suprematism, Dada, Constructivism, De Stijl and Art Deco developed in response to Cubism. Early Futurist paintings hold in common with Cubism the fusing of the past and the present, the representation of different views of the subject pictured at the same time or successively, also called multiple perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity, while Constructivism was influenced by Picasso's technique of constructing sculpture from separate elements. Other common threads between these disparate movements include the faceting or simplification of geometric forms, and the association of mechanization and modern life.\nHistory.\nScholars have divided the history of Cubism into phases. In one scheme, the first phase of Cubism, known as \"Analytic Cubism\", a phrase coined by Juan Gris a posteriori, was both radical and influential as a short but highly significant art movement between 1910 and 1912 in France. A second phase, \"Synthetic Cubism\", is generally considered to run from about 1912 to 1914, characterised by simpler shapes and brighter colours, and experiments in texture and pattern, for example, using newspaper print and patterned paper. \"Synthetic Cubism\" remained vital until around 1919, when the Surrealist movement gained popularity. English art historian Douglas Cooper proposed another scheme, describing three phases of Cubism in his book, \"The Cubist Epoch\". According to Cooper there was \"Early Cubism\", (from 1906 to 1908) when the movement was initially developed in the studios of Picasso and Braque; the second phase being called \"High Cubism\", (from 1909 to 1914) during which time Juan Gris emerged as an important exponent (after 1911); and finally Cooper referred to \"Late Cubism\" (from 1914 to 1921) as the last phase of Cubism as a radical avant-garde movement. Douglas Cooper's restrictive use of these terms to distinguish the work of Braque, Picasso, Gris (from 1911) and L\u00e9ger (to a lesser extent) implied an intentional value judgement.]\nProto-Cubism: 1907\u20131908.\nCubism burgeoned between 1907 and 1911. Pablo Picasso's 1907 painting \"Les Demoiselles d'Avignon\" has often been considered a proto-Cubist work.\nIn 1908, in his review of Georges Braque's exhibition at Kahnweiler's gallery, the critic Louis Vauxcelles called Braque a daring man who despises form, \"reducing everything, places and a figures and houses, to geometric schemas, to cubes\".\nVauxcelles recounted how Matisse told him at the time, \"Braque has just sent in [to the 1908 ] a painting made of little cubes\". The critic Charles Morice relayed Matisse's words and spoke of Braque's little cubes. The motif of the viaduct at l'Estaque had inspired Braque to produce three paintings marked by the simplification of form and deconstruction of perspective.\nGeorges Braque's 1908 \"Houses at L'Estaque\" (and related works) prompted Vauxcelles, in \"Gil Blas\", 25 March 1909, to refer to \"bizarreries cubiques\" (cubic oddities). Gertrude Stein referred to landscapes made by Picasso in 1909, such as \"Reservoir at Horta de Ebro\", as the first Cubist paintings. The first organized group exhibition by Cubists took place at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants in Paris during the spring of 1911 in a room called 'Salle 41'; it included works by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier, yet no works by Picasso or Braque were exhibited.\nBy 1911 Picasso was recognized as the inventor of Cubism, while Braque's importance and precedence was argued later, with respect to his treatment of space, volume and mass in the L'Estaque landscapes. But \"this view of Cubism is associated with a distinctly restrictive definition of which artists are properly to be called Cubists,\" wrote the art historian Christopher Green: \"Marginalizing the contribution of the artists who exhibited at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants in 1911 [...]\"\nThe assertion that the Cubist depiction of space, mass, time, and volume supports (rather than contradicts) the flatness of the canvas was made by Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler as early as 1920, but it was subject to criticism in the 1950s and 1960s, especially by Clement Greenberg.\nContemporary views of Cubism are complex, formed to some extent in response to the \"Salle 41\" Cubists, whose methods were too distinct from those of Picasso and Braque to be considered merely secondary to them. Alternative interpretations of Cubism have therefore developed. Wider views of Cubism include artists who were later associated with the \"Salle 41\" artists, e.g., Francis Picabia; the brothers Jacques Villon, Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Marcel Duchamp, who beginning in late 1911 formed the core of the Section d'Or (or the Puteaux Group); the sculptors Alexander Archipenko, Joseph Csaky and Ossip Zadkine as well as Jacques Lipchitz and Henri Laurens; and painters such as Louis Marcoussis, Roger de La Fresnaye, Franti\u0161ek Kupka, Diego Rivera, L\u00e9opold Survage, Auguste Herbin, Andr\u00e9 Lhote, Gino Severini (after 1916), Mar\u00eda Blanchard (after 1916), and Georges Valmier (after 1918). More fundamentally, Christopher Green argues that Douglas Cooper's terms were \"later undermined by interpretations of the work of Picasso, Braque, Gris and L\u00e9ger that stress iconographic and ideological questions rather than methods of representation.\"\nJohn Berger identifies the essence of Cubism with the mechanical diagram. \"The metaphorical model of Cubism is the diagram: The diagram being a visible symbolic representation of invisible processes, forces, structures. A diagram need not eschew certain aspects of appearance but these too will be treated as signs not as imitations or recreations.\"\nEarly Cubism: 1909\u20131914.\nThere was a distinct difference between Kahnweiler's Cubists and the Salon Cubists. Prior to 1914, Picasso, Braque, Gris and L\u00e9ger (to a lesser extent) gained the support of a single committed art dealer in Paris, Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, who guaranteed them an annual income for the exclusive right to buy their works. Kahnweiler sold only to a small circle of connoisseurs. His support gave his artists the freedom to experiment in relative privacy. Picasso worked in Montmartre until 1912, while Braque and Gris remained there until after the First World War. L\u00e9ger was based in Montparnasse.\nIn contrast, the Salon Cubists built their reputation primarily by exhibiting regularly at the and the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants, both major non-academic Salons in Paris. They were inevitably more aware of public response and the need to communicate. Already in 1910 a group began to form which included Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay and L\u00e9ger. They met regularly at Henri le Fauconnier's studio near the boulevard du Montparnasse. These soir\u00e9es often included writers such as Guillaume Apollinaire and Andr\u00e9 Salmon. Together with other young artists, the group wanted to emphasise a research into form, in opposition to the Neo-Impressionist emphasis on color.\nLouis Vauxcelles, in his review of the 26th Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants (1910), made a passing and imprecise reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, L\u00e9ger and Le Fauconnier as \"ignorant geometers, reducing the human body, the site, to pallid cubes.\" At the 1910 , a few months later, Metzinger exhibited his highly fractured \"Nu \u00e0 la chemin\u00e9e (Nude)\", which was subsequently reproduced in both \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" (1912) and \"Les Peintres Cubistes\" (1913).\nThe first public controversy generated by Cubism resulted from Salon showings at the Ind\u00e9pendants during the spring of 1911. This showing by Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, le Fauconnier and L\u00e9ger brought Cubism to the attention of the general public for the first time. Amongst the Cubist works presented, Robert Delaunay exhibited his \"Eiffel Tower, Tour Eiffel\" (Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York).\nAt the of the same year, in addition to the Ind\u00e9pendants group of \"Salle 41\", were exhibited works by Andr\u00e9 Lhote, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon, Roger de La Fresnaye, Andr\u00e9 Dunoyer de Segonzac and Franti\u0161ek Kupka. The exhibition was reviewed in the October 8, 1911 issue of \"The New York Times\". This article was published a year after Gelett Burgess' \"The Wild Men of Paris\", and two years prior to the Armory Show, which introduced astonished Americans, accustomed to realistic art, to the experimental styles of the European avant garde, including Fauvism, Cubism, and Futurism. The 1911 \"New York Times\" article portrayed works by Picasso, Matisse, Derain, Metzinger and others dated before 1909; not exhibited at the 1911 Salon. The article was titled \"The \"Cubists\" Dominate Paris' Fall Salon\" and subtitled \"Eccentric School of Painting Increases Its Vogue in the Current Art Exhibition \u2013 What Its Followers Attempt to Do.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSalon des Ind\u00e9pendants.\nThe subsequent 1912 Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants located in Paris (20 March to 16 May 1912) was marked by the presentation of Marcel Duchamp's \"Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2\", which itself caused a scandal, even amongst the Cubists. It was in fact rejected by the hanging committee, which included his brothers and other Cubists. Although the work was shown in the Salon de la Section d'Or in October 1912 and the 1913 Armory Show in New York, Duchamp never forgave his brothers and former colleagues for censoring his work. Juan Gris, a new addition to the Salon scene, exhibited his \"Portrait of Picasso\" (Art Institute of Chicago), while Metzinger's two showings included \"La Femme au Cheval\" (\"Woman with a horse\", 1911\u20131912, National Gallery of Denmark). Delaunay's monumental \"La Ville de Paris\" (Mus\u00e9e d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris) and L\u00e9ger's \"La Noce\" (\"The Wedding\", Mus\u00e9e National d'Art Moderne, Paris), were also exhibited.\nGaleries Dalmau.\nIn 1912, Galeries Dalmau presented the first declared group exhibition of Cubism worldwide (\"Exposici\u00f3 d'Art Cubista\"), with a controversial showing by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Juan Gris, Marie Laurencin and Marcel Duchamp (Barcelona, 20 April to 10 May 1912). The Dalmau exhibition comprised 83 works by 26 artists. Jacques Nayral's association with Gleizes led him to write the Preface for the Cubist exhibition, which was fully translated and reproduced in the newspaper \"La Veu de Catalunya\". Duchamp's \"Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2\" was exhibited for the first time.\nExtensive media coverage (in newspapers and magazines) before, during and after the exhibition launched the Galeries Dalmau as a force in the development and propagation of modernism in Europe. While press coverage was extensive, it was not always positive. Articles were published in the newspapers \"Esquella de La Torratxa\" and \"El Noticiero Universal\" attacking the Cubists with a series of caricatures laced with derogatory text. Art historian Jaime Brihuega writes of the Dalmau show: \"No doubt that the exhibition produced a strong commotion in the public, who welcomed it with a lot of suspicion.\nA major development in Cubism occurred in 1912 with Braque's and Picasso's introduction of collage in the modernist sense. Picasso is credited with creating the first Cubist collage, \"Still life With Chair Caning\", in May 1912, while Braque preceded Picasso in the creation of Cubist cardboard sculptures and papiers coll\u00e9s. Papiers coll\u00e9s were often composed of pieces of everyday paper artifacts such as newspaper, table cloth, wallpaper and sheet music, whereas Cubist collages combined disparate materials\u2014in the case of \"Still-life With Chair Caning\", freely brushed oil paint and commercially printed oilcloth together on a canvas.\nSalon d'Automne.\nThe Cubist contribution to the 1912 Salon d'Automne created scandal regarding the use of government owned buildings, such as the Grand Palais, to exhibit such artwork. The indignation of the politician Jean Pierre Philippe Lampu\u00e9 made the front page of \"Le Journal\", 5 October 1912. The controversy spread to the Municipal Council of Paris, leading to a debate in the Chambre des D\u00e9put\u00e9s about the use of public funds to provide the venue for such art. The Cubists were defended by the Socialist deputy, Marcel Sembat.\nIt was against this background of public anger that Jean Metzinger and Albert Gleizes wrote \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" (published by Eug\u00e8ne Figui\u00e8re in 1912, translated to English and Russian in 1913). Among the works exhibited were Le Fauconnier's vast composition \"Les Montagnards attaqu\u00e9s par des ours (Mountaineers Attacked by Bears)\" now at Rhode Island School of Design Museum, Joseph Csaky's \"Deux Femme, Two Women\" (a sculpture now lost), in addition to the highly abstract paintings by Kupka, \"Amorpha\" (The National Gallery, Prague), and Picabia, \"La Source (The Spring)\" (Museum of Modern Art, New York).\nAbstraction and the ready-made.\nThe most extreme forms of Cubism were not those practiced by Picasso and Braque, who resisted total abstraction. Other Cubists, by contrast, especially Franti\u0161ek Kupka, and those considered Orphists by Apollinaire (Delaunay, L\u00e9ger, Picabia and Duchamp), accepted abstraction by removing visible subject matter entirely. Kupka's two entries at the 1912 Salon d'Automne, \"Amorpha-Fugue \u00e0 deux couleurs\" and \"Amorpha chromatique chaude\", were highly abstract (or nonrepresentational) and metaphysical in orientation. Both Duchamp in 1912 and Picabia from 1912 to 1914 developed an expressive and allusive abstraction dedicated to complex emotional and sexual themes. Beginning in 1912 Delaunay painted a series of paintings entitled \"Simultaneous Windows\", followed by a series entitled \"Formes Circulaires\", in which he combined planar structures with bright prismatic hues; based on the optical characteristics of juxtaposed colors his departure from reality in the depiction of imagery was quasi-complete. In 1913\u201314 L\u00e9ger produced a series entitled \"Contrasts of Forms\", giving a similar stress to color, line and form. His Cubism, despite its abstract qualities, was associated with themes of mechanization and modern life. Apollinaire supported these early developments of abstract Cubism in \"Les Peintres cubistes\" (1913), writing of a new \"pure\" painting in which the subject was vacated. But in spite of his use of the term Orphism these works were so different that they defy attempts to place them in a single category.\nAlso labeled an Orphist by Apollinaire, Marcel Duchamp was responsible for another extreme development inspired by Cubism. The ready-made arose from a joint consideration that the work itself is considered an object (just as a painting), and that it uses the material detritus of the world (as collage and papier coll\u00e9 in the Cubist construction and Assemblage). The next logical step, for Duchamp, was to present an ordinary object as a self-sufficient work of art representing only itself. In 1913 he attached a bicycle wheel to a kitchen stool and in 1914 selected a bottle-drying rack as a sculpture in its own right.\nSection d'Or.\nThe \"Section d'Or\", also known as \"Groupe de Puteaux\", founded by some of the most conspicuous Cubists, was a collective of painters, sculptors and critics associated with Cubism and Orphism, active from 1911 through about 1914, coming to prominence in the wake of their controversial showing at the 1911 Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants. The \"Salon de la Section d'Or\" at the \"Galerie La Bo\u00e9tie\" in Paris, October 1912, was arguably the most important pre-World War I Cubist exhibition; exposing Cubism to a wide audience. Over 200 works were displayed, and the fact that many of the artists showed artworks representative of their development from 1909 to 1912 gave the exhibition the allure of a Cubist retrospective.\nThe group seems to have adopted the name Section d'Or to distinguish themselves from the narrower definition of Cubism developed in parallel by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque in the Montmartre quarter of Paris, and to show that Cubism, rather than being an isolated art-form, represented the continuation of a grand tradition (indeed, the golden ratio had fascinated Western intellectuals of diverse interests for at least 2,400 years).\nThe idea of the Section d'Or originated in the course of conversations between Metzinger, Gleizes and Jacques Villon. The group's title was suggested by Villon, after reading a 1910 translation of Leonardo da Vinci's \"Trattato della Pittura\" by Jos\u00e9phin P\u00e9ladan.\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Europeans were discovering African, Polynesian, Micronesian and Native American art. Artists such as Paul Gauguin, Henri Matisse, and Pablo Picasso were intrigued and inspired by the stark power and simplicity of styles of those foreign cultures. Around 1906, Picasso met Matisse through Gertrude Stein, at a time when both artists had recently acquired an interest in primitivism, Iberian sculpture, African art and African tribal masks. They became friendly rivals and competed with each other throughout their careers, perhaps leading to Picasso entering a new period in his work by 1907, marked by the influence of Greek, Iberian and African art. Picasso's paintings of 1907 have been characterized as Protocubism, as notably seen in \"Les Demoiselles d'Avignon\", the antecedent of Cubism.\nArt historian Douglas Cooper says Paul Gauguin and Paul C\u00e9zanne \"were particularly influential to the formation of Cubism and especially important to the paintings of Picasso during 1906 and 1907\". Cooper goes on to say: \"The \"Demoiselles\" is generally referred to as the first Cubist picture. This is an exaggeration, for although it was a major first step towards Cubism it is not yet Cubist. The disruptive, expressionist element in it is even contrary to the spirit of Cubism, which looked at the world in a detached, realistic spirit. Nevertheless, the \"Demoiselles\" is the logical picture to take as the starting point for Cubism, because it marks the birth of a new pictorial idiom, because in it Picasso violently overturned established conventions and because all that followed grew out of it.\"\nThe most serious objection to regarding the \"Demoiselles\" as the origin of Cubism, with its evident influence of primitive art, is that \"such deductions are unhistorical\", wrote the art historian Daniel Robbins. This familiar explanation \"fails to give adequate consideration to the complexities of a flourishing art that existed just before and during the period when Picasso's new painting developed.\" Between 1905 and 1908, a conscious search for a new style caused rapid changes in art across France, Germany, The Netherlands, Italy, and Russia. The Impressionists had used a double point of view, and both Les Nabis and the Symbolists (who also admired C\u00e9zanne) flattened the picture plane, reducing their subjects to simple geometric forms. Neo-Impressionist structure and subject matter, most notably to be seen in the works of Georges Seurat (e.g., \"Parade de Cirque\", \"Le Chahut\" and \"Le Cirque\"), was another important influence. There were also parallels in the development of literature and social thought.\nIn addition to Seurat, the roots of cubism are to be found in the two distinct tendencies of C\u00e9zanne's later work: first his breaking of the painted surface into small multifaceted areas of paint, thereby emphasizing the plural viewpoint given by binocular vision, and second his interest in the simplification of natural forms into cylinders, spheres, and cones. However, the cubists explored this concept further than C\u00e9zanne. They represented all the surfaces of depicted objects in a single picture plane, as if the objects had all their faces visible at the same time. This new kind of depiction revolutionized the way objects could be visualized in painting and art.\nThe historical study of Cubism began in the late 1920s, drawing at first from sources of limited data, namely the opinions of Guillaume Apollinaire. It came to rely heavily on Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler's book \"Der Weg zum Kubismus\" (published in 1920), which centered on the developments of Picasso, Braque, L\u00e9ger, and Gris. The terms \"analytical\" and \"synthetic\" which subsequently emerged have been widely accepted since the mid-1930s. Both terms are historical impositions that occurred after the facts they identify. Neither phase was designated as such at the time corresponding works were created. \"If Kahnweiler considers Cubism as Picasso and Braque,\" wrote Daniel Robbins, \"our only fault is in subjecting other Cubists' works to the rigors of that limited definition.\"\nThe traditional interpretation of \"Cubism\", formulated \"post facto\" as a means of understanding the works of Braque and Picasso, has affected our appreciation of other twentieth-century artists. It is difficult to apply to painters such as Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier, whose fundamental differences from traditional Cubism compelled Kahnweiler to question whether to call them Cubists at all. According to Daniel Robbins, \"To suggest that merely because these artists developed differently or varied from the traditional pattern they deserved to be relegated to a secondary or satellite role in Cubism is a profound mistake.\"\nThe history of the term \"Cubism\" usually stresses the fact that Matisse referred to \"cubes\" in connection with a painting by Braque in 1908, and that the term was published twice by the critic Louis Vauxcelles in a similar context. However, the word \"cube\" was used in 1906 by another critic, Louis Chassevent, with reference not to Picasso or Braque but rather to Metzinger and Delaunay:\n\"M. Metzinger is a mosaicist like M. Signac but he brings more precision to the cutting of his cubes of color which appear to have been made mechanically [...]\".\nThe critical use of the word \"cube\" goes back at least to May 1901 when Jean B\u00e9ral, reviewing the work of Henri-Edmond Cross at the Ind\u00e9pendants in \"Art et Litt\u00e9rature\", commented that he \"uses a large and square pointillism, giving the impression of mosaic. One even wonders why the artist has not used cubes of solid matter diversely colored: they would make pretty revetments.\" (Robert Herbert, 1968, p.\u00a0221)\nThe term Cubism did not come into general usage until 1911, mainly with reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, and L\u00e9ger. In 1911, the poet and critic Guillaume Apollinaire accepted the term on behalf of a group of artists invited to exhibit at the Brussels Ind\u00e9pendants. The following year, in preparation for the Salon de la Section d'Or, Metzinger and Gleizes wrote and published \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" in an effort to dispel the confusion raging around the word, and as a major defence of Cubism (which had caused a public scandal following the 1911 Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants and the 1912 Salon d'Automne in Paris). Clarifying their aims as artists, this work was the first theoretical treatise on Cubism and it still remains the clearest and most intelligible. The result, not solely a collaboration between its two authors, reflected discussions by the circle of artists who met in Puteaux and Courbevoie. It mirrored the attitudes of the \"artists of Passy\", which included Picabia and the Duchamp brothers, to whom sections of it were read prior to publication. The concept developed in \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" of observing a subject from different points in space and time simultaneously, i.e., the act of moving around an object to seize it from several successive angles fused into a single image (multiple viewpoints, mobile perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity), is a generally recognized device used by the Cubists.\nThe 1912 manifesto \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" by Metzinger and Gleizes was followed in 1913 by \"Les Peintres Cubistes\", a collection of reflections and commentaries by Guillaume Apollinaire. Apollinaire had been closely involved with Picasso beginning in 1905, and Braque beginning in 1907, but gave as much attention to artists such as Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Picabia, and Duchamp.\nThe fact that the 1912 exhibition had been curated to show the successive stages through which Cubism had transited, and that \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" had been published for the occasion, indicates the artists' intention of making their work comprehensible to a wide audience (art critics, art collectors, art dealers and the general public). Undoubtedly, due to the great success of the exhibition, Cubism became avant-garde movement recognized as a genre or style in art with a specific common philosophy or goal.\nCrystal Cubism: 1914\u20131918.\nA significant modification of Cubism between 1914 and 1916 was signaled by a shift towards a strong emphasis on large overlapping geometric planes and flat surface activity. This grouping of styles of painting and sculpture, especially significant between 1917 and 1920, was practiced by several artists; particularly those under contract with the art dealer and collector L\u00e9once Rosenberg. The tightening of the compositions, the clarity and sense of order reflected in these works, led to its being referred to by the critic Maurice Raynal as 'crystal' Cubism. Considerations manifested by Cubists prior to the outset of World War I\u2014such as the fourth dimension, dynamism of modern life, the occult, and Henri Bergson's concept of duration\u2014had now been vacated, replaced by a purely formal frame of reference.\nCrystal Cubism, and its associative \"rappel \u00e0 l'ordre\", has been linked with an inclination\u2014by those who served the armed forces and by those who remained in the civilian sector\u2014to escape the realities of the Great War, both during and directly following the conflict. The purifying of Cubism from 1914 through the mid-1920s, with its cohesive unity and voluntary constraints, has been linked to a much broader ideological transformation towards conservatism in both French society and French culture.\nCubism after 1918.\nThe most innovative period of Cubism was before 1914. After World War I, with the support given by the dealer L\u00e9once Rosenberg, Cubism returned as a central issue for artists, and continued as such until the mid-1920s when its avant-garde status was rendered questionable by the emergence of geometric abstraction and Surrealism in Paris. Many Cubists, including Picasso, Braque, Gris, L\u00e9ger, Gleizes, Metzinger and Emilio Pettoruti while developing other styles, returned periodically to Cubism, even well after 1925. Cubism reemerged during the 1920s and the 1930s in the work of the American Stuart Davis and the Englishman Ben Nicholson. In France, however, Cubism experienced a decline beginning in about 1925. L\u00e9once Rosenberg exhibited not only the artists stranded by Kahnweiler's exile but others including Laurens, Lipchitz, Metzinger, Gleizes, Csaky, Herbin and Severini. In 1918 Rosenberg presented a series of Cubist exhibitions at his Galerie de l'Effort Moderne in Paris. Attempts were made by Louis Vauxcelles to argue that Cubism was dead, but these exhibitions, along with a well-organized Cubist show at the 1920 Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants and a revival of the Salon de la Section d'Or in the same year, demonstrated it was still alive.\nThe reemergence of Cubism coincided with the appearance from about 1917 to 1924 of a coherent body of theoretical writing by Pierre Reverdy, Maurice Raynal and Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler and, among the artists, by Gris, L\u00e9ger and Gleizes. The occasional return to classicism\u2014figurative work either exclusively or alongside Cubist work\u2014experienced by many artists during this period (called Neoclassicism) has been linked to the tendency to evade the realities of the war and also to the cultural dominance of a classical or Latin image of France during and immediately following the war. Cubism after 1918 can be seen as part of a wide ideological shift towards conservatism in both French society and culture. Yet, Cubism itself remained evolutionary both within the oeuvre of individual artists, such as Gris and Metzinger, and across the work of artists as different from each other as Braque, L\u00e9ger and Gleizes. Cubism as a publicly debated movement became relatively unified and open to definition. Its theoretical purity made it a gauge against which such diverse tendencies as Realism or Naturalism, Dada, Surrealism and abstraction could be compared.\nInfluence in Asia.\nJapan and China were among the first countries in Asia to be influenced by Cubism. Contact first occurred via European texts translated and published in Japanese art journals in the 1910s. In the 1920s, Japanese and Chinese artists who studied in Paris, for example those enrolled at the \u00c9cole nationale sup\u00e9rieure des Beaux-Arts, brought back with them both an understanding of modern art movements, including Cubism. Notable works exhibiting Cubist qualities were Tetsugor\u014d Yorozu's \"Self Portrait with Red Eyes\" (1912) and Fang Ganmin's \"Melody in Autumn\" (1934).\nInterpretation.\nIntentions and criticism.\nThe Cubism of Picasso and Braque had more than a technical or formal significance, and the distinct attitudes and intentions of the Salon Cubists produced different kinds of Cubism, rather than a derivative of their work. \"It is by no means clear, in any case,\" wrote Christopher Green, \"to what extent these other Cubists depended on Picasso and Braque for their development of such techniques as faceting, 'passage' and multiple perspective; they could well have arrived at such practices with little knowledge of 'true' Cubism in its early stages, guided above all by their own understanding of C\u00e9zanne.\" The works exhibited by these Cubists at the 1911 and 1912 Salons extended beyond the conventional C\u00e9zanne-like subjects\u2014the posed model, still-life and landscape\u2014favored by Picasso and Braque to include large-scale modern-life subjects. Aimed at a large public, these works stressed the use of multiple perspective and complex planar faceting for expressive effect while preserving the eloquence of subjects endowed with literary and philosophical connotations.\nIn \"Du \"Cubisme\"\" Metzinger and Gleizes explicitly related the sense of time to multiple perspective, giving symbolic expression to the notion of 'duration' proposed by the philosopher Henri Bergson according to which life is subjectively experienced as a continuum, with the past flowing into the present and the present merging into the future. The Salon Cubists used the faceted treatment of solid and space and effects of multiple viewpoints to convey a physical and psychological sense of the fluidity of consciousness, blurring the distinctions between past, present and future. One of the major theoretical innovations made by the Salon Cubists, independently of Picasso and Braque, was that of \"simultaneity\", drawing to greater or lesser extent on theories of Henri Poincar\u00e9, Ernst Mach, Charles Henry, Maurice Princet, and Henri Bergson. With simultaneity, the concept of separate spatial and temporal dimensions was comprehensively challenged. Linear perspective developed during the Renaissance was vacated. The subject matter was no longer considered from a specific point of view at a moment in time, but built following a selection of successive viewpoints, i.e., as if viewed simultaneously from numerous angles (and in multiple dimensions) with the eye free to roam from one to the other.\nThis technique of representing simultaneity, multiple viewpoints (or relative motion) is pushed to a high degree of complexity in Metzinger's \"Nu \u00e0 la chemin\u00e9e\", exhibited at the 1910 Salon d'Automne; Gleizes' monumental \"Le D\u00e9piquage des Moissons (Harvest Threshing)\", exhibited at the 1912 Salon de la Section d'Or; Le Fauconnier's \"Abundance\" shown at the Ind\u00e9pendants of 1911; and Delaunay's \"City of Paris\", exhibited at the Ind\u00e9pendants in 1912. These ambitious works are some of the largest paintings in the history of Cubism. L\u00e9ger's \"The Wedding\", also shown at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants in 1912, gave form to the notion of simultaneity by presenting different motifs as occurring within a single temporal frame, where responses to the past and present interpenetrate with collective force. The conjunction of such subject matter with simultaneity aligns Salon Cubism with early Futurist paintings by Umberto Boccioni, Gino Severini and Carlo Carr\u00e0; themselves made in response to early Cubism.\nCubism and modern European art was introduced into the United States at the now legendary 1913 Armory Show in New York City, which then traveled to Chicago and Boston. In the Armory show Pablo Picasso exhibited \"La Femme au pot de moutarde\" (1910), the sculpture \"Head of a Woman (Fernande)\" (1909\u201310), \"Les Arbres\" (1907) amongst other cubist works. Jacques Villon exhibited seven important and large drypoints, while his brother Marcel Duchamp shocked the American public with his painting \"Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2\" (1912). Francis Picabia exhibited his abstractions \"La Danse \u00e0 la source\" and \"La Procession, Seville\" (both of 1912). Albert Gleizes exhibited \"La Femme aux phlox\" (1910) and \"L'Homme au balcon\" (1912), two highly stylized and faceted cubist works. Georges Braque, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Roger de La Fresnaye and Alexander Archipenko also contributed examples of their cubist works.\nCubist sculpture.\nJust as in painting, Cubist sculpture is rooted in Paul C\u00e9zanne's reduction of painted objects into component planes and geometric solids (cubes, spheres, cylinders, and cones). And just as in painting, it became a pervasive influence and contributed fundamentally to Constructivism and Futurism.\nCubist sculpture developed in parallel to Cubist painting. During the autumn of 1909 Picasso sculpted \"Head of a Woman (Fernande)\" with positive features depicted by negative space and vice versa. According to Douglas Cooper: \"The first true Cubist sculpture was Picasso's impressive \"Woman's Head\", modeled in 1909\u201310, a counterpart in three dimensions to many similar analytical and faceted heads in his paintings at the time.\" These positive/negative reversals were ambitiously exploited by Alexander Archipenko in 1912\u201313, for example in \"Woman Walking\". Joseph Csaky, after Archipenko, was the first sculptor in Paris to join the Cubists, with whom he exhibited from 1911 onwards. They were followed by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and then in 1914 by Jacques Lipchitz, Henri Laurens and Ossip Zadkine.\nIndeed, Cubist construction was as influential as any pictorial Cubist innovation. It was the stimulus behind the proto-Constructivist work of both Naum Gabo and Vladimir Tatlin and thus the starting-point for the entire constructive tendency in 20th-century modernist sculpture.\nArchitecture.\nCubism formed an important link between early-20th-century art and architecture. The historical, theoretical, and socio-political relationships between avant-garde practices in painting, sculpture and architecture had early ramifications in France, Germany, the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia. Though there are many points of intersection between Cubism and architecture, only a few direct links between them can be drawn. Most often the connections are made by reference to shared formal characteristics: faceting of form, spatial ambiguity, transparency, and multiplicity.\nArchitectural interest in Cubism centered on the dissolution and reconstitution of three-dimensional form, using simple geometric shapes, juxtaposed without the illusions of classical perspective. Diverse elements could be superimposed, made transparent or penetrate one another, while retaining their spatial relationships. Cubism had become an influential factor in the development of modern architecture from 1912 (\"La Maison Cubiste\", by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Andr\u00e9 Mare) onwards, developing in parallel with architects such as Peter Behrens and Walter Gropius, with the simplification of building design, the use of materials appropriate to industrial production, and the increased use of glass.\nCubism was relevant to an architecture seeking a style that needed not refer to the past. Thus, what had become a revolution in both painting and sculpture was applied as part of \"a profound reorientation towards a changed world\". The Cubo-Futurist ideas of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti influenced attitudes in avant-garde architecture. The influential De Stijl movement embraced the aesthetic principles of Neo-plasticism developed by Piet Mondrian under the influence of Cubism in Paris. De Stijl was also linked by Gino Severini to Cubist theory through the writings of Albert Gleizes. However, the linking of basic geometric forms with inherent beauty and ease of industrial application\u2014which had been prefigured by Marcel Duchamp from 1914\u2014was left to the founders of Purism, Am\u00e9d\u00e9e Ozenfant and Charles-\u00c9douard Jeanneret (better known as Le Corbusier,) who exhibited paintings together in Paris and published \"Apr\u00e8s le cubisme\" in 1918. Le Corbusier's ambition had been to translate the properties of his own style of Cubism to architecture. Between 1918 and 1922, Le Corbusier concentrated his efforts on Purist theory and painting. In 1922, Le Corbusier and his cousin Jeanneret opened a studio in Paris at 35 rue de S\u00e8vres. His theoretical studies soon advanced into many different architectural projects.\nLa Maison Cubiste (Cubist House).\nAt the 1912 an architectural installation was exhibited that quickly became known as \"Maison Cubiste\" (Cubist House), with architecture by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and interior decoration by Andr\u00e9 Mare along with a group of collaborators. Metzinger and Gleizes in \"Du \"Cubisme\"\", written during the assemblage of the \"Maison Cubiste\", wrote about the autonomous nature of art, stressing the point that decorative considerations should not govern the spirit of art. Decorative work, to them, was the \"antithesis of the picture\". \"The true picture\" wrote Metzinger and Gleizes, \"bears its \"raison d'\u00eatre\" within itself. It can be moved from a church to a drawing-room, from a museum to a study. Essentially independent, necessarily complete, it need not immediately satisfy the mind: on the contrary, it should lead it, little by little, towards the fictitious depths in which the coordinative light resides. It does not harmonize with this or that ensemble; it harmonizes with things in general, with the universe: it is an organism...\".\n\"La Maison Cubiste\" was a fully furnished model house, with a facade, a staircase, wrought iron banisters, and two rooms: a living room\u2014the \"Salon Bourgeois\", where paintings by Marcel Duchamp, Metzinger (\"Woman with a Fan\"), Gleizes, Laurencin and L\u00e9ger were hung, and a bedroom. It was an example of \"L'art d\u00e9coratif\", a home within which Cubist art could be displayed in the comfort and style of modern, bourgeois life. Spectators at the passed through the plaster facade, designed by Duchamp-Villon, to the two furnished rooms. This architectural installation was subsequently exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show, New York, Chicago and Boston, listed in the catalogue of the New York exhibit as Raymond Duchamp-Villon, number 609, and entitled \"Facade architectural, plaster\" (\"Fa\u00e7ade architecturale\").\nThe furnishings, wallpaper, upholstery and carpets of the interior were designed by Andr\u00e9 Mare, and were early examples of the influence of cubism on what would become Art Deco. They were composed of very brightly colored roses and other floral patterns in stylized geometric forms.\nMare called the living room in which Cubist paintings were hung the \"Salon Bourgeois\". L\u00e9ger described this name as 'perfect'. In a letter to Mare prior to the exhibition L\u00e9ger wrote: \"Your idea is absolutely splendid for us, really splendid. People will see Cubism in its domestic setting, which is very important.\n\"Mare's ensembles were accepted as frames for Cubist works because they allowed paintings and sculptures their independence\", Christopher Green wrote, \"creating a play of contrasts, hence the involvement not only of Gleizes and Metzinger themselves, but of Marie Laurencin, the Duchamp brothers (Raymond Duchamp-Villon designed the facade) and Mare's old friends L\u00e9ger and Roger La Fresnaye\".\nIn 1927, Cubists Joseph Csaky, Jacques Lipchitz, Louis Marcoussis, Henri Laurens, the sculptor Gustave Miklos, and others collaborated in the decoration of a Studio House, rue Saint-James, Neuilly-sur-Seine, designed by the architect Paul Ruaud and owned by the French fashion designer Jacques Doucet, also a collector of Post-Impressionist and Cubist paintings (including \"Les Demoiselles d'Avignon\", which he bought directly from Picasso's studio). Laurens designed the fountain, Csaky designed Doucet's staircase, Lipchitz made the fireplace mantel, and Marcoussis made a Cubist rug.\nCzech Cubist architecture.\nThe original Cubist architecture is very rare. Cubism was applied to architecture only in Bohemia (today Czech Republic) and especially in its capital, Prague. Czech architects were the first and only ones to ever design original Cubist buildings. Cubist architecture flourished for the most part between 1910 and 1914, but the Cubist or Cubism-influenced buildings were also built after World War I. After the war, the architectural style called \"Rondo-Cubism\" was developed in Prague fusing the Cubist architecture with round shapes.\nIn their theoretical rules, the Cubist architects expressed the requirement of dynamism, which would surmount the matter and calm contained in it, through a creative idea, so that the result would evoke feelings of dynamism and expressive plasticity in the viewer. This should be achieved by shapes derived from pyramids, cubes and prisms, by arrangements and compositions of oblique surfaces, mainly triangular, sculpted facades in protruding crystal-like units, reminiscent of the so-called diamond cut, or even cavernous that are reminiscent of the late Gothic architecture. In this way, the entire surfaces of the facades including even the gables and dormers are sculpted. The grilles as well as other architectural ornaments attain a three-dimensional form. Thus, new forms of windows and doors were also created, e. g. hexagonal windows. Czech Cubist architects also designed Cubist furniture.\nThe leading Cubist architects were Pavel Jan\u00e1k, Josef Go\u010d\u00e1r, Vlastislav Hofman, Emil Kr\u00e1l\u00ed\u010dek and Josef Chochol. They worked mostly in Prague but also in other Bohemian towns. The best-known Cubist building is the House of the Black Madonna in the Old Town of Prague built in 1912 by Josef Go\u010d\u00e1r with the only Cubist caf\u00e9 in the world, Grand Caf\u00e9 Orient. Vlastislav Hofman built the entrance pavilions of \u010e\u00e1blice Cemetery in 1912\u20131914, Josef Chochol designed several residential houses under Vy\u0161ehrad. A Cubist streetlamp has also been preserved near the Wenceslas Square, designed by Emil Kr\u00e1l\u00ed\u010dek in 1912, who also built the Diamond House in the New Town of Prague around 1913.\nCubism in other fields.\nThe influence of Cubism extended to other artistic fields, outside painting and sculpture. In literature, the written works of Gertrude Stein employ repetition and repetitive phrases as building blocks in both passages and whole chapters. Most of Stein's important works utilize this technique, including the novel \"The Making of Americans\" (1906\u201308). Not only were they the first important patrons of Cubism, Gertrude Stein and her brother Leo were also important influences on Cubism as well. In turn, Picasso was an important influence on Stein's writing. In the field of American fiction, William Faulkner's 1930 novel \"As I Lay Dying\" can be read as an interaction with the cubist mode. The novel features narratives of the diverse experiences of 15 characters which, when taken together, produce a single cohesive body.\nThe poets generally associated with Cubism are Guillaume Apollinaire, Blaise Cendrars, Jean Cocteau, Max Jacob, Andr\u00e9 Salmon and Pierre Reverdy. As American poet Kenneth Rexroth explains, Cubism in poetry \"is the conscious, deliberate dissociation and recombination of elements into a new artistic entity made self-sufficient by its rigorous architecture. This is quite different from the free association of the Surrealists and the combination of unconscious utterance and political nihilism of Dada.\" Nonetheless, the Cubist poets' influence on both Cubism and the later movements of Dada and Surrealism was profound; Louis Aragon, founding member of Surrealism, said that for Breton, Soupault, \u00c9luard and himself, Reverdy was \"our immediate elder, the exemplary poet.\" Though not as well remembered as the Cubist painters, these poets continue to influence and inspire; American poets John Ashbery and Ron Padgett have recently produced new translations of Reverdy's work. Wallace Stevens' \"Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird\" is also said to demonstrate how cubism's multiple perspectives can be translated into poetry. Ballet's first cubist sets and costumes were designed by Picasso in 1917 for Sergei Diaghilev's \"Parade\". This preceded six more ballets in which Picasso \"left a mark on the ballet world, influencing generations of designers and choreographers\". Braque followed suit with four ballets of his own commencing in 1924 Diaghliev's \"Les F\u00e2cheux\". Gris as well designed sets and costumes for Diaghilev's Ballet Russes. Artists such as the prolific poster designers A.M. Cassandre and Edward McKnight Kauffer popularized Cubism in the fields of commercial graphic design and typography. Paul Poiret and Callot Soeurs were among the couturiers that brought cubist elements\u2014such as overlapping layers and flat planes that obscure the volumes of the body\u2014into the world of fashion design.\nJohn Berger said: \"It is almost impossible to exaggerate the importance of Cubism. It was a revolution in the visual arts as great as that which took place in the early Renaissance. Its effects on later art, on film, and on architecture are already so numerous that we hardly notice them.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37807", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37807", "title": "Colin Turnbull", "text": "British-American anthropologist (1924\u20131994)\nColin Macmillan Turnbull (23 November 1924 \u2013 28 July 1994) was a British-American anthropologist who came to public attention with the popular books \"The Forest People\" (on the Mbuti Pygmies of Zaire) and \"The Mountain People\" (on the Ik people of Uganda), and one of the first anthropologists to work in the field of ethnomusicology.\nEarly life.\nTurnbull was born in London and educated at Westminster School and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he studied politics and philosophy. During World War II he was in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve after which he was awarded a two-year grant in the Department of Indian Religion and Philosophy, Banaras Hindu University, India, from which he graduated with a master's degree in Indian Religion and Philosophy.\nCareer.\nIn 1951, after his graduation from Banaras, Turnbull traveled to the Belgian Congo (present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo) with Newton Beal, a schoolteacher from Ohio he met in India. Turnbull and Beal first studied the Mbuti pygmies during this time, though that was not the goal of the trip.\nAn \"odd job\" Turnbull picked up while in Africa at this time was working for the Hollywood producer Sam Spiegel. Spiegel hired Turnbull to assist in the construction and transportation of a boat needed for his film. This boat was the \"African Queen\", which was used for the feature film \"The African Queen\" (starring Humphrey Bogart and Katharine Hepburn; 1951). After his first trip to Africa, Turnbull traveled to Yellowknife in the Northwest Territories, where he worked as a geologist and gold miner for a year, before he went back to school to obtain another degree.\nUpon returning to Oxford in 1954, Turnbull began specializing in the anthropology of Africa. He remained in Oxford for two years before another field trip to Africa, finally focusing on the Belgian Congo (1957\u201358) and Uganda. After years of fieldwork, he finally achieved his anthropology doctorate from Oxford in 1964.\nTurnbull became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1965, after he moved to New York City to become curator in charge of African Ethnology at the American Museum of Natural History in 1959. He later resided in Lancaster County, and was on staff in the Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Virginia Commonwealth University, in Richmond, Virginia. Other professional associations included corresponding membership of Royal Museum for Central Africa and a fellowship in the British Royal Anthropological Institute. He first gained prominence with his book \"The Forest People\" (1961), a study of the Mbuti people.\nIn 1972, having been commissioned to come up with an explanation and solution to the difficulties experienced by the Ik people, he published his controversial ethnography \"The Mountain People\". The Ik were a hunter-gatherer tribe who had been forced to stop moving around ancestral lands, through the seasons, because it now involved the three national borders of Uganda, Kenya and Sudan. Forced to become stationary in Uganda, and without a knowledge base and culture for survival under such conditions, they failed to thrive, even to the point of starvation and death. He described the Ik as driven to a radically selfish condition in which they felt no care or responsibility for anyone else, even their children.\n\"The Mountain People\" was later adapted into a theatrical work by playwright Peter Brook.\nContributions to music.\nSome of Turnbull's recordings of Mbuti music were commercially released, and his works inspired other ethnomusicological studies, such as those of Simha Arom and Mauro Campagnoli. His recording of \"Music of the Rainforest Pygmies\", recorded in 1961, was released on CD by Lyrichord Discs. His recording of a Zaire pygmy girls' initiation song was used on the Voyager Golden Record.\nPersonal life.\nTurnbull's partner, Joseph Allen Towles, was born in Senora, Virginia, on 17 August 1937. In 1957 he moved to New York City to pursue a career as an actor and writer. He met Turnbull in 1959 and they exchanged marriage vows the following year.\nFrom 1965 to 1967, Turnbull and Towles conducted fieldwork among the Ik of Northern Uganda in Africa. In the Congo in 1970, they conducted fieldwork on the Nkumbi circumcision initiation ritual for boys and the Asa myth of origin among the Mbo of the Ituri forest.\nIn 1979, they traveled studying the concept of tourism as pilgrimage. Towles criticised Turnbull's semi-autobiographical work \"The Human Cycle\" (1983), which omitted all references to their relationship.\nTurnbull arranged for Towles' research to be published posthumously. It appeared in 1993 as \"Nkumbi initiation ritual and structure among the Mbo of Za\u00efre\" and as \"Asa: Myth of Origin of the Blood Brotherhood Among the Mbo of the Ituri Forest\", both in \"Annales\" of the Royal Museum for Central Africa (Tervuren, Belgium), vol. 137.\nLater years.\nLate in life Turnbull took up the political cause of death row inmates. After his partner's death, Turnbull donated all his belongings to the United Negro College Fund. He donated all their research materials, most of which were the product of his career, to the College of Charleston, insisting that the collection be known under Towles' name alone.\nIn 1989, Turnbull moved to Bloomington, Indiana, to participate in the building of Tibetan Cultural Center with his friend Thupten Jigme Norbu, elder brother of the 14th Dalai Lama. Later Turnbull moved to Dharamsala, India where he took the monks' vow of Tibetan Buddhism, given to him by the Dalai Lama. Turnbull's partner, Joseph A Towles died of AIDS in 1988, and Turnbull had Towles's book \"Nkumbi Initiation and Asa: Myth of Origin of the Blood Brotherhood Among the Mbo of the Ituri Forest\" published posthumously. Turnbull himself died of AIDS in 1994.\nControversy.\nSome later scholars criticized Turnbull's account of the Ik. Bernd Heine, who visited the tribe 20 years after Turnbull, provided new information in a 1985 article that appeared to discredit Turnbull's unflattering portrayal. According to a 2021 BBC radio documentary, Turnbull had drawn much of his image of the tribe from interviews with older Ik who contrasted their current situation with their memories of a better life prior to displacement, and therefore exaggerated the tribe's social dysfunction in the years Turnbull was present. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37808", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37808", "title": "Catalase", "text": "Enzyme decomposing hydrogen peroxide\nCatalase is a common enzyme found in nearly all living organisms exposed to oxygen (such as bacteria, plants, and animals) which catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen. It is a very important enzyme in protecting the cell from oxidative damage by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Catalase has one of the highest turnover numbers of all enzymes; one catalase molecule can convert millions of hydrogen peroxide molecules to water and oxygen each second.\nCatalase is a tetramer of four polypeptide chains, each over 500 amino acids long. It contains four iron-containing heme groups that allow the enzyme to react with hydrogen peroxide. The optimum pH for human catalase is approximately 7, and has a fairly broad maximum: the rate of reaction does not change appreciably between pH 6.8 and 7.5. The pH optimum for other catalases varies between 4 and 11 depending on the species. The optimum temperature also varies by species.\nStructure.\nHuman catalase forms a tetramer composed of four subunits, each of which can be conceptually divided into four domains. The extensive core of each subunit is generated by an eight-stranded antiparallel \u03b2-barrel (\u03b21-8), with nearest neighbor connectivity capped by \u03b2-barrel loops on one side and \u03b19 loops on the other. A helical domain at one face of the \u03b2-barrel is composed of four C-terminal helices (\u03b116, \u03b117, \u03b118, and \u03b119) and four helices derived from residues between \u03b24 and \u03b25 (\u03b14, \u03b15, \u03b16, and \u03b17). Alternative splicing may result in different protein variants.\nHistory.\nCatalase was first noticed in 1818 by Louis Jacques Th\u00e9nard, who discovered hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Th\u00e9nard suggested its breakdown was caused by an unknown substance. In 1900, Oscar Loew was the first to give it the name catalase, and found it in many plants and animals. In 1937 catalase from beef liver was crystallized by James B. Sumner and Alexander Dounce and the molecular weight was measured in 1938.\nThe amino acid sequence of bovine catalase was determined in 1969, and the three-dimensional structure in 1981.\nFunction.\nMolecular mechanism.\nWhile the complete mechanism of catalase is not currently known, the reaction is believed to occur in two stages:\n H2O2 + Fe(III)-E \u2192 H2O + O=Fe(IV)-E(.+)\n H2O2 + O=Fe(IV)-E(.+) \u2192 H2O + Fe(III)-E + O2\nHere Fe()-E represents the iron center of the heme group attached to the enzyme. Fe(IV)-E(.+) is a mesomeric form of Fe(V)-E, meaning the iron is not completely oxidized to +V, but receives some stabilising electron density from the heme ligand, which is then shown as a radical cation (.+).\nAs hydrogen peroxide enters the active site, it does interact with the amino acids Asn148 (asparagine at position 148) and His75, causing a proton (hydrogen ion) to transfer between the oxygen atoms. The free oxygen atom coordinates, freeing the newly formed water molecule and Fe(IV)=O. Fe(IV)=O reacts with a second hydrogen peroxide molecule to reform Fe(III)-E and produce water and oxygen. The reactivity of the iron center may be improved by the presence of the phenolate ligand of Tyr358 in the fifth coordination position, which can assist in the oxidation of the Fe(III) to Fe(IV). The efficiency of the reaction may also be improved by the interactions of His75 and Asn148 with reaction intermediates. The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide by catalase proceeds according to first-order kinetics, the rate being proportional to the hydrogen peroxide concentration.\nCatalase can also catalyze the oxidation, by hydrogen peroxide, of various metabolites and toxins, including formaldehyde, formic acid, phenols, acetaldehyde and alcohols. It does so according to the following reaction:\n H2O2 + H2R \u2192 2H2O + R\nThe exact mechanism of this reaction is not known.\nAny heavy metal ion (such as copper cations in copper(II) sulfate) can act as a noncompetitive inhibitor of catalase. However, \"Copper deficiency can lead to a reduction in catalase activity in tissues, such as heart and liver.\" Furthermore, the poison cyanide is a noncompetitive inhibitor of catalase at high concentrations of hydrogen peroxide.\nArsenate acts as an activator. Three-dimensional protein structures of the peroxidated catalase intermediates are available at the Protein Data Bank.\nCellular role.\nHydrogen peroxide is a harmful byproduct of many normal metabolic processes; to prevent damage to cells and tissues, it must be quickly converted into other, less dangerous substances. To this end, catalase is frequently used by cells to rapidly catalyze the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide into less-reactive gaseous oxygen and water molecules.\nMice genetically engineered to lack catalase are initially phenotypically normal. However, catalase deficiency in mice may increase the likelihood of developing obesity, fatty liver, and type 2 diabetes. Some humans have very low levels of catalase (acatalasia), yet show few ill effects.\nThe increased oxidative stress that occurs with aging in mice is alleviated by over-expression of catalase. Over-expressing mice do not exhibit the age-associated loss of spermatozoa, testicular germ and Sertoli cells seen in wild-type mice. Oxidative stress in wild-type mice ordinarily induces oxidative DNA damage (measured as 8-oxodG) in sperm with aging, but these damages are significantly reduced in aged catalase over-expressing mice. Furthermore, these over-expressing mice show no decrease in age-dependent number of pups per litter. Overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria extends the lifespan of mice.\nIn eukaryotes, catalase is usually located in a cellular organelle called the peroxisome. Peroxisomes in plant cells are involved in photorespiration (the use of oxygen and production of carbon dioxide) and symbiotic nitrogen fixation (the breaking apart of diatomic nitrogen (N2) to reactive nitrogen atoms). Hydrogen peroxide is used as a potent antimicrobial agent when cells are infected with a pathogen. Catalase-positive pathogens, such as \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\", \"Legionella pneumophila\", and \"Campylobacter jejuni\", make catalase to deactivate the peroxide radicals, thus allowing them to survive unharmed within the host.\nLike alcohol dehydrogenase, catalase converts ethanol to acetaldehyde, but it is unlikely that this reaction is physiologically significant.\nDistribution among organisms.\nThe large majority of known organisms use catalase in every organ, with particularly high concentrations occurring in the liver in mammals. Catalase is found primarily in peroxisomes and the cytosol of erythrocytes (and sometimes in mitochondria)\nAlmost all aerobic microorganisms use catalase. It is also present in some anaerobic microorganisms, such as \"Methanosarcina barkeri\". Catalase is also universal among plants and occurs in most fungi.\nOne unique use of catalase occurs in the bombardier beetle. This beetle has two sets of liquids that are stored separately in two paired glands. The larger of the pair, the storage chamber or reservoir, contains hydroquinones and hydrogen peroxide, while the smaller, the reaction chamber, contains catalases and peroxidases. To activate the noxious spray, the beetle mixes the contents of the two compartments, causing oxygen to be liberated from hydrogen peroxide. The oxygen oxidizes the hydroquinones and also acts as the propellant. The oxidation reaction is very exothermic (\u0394H = \u2212202.8 kJ/mol) and rapidly heats the mixture to the boiling point.\nLong-lived queens of the termite \"Reticulitermes speratus\" have significantly lower oxidative damage to their DNA than non-reproductive individuals (workers and soldiers). Queens have more than two times higher catalase activity and seven times higher expression levels of the catalase gene RsCAT1 than workers. It appears that the efficient antioxidant capability of termite queens can partly explain how they attain longer life.\nCatalase enzymes from various species have vastly differing optimum temperatures. Poikilothermic animals typically have catalases with optimum temperatures in the range of 15-25\u00a0\u00b0C, while mammalian or avian catalases might have optimum temperatures above 35\u00a0\u00b0C, and catalases from plants vary depending on their growth habit. In contrast, catalase isolated from the hyperthermophile archaeon \"Pyrobaculum calidifontis\" has a temperature optimum of 90\u00a0\u00b0C.\nClinical significance and application.\nCatalase is used in the food industry for removing hydrogen peroxide from milk prior to cheese production. Another use is in food wrappers, where it prevents food from oxidizing. Catalase is also used in the textile industry, removing hydrogen peroxide from fabrics to make sure the material is peroxide-free.\nA minor use is in contact lens hygiene \u2013 a few lens-cleaning products disinfect the lens using a hydrogen peroxide solution; a solution containing catalase is then used to decompose the hydrogen peroxide before the lens is used again.\nBacterial identification (catalase test).\nThe catalase test is one of the three main tests used by microbiologists to identify species of bacteria. If the bacteria possess catalase (i.e., are catalase-positive), bubbles of oxygen are observed when a small amount of bacterial isolate is added to hydrogen peroxide. The catalase test is done by placing a drop of hydrogen peroxide on a microscope slide. An applicator stick is touched to the colony, and the tip is then smeared onto the hydrogen peroxide drop.\nWhile the catalase test alone cannot identify a particular organism, it can aid identification when combined with other tests such as antibiotic resistance. The presence of catalase in bacterial cells depends on both the growth condition and the medium used to grow the cells.\nCapillary tubes may also be used. A small sample of bacteria is collected on the end of the capillary tube, without blocking the tube, to avoid false negative results. The opposite end is then dipped into hydrogen peroxide, which is drawn into the tube through capillary action, and turned upside down, so that the bacterial sample points downwards. The hand holding the tube is then tapped on the bench, moving the hydrogen peroxide down until it touches the bacteria. If bubbles form on contact, this indicates a positive catalase result. This test can detect catalase-positive bacteria at concentrations above about 105 cells/mL, and is simple to use.\nBacterial virulence.\nNeutrophils and other phagocytes use peroxide to kill bacteria. The enzyme NADPH oxidase generates superoxide within the phagosome, which is converted via hydrogen peroxide to other oxidising substances like hypochlorous acid which kill phagocytosed pathogens. In individuals with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), phagocytic peroxide production is impaired due to a defective NADPH oxidase system. Normal cellular metabolism will still produce a small amount of peroxide and this peroxide can be used to produce hypochlorous acid to eradicate the bacterial infection. However, if individuals with CGD are infected with catalase-positive bacteria, the bacterial catalase can destroy the excess peroxide before it can be used to produce other oxidising substances. In these individuals the pathogen survives and becomes a chronic infection. This chronic infection is typically surrounded by macrophages in an attempt to isolate the infection. This wall of macrophages surrounding a pathogen is called a granuloma. Many bacteria are catalase positive, but some are better catalase-producers than others. Some catalase-positive bacteria and fungi include: \"Nocardia, Pseudomonas, Listeria, Aspergillus, Candida, E. coli, Staphylococcus, Serratia, B. cepacia\" and \"H. pylori\".\nAcatalasia.\nAcatalasia is a condition caused by homozygous mutations in CAT, resulting in a lack of catalase. Symptoms are mild and include oral ulcers. A heterozygous CAT mutation results in lower, but still present catalase.\nGray hair.\nLow levels of catalase may play a role in the graying process of human hair. Hydrogen peroxide is naturally produced by the body and broken down by catalase. Hydrogen peroxide can accumulate in hair follicles and if catalase levels decline, this buildup can cause oxidative stress and graying. These low levels of catalase are associated with old age. Hydrogen peroxide interferes with the production of melanin, the pigment that gives hair its color.\nInteractions.\nCatalase has been shown to interact with the \"ABL2\" and \"Abl\" genes. Infection with the murine leukemia virus causes catalase activity to decline in the lungs, heart and kidneys of mice. Conversely, dietary fish oil increased catalase activity in the heart, and kidneys of mice.\nMethods for determining catalase activity.\nIn 1870, Schoenn discovered a formation of yellow color from the interaction of hydrogen peroxide with molybdate; then, from the middle of the 20th century, this reaction began to be used for colorimetric determination of unreacted hydrogen peroxide in the catalase activity assay. The reaction became widely used after publications by Korolyuk et al. (1988) and Goth (1991). The first paper describes serum catalase assay with no buffer in the reaction medium; the latter describes the procedure based on phosphate buffer as a reaction medium. Since phosphate ion reacts with ammonium molybdate, the use of MOPS buffer as a reaction medium is more appropriate.\nDirect UV measurement of the decrease in the concentration of hydrogen peroxide is also widely used after the publications by Beers &amp; Sizer and Aebi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37814", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37814", "title": "Dostoevsky", "text": ""}
{"id": "37815", "revid": "33612271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37815", "title": "Bulgakov", "text": "Bulgakov () is a Russian surname. Notable people with the surname include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname Bulgakov. "}
{"id": "37817", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37817", "title": "M\u00f6bius strip", "text": "Non-orientable surface with one edge\nIn mathematics, a M\u00f6bius strip, M\u00f6bius band, or M\u00f6bius loop is a surface that can be formed by attaching the ends of a strip of paper together with a half-twist. As a mathematical object, it was discovered by Johann Benedict Listing and August Ferdinand M\u00f6bius in 1858, but it had already appeared in Roman mosaics from the third century CE. The M\u00f6bius strip is a non-orientable surface, meaning that within it one cannot consistently distinguish clockwise from counterclockwise turns. Every non-orientable surface contains a M\u00f6bius strip.\nAs an abstract topological space, the M\u00f6bius strip can be embedded into three-dimensional Euclidean space in many different ways: a clockwise half-twist is different from a counterclockwise half-twist, and it can also be embedded with odd numbers of twists greater than one, or with a knotted centerline. Any two embeddings with the same knot for the centerline and the same number and direction of twists are topologically equivalent. All of these embeddings have only one side, but when embedded in other spaces, the M\u00f6bius strip may have two sides. It has only a single boundary curve.\nSeveral geometric constructions of the M\u00f6bius strip provide it with additional structure. It can be swept as a ruled surface by a line segment rotating in a rotating plane, with or without self-crossings. A thin paper strip with its ends joined to form a M\u00f6bius strip can bend smoothly as a developable surface or be folded flat; the flattened M\u00f6bius strips include the trihexaflexagon. The Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip is a minimal surface in a hypersphere, and the Meeks M\u00f6bius strip is a self-intersecting minimal surface in ordinary Euclidean space. Both the Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip and another self-intersecting M\u00f6bius strip, the cross-cap, have a circular boundary. A M\u00f6bius strip without its boundary, called an open M\u00f6bius strip, can form surfaces of constant curvature. Certain highly symmetric spaces whose points represent lines in the plane have the shape of a M\u00f6bius strip.\nThe many applications of M\u00f6bius strips include mechanical belts that wear evenly on both sides, dual-track roller coasters whose carriages alternate between the two tracks, and world maps printed so that antipodes appear opposite each other. M\u00f6bius strips appear in molecules and devices with novel electrical and electromechanical properties, and have been used to prove impossibility results in social choice theory. In popular culture, M\u00f6bius strips appear in artworks by M. C. Escher, Max Bill, and others, and in the design of the recycling symbol. Many architectural concepts have been inspired by the M\u00f6bius strip, including the building design for the NASCAR Hall of Fame. Performers including Harry Blackstone Sr. and Thomas Nelson Downs have based stage magic tricks on the properties of the M\u00f6bius strip. The canons of J. S. Bach have been analyzed using M\u00f6bius strips. Many works of speculative fiction feature M\u00f6bius strips; more generally, a plot structure based on the M\u00f6bius strip, of events that repeat with a twist, is common in fiction.\nHistory.\nThe discovery of the M\u00f6bius strip as a mathematical object is attributed independently to the German mathematicians Johann Benedict Listing and August Ferdinand M\u00f6bius in 1858. However, it had been known long before, both as a physical object and in artistic depictions; in particular, it can be seen in several Roman mosaics from the third century CE. In many cases these merely depict coiled ribbons as boundaries. When the number of coils is odd, these ribbons are M\u00f6bius strips, but for an even number of coils they are topologically equivalent to untwisted rings. Therefore, whether the ribbon is a M\u00f6bius strip may be coincidental, rather than a deliberate choice. In at least one case, a ribbon with different colors on different sides was drawn with an odd number of coils, forcing its artist to make a clumsy fix at the point where the colors did not match up. Another mosaic from the town of Sentinum (depicted) shows the zodiac, held by the god Aion, as a band with only a single twist. There is no clear evidence that the one-sidedness of this visual representation of celestial time was intentional; it could have been chosen merely as a way to make all of the signs of the zodiac appear on the visible side of the strip. Some other ancient depictions of the ourobouros or of figure-eight-shaped decorations are also alleged to depict M\u00f6bius strips, but whether they were intended to depict flat strips of any type is unclear.\nIndependently of the mathematical tradition, machinists have long known that mechanical belts wear half as quickly when they form M\u00f6bius strips, because they use the entire surface of the belt rather than only the inner surface of an untwisted belt. Additionally, such a belt may be less prone to curling from side to side. An early written description of this technique dates to 1871, which is after the first mathematical publications regarding the M\u00f6bius strip. Much earlier, an image of a chain pump in a work of Ismail al-Jazari from 1206 depicts a M\u00f6bius strip configuration for its drive chain. Another use of this surface was made by seamstresses in Paris (at an unspecified date): they initiated novices by requiring them to stitch a M\u00f6bius strip as a collar onto a garment.\nProperties.\nThe M\u00f6bius strip has several curious properties. It is a non-orientable surface: if an asymmetric two-dimensional object slides one time around the strip, it returns to its starting position as its mirror image. In particular, a curved arrow pointing clockwise (\u21bb) would return as an arrow pointing counterclockwise (\u21ba), implying that, within the M\u00f6bius strip, it is impossible to consistently define what it means to be clockwise or counterclockwise. It is the simplest non-orientable surface: any other surface is non-orientable if and only if it has a M\u00f6bius strip as a subset. Relatedly, when embedded into Euclidean space, the M\u00f6bius strip has only one side. A three-dimensional object that slides one time around the surface of the strip is not mirrored, but instead returns to the same point of the strip on what appears locally to be its other side, showing that both positions are really part of a single side. This behavior is different from familiar orientable surfaces in three dimensions such as those modeled by flat sheets of paper, cylindrical drinking straws, or hollow balls, for which one side of the surface is not connected to the other. However, this is a property of its embedding into space rather than an intrinsic property of the M\u00f6bius strip itself: there exist other topological spaces in which the M\u00f6bius strip can be embedded so that it has two sides. For instance, if the front and back faces of a cube are glued to each other with a left-right mirror reflection, the result is a three-dimensional topological space (the Cartesian product of a M\u00f6bius strip with an interval) in which the top and bottom halves of the cube can be separated from each other by a two-sided M\u00f6bius strip. In contrast to disks, spheres, and cylinders, for which it is possible to simultaneously embed an uncountable set of disjoint copies into three-dimensional space, only a countable number of M\u00f6bius strips can be simultaneously embedded.\nA path along the edge of a M\u00f6bius strip, traced until it returns to its starting point on the edge, includes all boundary points of the M\u00f6bius strip in a single continuous curve. For a M\u00f6bius strip formed by gluing and twisting a rectangle, it has twice the length of the centerline of the strip. In this sense, the M\u00f6bius strip is different from an untwisted ring and like a circular disk in having only one boundary. A M\u00f6bius strip in Euclidean space cannot be moved or stretched into its mirror image; it is a chiral object with right- or left-handedness. M\u00f6bius strips with odd numbers of half-twists greater than one, or that are knotted before gluing, are distinct as embedded subsets of three-dimensional space, even though they are all equivalent as two-dimensional topological surfaces. More precisely, two M\u00f6bius strips are equivalently embedded in three-dimensional space when their centerlines determine the same knot and they have the same number of twists as each other. With an even number of twists, however, one obtains a different topological surface, called the annulus.\nThe M\u00f6bius strip can be continuously transformed into its centerline, by making it narrower while fixing the points on the centerline. This transformation is an example of a deformation retraction, and its existence means that the M\u00f6bius strip has many of the same properties as its centerline, which is topologically a circle. In particular, its fundamental group is the same as the fundamental group of a circle, an infinite cyclic group. Therefore, paths on the M\u00f6bius strip that start and end at the same point can be distinguished topologically (up to homotopy) only by the number of times they loop around the strip.\nCutting a M\u00f6bius strip along the centerline with a pair of scissors yields one long strip with four half-twists in it (relative to an untwisted annulus or cylinder) rather than two separate strips. Two of the half-twists come from the fact that this thinner strip goes two times through the half-twist in the original M\u00f6bius strip, and the other two come from the way the two halves of the thinner strip wrap around each other. The result is not a M\u00f6bius strip, but instead is topologically equivalent to a cylinder. Cutting this double-twisted strip again along its centerline produces two linked double-twisted strips. If, instead, a M\u00f6bius strip is cut lengthwise, a third of the way across its width, it produces two linked strips. One of the two is a central, thinner, M\u00f6bius strip, while the other has two half-twists. These interlinked shapes, formed by lengthwise slices of M\u00f6bius strips with varying widths, are sometimes called \"paradromic\" \"rings\".\nThe M\u00f6bius strip can be cut into six mutually adjacent regions, showing that maps on the surface of the M\u00f6bius strip can sometimes require six colors, in contrast to the four color theorem for the plane. Six colors are always enough. This result is part of the Ringel\u2013Youngs theorem, which states how many colors each topological surface needs. The edges and vertices of these six regions form Tietze's graph, which is a dual graph on this surface for the six-vertex complete graph but cannot be drawn without crossings on a plane. Another family of graphs that can be embedded on the M\u00f6bius strip, but not on the plane, are the M\u00f6bius ladders, the boundaries of subdivisions of the M\u00f6bius strip into rectangles meeting end-to-end. These include the utility graph, a six-vertex complete bipartite graph whose embedding into the M\u00f6bius strip shows that, unlike in the plane, the three utilities problem can be solved on a transparent M\u00f6bius strip. The Euler characteristic of the M\u00f6bius strip is zero, meaning that for any subdivision of the strip by vertices and edges into regions, the numbers formula_1, formula_2, and formula_3 of vertices, edges, and regions satisfy formula_4. For instance, Tietze's graph has formula_5 vertices, formula_6 edges, and formula_7 regions; \nConstructions.\nThere are many different ways of defining geometric surfaces with the topology of the M\u00f6bius strip, yielding realizations with additional geometric properties.\nSweeping a line segment.\nA M\u00f6bius strip swept out by a rotating line segment in a rotating plane\nPl\u00fccker's conoid swept out by a different motion of a line segment\nOne way to embed the M\u00f6bius strip in three-dimensional Euclidean space is to sweep it out by a line segment rotating in a plane, which in turn rotates around one of its lines. For the swept surface to meet up with itself after a half-twist, the line segment should rotate around its center at half the angular velocity of the plane's rotation. This can be described as a parametric surface defined by equations for the Cartesian coordinates of its points,\nformula_8\nfor formula_9 and formula_10,\nwhere one parameter formula_11 describes the rotation angle of the plane around its central axis and the other parameter formula_12 describes the position of a point along the rotating line segment. This produces a M\u00f6bius strip of width 1, whose center circle has radius 1, lies in the formula_13-plane and is centered at formula_14. The same method can produce M\u00f6bius strips with any odd number of half-twists, by rotating the segment more quickly in its plane. The rotating segment sweeps out a circular disk in the plane that it rotates within, and the M\u00f6bius strip that it generates forms a slice through the solid torus swept out by this disk. Because of the one-sidedness of this slice, the sliced torus remains connected.\nA line or line segment swept in a different motion, rotating in a horizontal plane around the origin as it moves up and down, forms Pl\u00fccker's conoid or cylindroid, an algebraic ruled surface in the form of a self-crossing M\u00f6bius strip. It has applications in the design of gears.\nPolyhedral surfaces and flat foldings.\nA strip of paper can form a flattened M\u00f6bius strip in the plane by folding it at formula_15 angles so that its center line lies along an equilateral triangle, and attaching the ends. The shortest strip for which this is possible consists of three equilateral triangles, folded at the edges where two triangles meet. Its aspect ratio\u00a0\u2013 the ratio of the strip's length to its width\u00a0\u2013 is formula_16, and the same folding method works for any larger aspect ratio. For a strip of nine equilateral triangles, the result is a trihexaflexagon, which can be flexed to reveal different parts of its surface. For strips too short to apply this method directly, one can first \"accordion fold\" the strip in its wide direction back and forth using an even number of folds. With two folds, for example, a formula_17 strip would become a formula_18 folded strip whose cross section is in the shape of an \"N\" and would remain an \"N\" after a half-twist. The narrower accordion-folded strip can then be folded and joined in the same way that a longer strip would be.\nThe M\u00f6bius strip can also be embedded as a polyhedral surface in space or flat-folded in the plane, with only five triangular faces sharing five vertices. In this sense, it is simpler than the cylinder, which requires six triangles and six vertices, even when represented more abstractly as a simplicial complex. A five-triangle M\u00f6bius strip can be represented most symmetrically by five of the ten equilateral triangles of a four-dimensional regular simplex. This four-dimensional polyhedral M\u00f6bius strip is the only \"tight\" M\u00f6bius strip, one that is fully four-dimensional and for which all cuts by hyperplanes separate it into two parts that are topologically equivalent to disks or circles.\nOther polyhedral embeddings of M\u00f6bius strips include one with four convex quadrilaterals as faces, another with three non-convex quadrilateral faces, and one using the vertices and center point of a regular octahedron, with a triangular boundary. Every abstract triangulation of the projective plane can be embedded into 3D as a polyhedral M\u00f6bius strip with a triangular boundary after removing one of its faces; an example is the six-vertex projective plane obtained by adding one vertex to the five-vertex M\u00f6bius strip, connected by triangles to each of its boundary edges. However, not every abstract triangulation of the M\u00f6bius strip can be represented geometrically, as a polyhedral surface. To be realizable, it is necessary and sufficient that there be no two disjoint non-contractible 3-cycles in the triangulation.\nSmoothly embedded rectangles.\nA rectangular M\u00f6bius strip, made by attaching the ends of a paper rectangle, can be embedded smoothly into three-dimensional space whenever its aspect ratio is greater than formula_16, the same ratio as for the flat-folded equilateral-triangle version of the M\u00f6bius strip. This flat triangular embedding can lift to a smooth embedding in three dimensions, in which the strip lies flat in three parallel planes between three cylindrical rollers, each tangent to two of the planes. Mathematically, a smoothly embedded sheet of paper can be modeled as a developable surface, that can bend but cannot stretch. As its aspect ratio decreases toward formula_20, all smooth embeddings seem to approach the same triangular form.\nThe lengthwise folds of an accordion-folded flat M\u00f6bius strip prevent it from forming a three-dimensional embedding in which the layers are separated from each other and bend smoothly without crumpling or stretching away from the folds. Instead, unlike in the flat-folded case, there is a lower limit to the aspect ratio of smooth rectangular M\u00f6bius strips. Their aspect ratio cannot be less than formula_21, even if self-intersections are allowed. Self-intersecting smooth M\u00f6bius strips exist for any aspect ratio above this bound. Without self-intersections, the aspect ratio must be at least\nformula_22\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in mathematics\nCan a formula_23 paper rectangle be glued end-to-end to form a smooth M\u00f6bius strip embedded in space?\u2009\nMore unsolved problems in mathematics\nFor aspect ratios between this bound and formula_20, it has been an open problem whether smooth embeddings, without self-intersection, exist. In 2023, Richard Schwartz announced a proof that they do not exist, but this result still awaits peer review and publication. If the requirement of smoothness is relaxed to allow continuously differentiable surfaces, the Nash\u2013Kuiper theorem implies that any two opposite edges of any rectangle can be glued to form an embedded M\u00f6bius strip, no matter how small the aspect ratio becomes. The limiting case, a surface obtained from an infinite strip of the plane between two parallel lines, glued with the opposite orientation to each other, is called the \"unbounded M\u00f6bius strip\" or the real tautological line bundle. Although it has no smooth closed embedding into three-dimensional space, it can be embedded smoothly as a closed subset of four-dimensional Euclidean space.\nThe minimum-energy shape of a smooth M\u00f6bius strip glued from a rectangle does not have a known analytic description, but can be calculated numerically, and has been the subject of much study in plate theory since the initial work on this subject in 1930 by Michael Sadowsky. It is also possible to find algebraic surfaces that contain rectangular developable M\u00f6bius strips.\nMaking the boundary circular.\nThe edge, or boundary, of a M\u00f6bius strip is topologically equivalent to a circle. In common forms of the M\u00f6bius strip, it has a different shape from a circle, but it is unknotted, and therefore the whole strip can be stretched without crossing itself to make the edge perfectly circular. One such example is based on the topology of the Klein bottle, a one-sided surface with no boundary that cannot be embedded into three-dimensional space, but can be immersed (allowing the surface to cross itself in certain restricted ways). A Klein bottle is the surface that results when two M\u00f6bius strips are glued together edge-to-edge, and\u00a0\u2013 reversing that process\u00a0\u2013 a Klein bottle can be sliced along a carefully chosen cut to produce two M\u00f6bius strips. For a form of the Klein bottle known as Lawson's Klein bottle, the curve along which it is sliced can be made circular, resulting in M\u00f6bius strips with circular edges.\nLawson's Klein bottle is a self-crossing minimal surface in the unit hypersphere of 4-dimensional space, the set of points of the form formula_25 for formula_26. Half of this Klein bottle, the subset with formula_27, gives a M\u00f6bius strip embedded in the hypersphere as a minimal surface with a great circle as its boundary. This embedding is sometimes called the \"Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip\" after topologists Sue Goodman and Daniel Asimov, who discovered it in the 1970s. Geometrically Lawson's Klein bottle can be constructed by sweeping a great circle through a great-circular motion in the 3-sphere, and the Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip is obtained by sweeping a semicircle instead of a circle, or equivalently by slicing the Klein bottle along a circle that is perpendicular to all of the swept circles. Stereographic projection transforms this shape from a three-dimensional spherical space into three-dimensional Euclidean space, preserving the circularity of its boundary. The most symmetric projection is obtained by using a projection point that lies on that great circle that runs through the midpoint of each of the semicircles, but produces an unbounded embedding with the projection point removed from its centerline. Instead, leaving the Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip unprojected, in the 3-sphere, leaves it with an infinite group of symmetries isomorphic to the orthogonal group formula_28, the group of symmetries of a circle.\nThe Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip extends on all sides of its boundary circle, unavoidably if the surface is to avoid crossing itself. Another form of the M\u00f6bius strip, called the cross-cap or crosscap, also has a circular boundary, but otherwise stays on only one side of the plane of this circle, making it more convenient for attaching onto circular holes in other surfaces. In order to do so, it crosses itself. It can be formed by removing a quadrilateral from the top of a hemisphere, orienting the edges of the quadrilateral in alternating directions, and then gluing opposite pairs of these edges consistently with this orientation. The two parts of the surface formed by the two glued pairs of edges cross each other with a pinch point like that of a Whitney umbrella at each end of the crossing segment, the same topological structure seen in Pl\u00fccker's conoid.\nSurfaces of constant curvature.\nThe open M\u00f6bius strip is the relative interior of a standard M\u00f6bius strip, formed by omitting the points on its boundary edge. It may be given a Riemannian geometry of constant positive, negative, or zero Gaussian curvature. The cases of negative and zero curvature form geodesically complete surfaces, which means that all geodesics (\"straight lines\" on the surface) may be extended indefinitely in either direction.\nAn open strip with zero curvature may be constructed by gluing the opposite sides of a plane strip between two parallel lines, described above as the tautological line bundle. The resulting metric makes the open M\u00f6bius strip into a (geodesically) complete flat surface (i.e., having zero Gaussian curvature everywhere). This is the unique metric on the M\u00f6bius strip, up to uniform scaling, that is both flat and complete. It is the quotient space of a plane by a glide reflection, and (together with the plane, cylinder, torus, and Klein bottle) is one of only five two-dimensional complete flat manifolds.\nThe open M\u00f6bius strip also admits complete metrics of constant negative curvature. One way to see this is to begin with the upper half plane (Poincar\u00e9) model of the hyperbolic plane, a geometry of constant curvature whose lines are represented in the model by semicircles that meet the formula_29-axis at right angles. Take the subset of the upper half-plane between any two nested semicircles, and identify the outer semicircle with the left-right reversal of the inner semicircle. The result is topologically a complete and non-compact M\u00f6bius strip with constant negative curvature. It is a \"nonstandard\" complete hyperbolic surface in the sense that it contains a complete hyperbolic half-plane (actually two, on opposite sides of the axis of glide-reflection), and is one of only 13 nonstandard surfaces. Again, this can be understood as the quotient of the hyperbolic plane by a glide reflection.\nA M\u00f6bius strip of constant positive curvature cannot be complete, since it is known that the only complete surfaces of constant positive curvature are the sphere and the projective plane. However, in a sense it is only one point away from being a complete surface, as the open M\u00f6bius strip is homeomorphic to the once-punctured projective plane, the surface obtained by removing any one point from the projective plane.\nThe minimal surfaces are described as having constant zero mean curvature instead of constant Gaussian curvature. The Sudanese M\u00f6bius strip was constructed as a minimal surface bounded by a great circle in a 3-sphere, but there is also a unique complete (boundaryless) minimal surface immersed in Euclidean space that has the topology of an open M\u00f6bius strip. It is called the Meeks M\u00f6bius strip, after its 1982 description by William Hamilton Meeks, III. Although globally unstable as a minimal surface, small patches of it, bounded by non-contractible curves within the surface, can form stable embedded M\u00f6bius strips as minimal surfaces. Both the Meeks M\u00f6bius strip, and every higher-dimensional minimal surface with the topology of the M\u00f6bius strip, can be constructed using solutions to the Bj\u00f6rling problem, which defines a minimal surface uniquely from its boundary curve and tangent planes along this curve.\nSpaces of lines.\nThe family of lines in the plane can be given the structure of a smooth space, with each line represented as a point in this space. The resulting space of lines is topologically equivalent to the open M\u00f6bius strip. One way to see this is to extend the Euclidean plane to the real projective plane by adding one more line, the line at infinity. By projective duality the space of lines in the projective plane is equivalent to its space of points, the projective plane itself. Removing the line at infinity, to produce the space of Euclidean lines, punctures this space of projective lines. Therefore, the space of Euclidean lines is a punctured projective plane, which is one of the forms of the open M\u00f6bius strip. The space of lines in the hyperbolic plane can be parameterized by unordered pairs of distinct points on a circle, the pairs of points at infinity of each line. This space, again, has the topology of an open M\u00f6bius strip.\nThese spaces of lines are highly symmetric. The symmetries of Euclidean lines include the affine transformations, and the symmetries of hyperbolic lines include the M\u00f6bius transformations. The affine transformations and M\u00f6bius transformations both form 6-dimensional Lie groups, topological spaces having a compatible algebraic structure describing the composition of symmetries. Because every line in the plane is symmetric to every other line, the open M\u00f6bius strip is a homogeneous space, a space with symmetries that take every point to every other point. Homogeneous spaces of Lie groups are called solvmanifolds, and the M\u00f6bius strip can be used as a counterexample, showing that not every solvmanifold is a nilmanifold, and that not every solvmanifold can be factored into a direct product of a compact solvmanifold with formula_30. These symmetries also provide another way to construct the M\u00f6bius strip itself, as a \"group model\" of these Lie groups. A group model consists of a Lie group and a stabilizer subgroup of its action; contracting the cosets of the subgroup to points produces a space with the same topology as the underlying homogenous space. In the case of the symmetries of Euclidean lines, the stabilizer of the formula_29-axis consists of all symmetries that take the axis to itself. Each line formula_32 corresponds to a coset, the set of symmetries that map formula_32 to the formula_29-axis. Therefore, the quotient space, a space that has one point per coset and inherits its topology from the space of symmetries, is the same as the space of lines, and is again an open M\u00f6bius strip.\nApplications.\nBeyond the already-discussed applications of M\u00f6bius strips to the design of mechanical belts that wear evenly on their entire surface, and of the Pl\u00fccker conoid to the design of gears, other applications of M\u00f6bius strips include:\nScientists have also studied the energetics of soap films shaped as M\u00f6bius strips, the chemical synthesis of molecules with a M\u00f6bius strip shape, and the formation of larger nanoscale M\u00f6bius strips using DNA origami.\nIn popular culture.\nTwo-dimensional artworks featuring the M\u00f6bius strip include an untitled 1947 painting by Corrado Cagli (memorialized in a poem by Charles Olson), and two prints by M. C. Escher: \"M\u00f6bius Band I\" (1961), depicting three folded flatworms biting each other's tails; and \"M\u00f6bius Band II\" (1963), depicting ants crawling around a lemniscate-shaped M\u00f6bius strip. It is also a popular subject of mathematical sculpture, including works by Max Bill (\"Endless Ribbon\", 1953), Jos\u00e9 de Rivera (\"Infinity\", 1967), and Sebasti\u00e1n. A trefoil-knotted M\u00f6bius strip was used in John Robinson's \"Immortality\" (1982). Charles O. Perry's \"Continuum\" (1976) is one of several pieces by Perry exploring variations of the M\u00f6bius strip.\nBecause of their easily recognized form, M\u00f6bius strips are a common element of graphic design. The familiar three-arrow logo for recycling, designed in 1970, is based on the smooth triangular form of the M\u00f6bius strip, as was the logo for the environmentally-themed Expo '74. Some variations of the recycling symbol use a different embedding with three half-twists instead of one, and the original version of the Google Drive logo used a flat-folded three-twist M\u00f6bius strip, as have other similar designs. The Brazilian Instituto Nacional de Matem\u00e1tica Pura e Aplicada (IMPA) uses a stylized smooth M\u00f6bius strip as its logo, and has a matching large sculpture of a M\u00f6bius strip on display in its building. The M\u00f6bius strip has also featured in the artwork for postage stamps from countries including Brazil, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.\nM\u00f6bius strips have been a frequent inspiration for the architectural design of buildings and bridges. However, many of these are projects or conceptual designs rather than constructed objects, or stretch their interpretation of the M\u00f6bius strip beyond its recognizability as a mathematical form or a functional part of the architecture. An example is the National Library of Kazakhstan, for which a building was planned in the shape of a thickened M\u00f6bius strip but refinished with a different design after the original architects pulled out of the project. One notable building incorporating a M\u00f6bius strip is the NASCAR Hall of Fame, which is surrounded by a large twisted ribbon of stainless steel acting as a fa\u00e7ade and canopy, and evoking the curved shapes of racing tracks. On a smaller scale, \"Moebius Chair\" (2006) by Pedro Reyes is a courting bench whose base and sides have the form of a M\u00f6bius strip. As a form of mathematics and fiber arts, scarves have been knit into M\u00f6bius strips since the work of Elizabeth Zimmermann in the early 1980s. In food styling, M\u00f6bius strips have been used for slicing bagels, making loops out of bacon, and creating new shapes for pasta.\nAlthough mathematically the M\u00f6bius strip and the fourth dimension are both purely spatial concepts, they have often been invoked in speculative fiction as the basis for a time loop into which unwary victims may become trapped. Examples of this trope include Martin Gardner's \"No-Sided Professor\" (1946), Armin Joseph Deutsch's \"A Subway Named Mobius\" (1950) and the film \"Moebius\" (1996) based on it. An entire world shaped like a M\u00f6bius strip is the setting of Arthur C. Clarke's \"The Wall of Darkness\" (1946), while conventional M\u00f6bius strips are used as clever inventions in multiple stories of William Hazlett Upson from the 1940s. Other works of fiction have been analyzed as having a M\u00f6bius strip\u2013like structure, in which elements of the plot repeat with a twist; these include Marcel Proust's \"In Search of Lost Time\" (1913\u20131927), Luigi Pirandello's \"Six Characters in Search of an Author\" (1921), Frank Capra's \"It's a Wonderful Life\" (1946), John Barth's \"Lost in the Funhouse\" (1968), Samuel R. Delany's \"Dhalgren\" (1975) and the film \"Donnie Darko\" (2001).\nOne of the musical canons by J. S. Bach, the fifth of 14 canons (BWV 1087) discovered in 1974 in Bach's copy of the \"Goldberg Variations\", features a glide-reflect symmetry in which each voice in the canon repeats, with inverted notes, the same motif from two measures earlier. Because of this symmetry, this canon can be thought of as having its score written on a M\u00f6bius strip. In music theory, tones that differ by an octave are generally considered to be equivalent notes, and the space of possible notes forms a circle, the chromatic circle. Because the M\u00f6bius strip is the configuration space of two unordered points on a circle, the space of all two-note chords takes the shape of a M\u00f6bius strip. This conception, and generalizations to more points, is a significant application of orbifolds to music theory. Modern musical groups taking their name from the M\u00f6bius strip include American electronic rock trio Mobius Band and Norwegian progressive rock band Ring Van M\u00f6bius.\nThe \"M\u00f6bius flip\" is a difficult acrobatic skiing trick, involving a full flip with a twist. In \"The Moebius Flip\", a 1969 experimental short ski film, skiers flip into an alternate reality and must complete the titular trick to return home.\nM\u00f6bius strips and their properties have been used in the design of stage magic. One such trick, known as the Afghan bands, uses the fact that the M\u00f6bius strip remains in one piece as a single strip when cut lengthwise. It originated in the 1880s, and was very popular in the first half of the twentieth century. Many versions of this trick exist and have been performed by famous illusionists such as Harry Blackstone Sr. and Thomas Nelson Downs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37818", "revid": "256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37818", "title": "Charlimagne", "text": ""}
{"id": "37819", "revid": "256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37819", "title": "Charlimaine", "text": ""}
{"id": "37820", "revid": "256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37820", "title": "Charlamaine", "text": ""}
{"id": "37821", "revid": "256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37821", "title": "Charlemaine", "text": ""}
{"id": "37823", "revid": "157842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37823", "title": "Bootstarpping", "text": ""}
{"id": "37824", "revid": "302677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37824", "title": "SAT (disambiguation)", "text": "The SAT is a standardized college admissions test in the United States.\nSAT or Sat may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37825", "revid": "36248872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37825", "title": "CNF", "text": "CNF may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScience.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37828", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37828", "title": "DNF", "text": "DNF may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37829", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37829", "title": "3-CNF", "text": ""}
{"id": "37830", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37830", "title": "Solid-propellant rocket", "text": "Rocket with a motor that uses solid propellants\nA solid-propellant rocket or solid rocket is a rocket with a rocket engine that uses solid propellants (fuel/oxidizer). The earliest rockets were solid-fuel rockets powered by gunpowder. The inception of gunpowder rockets in warfare can be credited to the ancient Chinese, and in the 13th century, the Mongols played a pivotal role in facilitating their westward adoption.\nAll rockets used some form of solid or powdered propellant until the 20th century, when liquid-propellant rockets offered more efficient and controllable alternatives. Because of their simplicity and reliability, solid rockets are still used today in military armaments worldwide, model rockets, solid rocket boosters and on larger applications.\nSince solid-fuel rockets can remain in storage for an extended period without much propellant degradation, and since they almost always launch reliably, they have been frequently used in military applications such as missiles. The lower performance of solid propellants (as compared to liquids) does not favor their use as primary propulsion in modern medium-to-large launch vehicles customarily used for commercial satellites and major space probes. Solids are, however, frequently used as strap-on boosters to increase payload capacity or as spin-stabilized add-on upper stages when higher-than-normal velocities are required. Solid rockets are used as light launch vehicles for low Earth orbit (LEO) payloads under 2 tons or escape payloads up to .\nBasic concepts.\nA simple solid rocket motor consists of a casing, nozzle, grain (propellant charge), and igniter.\nThe solid grain mass burns in a predictable fashion to produce exhaust gases, the flow of which is described by Taylor\u2013Culick flow. The nozzle dimensions are calculated to maintain a design chamber pressure, while producing thrust from the exhaust gases.\nOnce ignited, a simple solid rocket motor cannot be shut off, as it contains all the ingredients necessary for combustion within the chamber in which they are burned. More advanced solid rocket motors can be throttled, or extinguished and re-ignited, by control of the nozzle geometry or through the use of vent ports. Further, pulsed rocket motors that burn in segments, and that can be ignited upon command are available.\nModern designs may also include a steerable nozzle for guidance, avionics, recovery hardware (parachutes), self-destruct mechanisms, APUs, controllable tactical motors, controllable divert and attitude control motors, and thermal management materials.\nHistory.\nThe medieval Song dynasty Chinese invented a very primitive form of solid-propellant rocket. Illustrations and descriptions in the 14th century Chinese military treatise \"Huolongjing\" by the Ming dynasty military writer and philosopher Jiao Yu confirm that the Chinese in 1232 used proto solid propellant rockets then known as \"fire arrows\" to drive back the Mongols during the Siege of Kaifeng (1232). Each arrow took a primitive form of a simple, solid-propellant rocket tube that was filled with gunpowder. One open end allowed the gas to escape and was attached to a long stick that acted as a guidance system for flight direction control.\nThe first rockets with tubes of cast iron were used by the Kingdom of Mysore under Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan in the 1750s. These rockets had a reach of targets up to a mile and a half away. These were extremely effective in the Second Anglo-Mysore War that ended in a humiliating defeat for the British East India Company. Word of the success of the Mysore rockets against the British triggered research in England, France, Ireland and elsewhere. When the British finally conquered the fort of Srirangapatana in 1799, hundreds of rockets were shipped off to the Royal Arsenal near London to be reverse-engineered. This led to the first industrial manufacture of military rockets with the Congreve rocket in 1804.\nIn 1921 the Soviet research and development laboratory Gas Dynamics Laboratory began developing solid-propellant rockets, which resulted in the first launch in 1928, that flew for approximately 1,300 metres. These rockets were used in 1931 for the world's first successful use of rockets to assist take-off of aircraft. The research continued from 1933 by the Reactive Scientific Research Institute (RNII) with the development of the RS-82 and RS-132 rockets, including designing several variations for ground-to-air, ground-to-ground, air-to-ground and air-to-air combat. The earliest known use by the Soviet Air Force of aircraft-launched unguided anti-aircraft rockets in combat against heavier-than-air aircraft took place in August 1939, during the Battle of Khalkhin Gol. In June 1938, the RNII began developing a multiple rocket launcher based on the RS-132 rocket. In August 1939, the completed product was the BM-13 / Katyusha rocket launcher. Towards the end of 1938 the first significant large scale testing of the rocket launchers took place, 233 rockets of various types were used. A salvo of rockets could completely straddle a target at a range of . By the end of World War II total production of rocket launchers reached about 10,000. with 12 million rockets of the RS type produced for the Soviet armed forces.\nIn the United States modern castable composite solid rocket motors were invented by the American aerospace engineer Jack Parsons at Caltech in 1942 when he replaced double base propellant with roofing asphalt and potassium perchlorate. This made possible slow-burning rocket motors of adequate size and with sufficient shelf-life for jet-assisted take off applications. Charles Bartley, employed at JPL (Caltech), substituted curable synthetic rubber for the gooey asphalt, creating a flexible but geometrically stable load-bearing propellant grain that bonded securely to the motor casing. This made possible much larger solid rocket motors. Atlantic Research Corporation significantly boosted composite propellant Isp in 1954 by increasing the amount of powdered aluminium in the propellant to as much as 20%.\nSolid-propellant rocket technology got its largest boost in technical innovation, size and capability with the various mid-20th century government initiatives to develop increasingly capable military missiles. After initial designs of ballistic missile military technology designed with liquid-propellant rockets in the 1940s and 1950s, both the Soviet Union and the United States embarked on major initiatives to develop solid-propellant local, regional, and intercontinental ballistic missiles, including solid-propellant missiles that could be launched from air or sea. Many other governments also developed these military technologies over the next 50 years.\nBy the later 1980s and continuing to 2020, these government-developed highly-capable solid rocket technologies have been applied to orbital spaceflight by many government-directed programs, most often as booster rockets to add extra thrust during the early ascent of their primarily liquid rocket launch vehicles. Some designs have had solid rocket upper stages as well. Examples flying in the 2010s include the European Ariane 5, US Atlas V and Space Shuttle, and Japan's H-II.\nThe largest solid rocket motors ever built were Aerojet's three monolithic solid motors cast in Florida. Motors 260 SL-1 and SL-2 were in diameter, long, weighed , and had a maximum thrust of . Burn duration was two minutes. The nozzle throat was large enough to walk through standing up. The motor was capable of serving as a 1-to-1 replacement for the 8-engine Saturn I liquid-propellant first stage but was never used as such. Motor 260 SL-3 was of similar length and weight but had a maximum thrust of and a shorter duration.\nDesign.\nDesign begins with the total impulse required, which determines the fuel and oxidizer mass. Grain geometry and chemistry are then chosen to satisfy the required motor characteristics.\nThe following are chosen or solved simultaneously. The results are exact dimensions for grain, nozzle, and case geometries:\nThe grain may or may not be bonded to the casing. Case-bonded motors are more difficult to design, since the deformation of the case and the grain under flight must be compatible.\nCommon modes of failure in solid rocket motors include fracture of the grain, failure of case bonding, and air pockets in the grain. All of these produce an instantaneous increase in burn surface area and a corresponding increase in exhaust gas production rate and pressure, which may rupture the casing.\nAnother failure mode is casing seal failure. Seals are required in casings that have to be opened to load the grain. Once a seal fails, hot gas will erode the escape path and result in failure. This was the cause of the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster.\nGrain geometry.\nSolid rocket fuel deflagrates from the surface of exposed propellant in the combustion chamber. In this fashion, the geometry of the propellant inside the rocket motor plays an important role in the overall motor performance. As the surface of the propellant burns, the shape evolves (a subject of study in internal ballistics), most often changing the propellant surface area exposed to the combustion gases. Since the propellant volume is equal to the cross sectional area formula_1 times the fuel length, the volumetric propellant consumption rate is the cross section area times the linear burn rate formula_2, and the instantaneous mass flow rate of combustion gases generated is equal to the volumetric rate times the fuel density formula_3:\nformula_4\nSeveral geometric configurations are often used depending on the application and desired thrust curve:\nCasing.\nThe casing may be constructed from a range of materials. Cardboard is used for small black powder model motors, whereas aluminium is used for larger composite-fuel hobby motors. Steel was used for the space shuttle boosters. Filament-wound graphite epoxy casings are used for high-performance motors.\nThe casing must be designed to withstand the pressure and resulting stresses of the rocket motor, possibly at elevated temperature. For design, the casing is considered a pressure vessel.\nTo protect the casing from corrosive hot gases, a sacrificial thermal liner on the inside of the casing is often implemented, which ablates to prolong the life of the motor casing.\nNozzle.\nA convergent-divergent design accelerates the exhaust gas out of the nozzle to produce thrust. The nozzle must be constructed from a material that can withstand the heat of the combustion gas flow. Often, heat-resistant carbon-based materials are used, such as amorphous graphite or reinforced carbon\u2013carbon.\nSome designs include directional control of the exhaust. This can be accomplished by gimballing the nozzle, as in the Space Shuttle SRBs, by the use of jet vanes in the exhaust as in the V-2 rocket, or by liquid injection thrust vectoring (LITV).\nLITV consists of injecting a liquid into the exhaust stream after the nozzle throat. The liquid then vaporizes, and in most cases chemically reacts, adding mass flow to one side of the exhaust stream and thus providing a control moment. For example, the Titan IIIC solid boosters injected nitrogen tetroxide for LITV; the tanks can be seen on the sides of the rocket between the main center stage and the boosters.\nAn early Minuteman first stage used a single motor with four gimballed nozzles to provide pitch, yaw, and roll control.\nPerformance.\nA typical, well-designed ammonium perchlorate composite propellant (APCP) first-stage motor may have a vacuum specific impulse (\"I\"sp) as high as (Titan IVB SRMU). This compares to for RP1/LOX (RD-180) and for LH2/LOX (Block II RS-25) bipropellant engines. Upper stage specific impulses are somewhat greater: as much as for APCP (Orbus 6E), for RP1/LOX (RD-0124) and for LH2/LOX (RL10B-2). \nPropellant fractions are usually somewhat higher for (non-segmented) solid propellant first stages than for upper stages. The Castor 120 first stage has a propellant mass fraction of 92.23% while the Castor 30 upper stage developed for Orbital Science's Taurus II COTS (Commercial Off The Shelf) (International Space Station resupply) launch vehicle has a 91.3% propellant fraction with 2.9% graphite epoxy motor casing, 2.4% nozzle, igniter and thrust vector actuator, and 3.4% non-motor hardware including such things as payload mount, interstage adapter, cable raceway, instrumentation, etc. Castor 120 and Castor 30 are in diameter, respectively, and serve as stages on the Athena IC and IIC commercial launch vehicles. A four-stage Athena II using Castor 120s as both first and second stages became the first commercially developed launch vehicle to launch a lunar probe (\"Lunar Prospector\") in 1998.\nSolid rockets can provide high thrust for relatively low cost. For this reason, solids have been used as initial stages in rockets (for example the Space Shuttle), while reserving high specific impulse engines, especially less massive hydrogen-fueled engines, for higher stages. In addition, solid rockets have a long history as the final boost stage for satellites due to their simplicity, reliability, compactness and reasonably high mass fraction. A spin-stabilized solid rocket motor is sometimes added when extra velocity is required, such as for a mission to a comet or the outer solar system, because a spinner does not require a guidance system (on the newly added stage). Thiokol's extensive family of mostly titanium-cased \"Star\" space motors has been widely used, especially on Delta launch vehicles and as spin-stabilized upper stages to launch satellites from the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle. \"Star\" motors have propellant fractions as high as 94.6% but add-on structures and equipment reduce the operating mass fraction by 2% or more.\nHigher performing solid rocket propellants are used in large strategic missiles (as opposed to commercial launch vehicles). HMX, C4H8N4(NO2)4, a nitramine with greater energy than ammonium perchlorate, was used in the propellant of the Peacekeeper ICBM and is the main ingredient in NEPE-75 propellant used in the Trident II D-5 Fleet Ballistic Missile. It is because of explosive hazard that the higher energy military solid propellants containing HMX are not used in commercial launch vehicles except when the LV is an adapted ballistic missile already containing HMX propellant (Minotaur IV and V based on the retired Peacekeeper ICBMs). The Naval Air Weapons Station at China Lake, California, developed a new compound, C6H6N6(NO2)6, called simply CL-20 (China Lake compound #20). Compared to HMX, CL-20 has 14% more energy per mass, 20% more energy per volume, and a higher oxygen-to-fuel ratio. One of the motivations for development of these very high energy density military solid propellants is to achieve mid-course exo-atmospheric ABM capability from missiles small enough to fit in existing ship-based below-deck vertical launch tubes and air-mobile truck-mounted launch tubes. CL-20 propellant compliant with Congress' 2004 insensitive munitions (IM) law has been demonstrated and may, as its cost comes down, be suitable for use in commercial launch vehicles, with a very significant increase in performance compared with the currently favored APCP solid propellants. With a specific impulse of 309 s already demonstrated by Peacekeeper's second stage using HMX propellant, the higher energy of CL-20 propellant can be expected to increase specific impulse to around 320 s in similar ICBM or launch vehicle upper stage applications, without the explosive hazard of HMX.\nAn attractive attribute for military use is the ability for solid rocket propellant to remain loaded in the rocket for long durations and then be reliably launched at a moment's notice.\nPropellant families.\nBlack powder (gunpowder) propellant.\nBlack powder (gunpowder) is composed of charcoal (fuel), potassium nitrate (oxidizer), and sulfur (fuel and catalyst). It is one of the oldest pyrotechnic compositions with application to rocketry. In modern times, black powder finds use in low-power model rockets (such as Estes and Quest rockets), as it is cheap and fairly easy to produce. The fuel grain is typically a mixture of pressed fine powder (into a solid, hard slug), with a burn rate that is highly dependent upon exact composition and operating conditions. The specific impulse of black powder is low, around . The grain is sensitive to fracture and, therefore, catastrophic failure. Black powder does not typically find use in motors above thrust.\nZinc\u2013sulfur (ZS) propellants.\nComposed of powdered zinc metal and powdered sulfur (oxidizer), ZS or \"micrograin\" is another pressed propellant that does not find any practical application outside specialized amateur rocketry circles due to its poor performance (as most ZS burns outside the combustion chamber) and fast linear burn rates on the order of 2\u00a0m/s. ZS is most often employed as a novelty propellant as the rocket accelerates extremely quickly leaving a spectacular large orange fireball behind it.\nDouble-base (DB) propellants.\nDB propellants are composed of two monopropellant fuel components where one typically acts as a high-energy (yet unstable) monopropellant and the other acts as a lower-energy stabilizing (and gelling) monopropellant. In typical circumstances, nitroglycerin is dissolved in a nitrocellulose gel and solidified with additives. DB propellants are implemented in applications where minimal smoke is required yet a medium-high Isp of roughly is required. The addition of metal fuels (such as aluminium) can increase performance to around , though metal oxide nucleation in the exhaust can turn the smoke opaque.\nComposite propellants.\nA powdered oxidizer and powdered metal fuel are intimately mixed and immobilized with a rubbery binder (that also acts as a fuel). Composite propellants are often either ammonium-nitrate-based (ANCP) or ammonium-perchlorate-based (APCP). Ammonium nitrate composite propellant often uses magnesium and/or aluminium as fuel and delivers medium performance (Isp of about ) whereas ammonium perchlorate composite propellant often uses aluminium fuel and delivers high performance: vacuum Isp up to with a single-piece nozzle or with a high-area-ratio telescoping nozzle. Aluminium is used as fuel because it has a reasonable specific energy density, a high volumetric energy density, and is difficult to ignite accidentally. Composite propellants are cast, and retain their shape after the rubber binder, such as Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB), cross-links (solidifies) with the aid of a curative additive. Because of its high performance, moderate ease of manufacturing, and moderate cost, APCP finds widespread use in space, military, and amateur rockets, whereas cheaper and less efficient ANCP finds use in amateur rocketry and gas generators. Ammonium dinitramide, NH4N(NO2)2, is being considered as a 1-to-1 chlorine-free substitute for ammonium perchlorate in composite propellants. Unlike ammonium nitrate, ADN can be substituted for AP without a loss in motor performance.\nPolyurethane-bound aluminium-APCP solid fuel was used in the submarine-launched Polaris missiles. APCP used in the space shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters consisted of ammonium perchlorate (oxidizer, 69.6% by weight), aluminium (fuel, 16%), iron oxide (a catalyst, 0.4%), polybutadiene acrylonitrile (PBAN) polymer (a non-urethane rubber binder that held the mixture together and acted as secondary fuel, 12.04%), and an epoxy curing agent (1.96%). It developed a specific impulse of 242 seconds (2.37\u00a0km/s) at sea level or 268 seconds (2.63\u00a0km/s) in a vacuum. The 2005\u20132009 Constellation Program was to use a similar PBAN-bound APCP.\nIn 2009, a group succeeded in creating a propellant of water and nanoaluminium (ALICE).\n\"Candy\" propellants.\nIn general, rocket candy propellants are an oxidizer (typically potassium nitrate) and a sugar fuel (typically dextrose, sorbitol, or sucrose) that are cast into shape by gently melting the propellant constituents together and pouring or packing the amorphous colloid into a mold. Candy propellants generate a low-medium specific impulse of roughly and, thus, are used primarily by amateur and experimental rocketeers.\nHigh-energy composite (HEC) propellants.\nTypical HEC propellants start with a standard composite propellant mixture (such as APCP) and add a high-energy explosive to the mix. This extra component usually is in the form of small crystals of RDX or HMX, both of which have higher energy than ammonium perchlorate. Despite a modest increase in specific impulse, implementation is limited due to the increased hazards of the high-explosive additives.\nComposite modified double base propellants.\nComposite modified double base propellants start with a nitrocellulose/nitroglycerin double base propellant as a binder and add solids (typically ammonium perchlorate (AP) and powdered aluminium) normally used in composite propellants. The ammonium perchlorate makes up the oxygen deficit introduced by using nitrocellulose, improving the overall specific impulse. The aluminium improves specific impulse as well as combustion stability. High performing propellants such as NEPE-75 used to fuel the Trident II D-5 SLBM replace most of the AP with polyethylene glycol-bound HMX, further increasing specific impulse. The mixing of composite and double base propellant ingredients has become so common as to blur the functional definition of double base propellants.\nMinimum-signature (\"smokeless\") propellants.\nOne of the most active areas of solid propellant research is the development of high-energy, minimum-signature propellant using C6H6N6(NO2)6 CL-20 nitroamine (China Lake compound #20), which has 14% higher energy per mass and 20% higher energy density than HMX. The new propellant has been successfully developed and tested in tactical rocket motors. The propellant is non-polluting: acid-free, solid particulates-free, and lead-free. It is also smokeless and has only a faint shock diamond pattern that is visible in the otherwise transparent exhaust. Without the bright flame and dense smoke trail produced by the burning of aluminized propellants, these smokeless propellants all but eliminate the risk of giving away the positions from which the missiles are fired. The new CL-20 propellant is shock-insensitive (hazard class 1.3) as opposed to current HMX smokeless propellants which are highly detonable (hazard class 1.1). CL-20 is considered a major breakthrough in solid rocket propellant technology but has yet to see widespread use because costs remain high.\nElectric solid propellants.\nElectric solid propellants (ESPs) are a family of high performance plastisol solid propellants that can be ignited and throttled by the application of electric current. Unlike conventional rocket motor propellants that are difficult to control and extinguish, ESPs can be ignited reliably at precise intervals and durations. It requires no moving parts and the propellant is insensitive to flames or electrical sparks.\nHobby and amateur/model rocketry.\nSolid propellant rocket motors can be bought for use in model rocketry; they are normally small cylinders of black powder fuel with an integral nozzle and optionally a small charge that is set off when the propellant is exhausted after a time delay. This charge can be used to trigger a camera, or deploy a parachute. Without this charge and delay, the motor may ignite a second stage (black powder only). \nIn amateur rocketry, \"candy\" propellants are common because they offer relative safety and ease of production, ingredients that are readily available publicly, and a higher specific impulse than blackpowder motors.\nIn mid- and high-power rocketry, commercially made APCP motors are widely used. They can be designed as either single-use or reloadables. These motors are available in impulse ranges from \"A\" (1.26\u00a0Ns\u2013 2.50\u00a0Ns) to \"O\" (20.48\u00a0kNs \u2013 40.96\u00a0kNs), from several manufacturers. They are manufactured in standardized diameters and varying lengths depending on required impulse. Standard motor diameters are 13, 18, 24, 29, 38, 54, 75, 98, and 150 millimeters. Different propellant formulations are available to produce different thrust profiles, as well as special effects such as colored flames, smoke trails, or large quantities of sparks (produced by adding titanium sponge to the mix).\nUse.\nSounding rockets.\nAlmost all sounding rockets use solid motors.\nMissiles.\nDue to reliability, ease of storage and handling, solid rockets are used on missiles and ICBMs.\nOrbital rockets.\nSolid rockets are suitable for launching small payloads to orbital velocities, especially if three or more stages are used. Many of these are based on repurposed ICBMs.\nGravity-1 is the largest-payload-capacity rocket to get into orbit with only solid rocket motors.\nLarger liquid-fueled orbital rockets often use solid rocket boosters to gain enough initial thrust to launch the fully fueled rocket.\nSolid fuel is also used for some upper stages, particularly the Star 37 (sometimes referred to as the \"Burner\" upper stage) and the Star 48 (sometimes referred to as the \"Payload Assist Module\", or PAM), both manufactured originally by Thiokol, and today by Northrop Grumman. They are used to lift large payloads to intended orbits (such as the Global Positioning System satellites), or smaller payloads to interplanetary\u2014or even interstellar\u2014trajectories. Another solid-fuel upper stage, used by the Space Shuttle and the Titan IV, was the Boeing-manufactured Inertial Upper Stage (IUS).\nSome rockets, like the Antares (manufactured by Northrop Grumman), have mandatory solid-fuel upper stages. The Antares rocket uses the Northrop Grumman-manufactured Castor 30 as an upper stage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37831", "revid": "13266769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37831", "title": "Hybrid-propellant rocket", "text": "Rocket engine that uses both liquid / gaseous and solid fuel\nA hybrid-propellant rocket is a rocket with a rocket motor that uses rocket propellants in two different phases: one solid and the other either gas or liquid. The hybrid rocket concept can be traced back to the early 1930s.\nHybrid rockets avoid some of the disadvantages of solid rockets like the dangers of propellant handling, while also avoiding some disadvantages of liquid rockets like their mechanical complexity. Because it is difficult for the fuel and oxidizer to be mixed intimately (being different states of matter), hybrid rockets tend to fail more benignly than liquids or solids. Like liquid rocket engines, hybrid rocket motors can be shut down easily and the thrust is throttleable. The theoretical specific impulse (formula_1) performance of hybrids is generally higher than solid motors and lower than liquid engines. formula_1 as high as 400\u00a0s has been measured in a hybrid rocket using metalized fuels. Hybrid systems are more complex than solid ones, but they avoid significant hazards of manufacturing, shipping and handling solid rocket motors by storing the oxidizer and the fuel separately.\nHistory.\nThe first work on hybrid rockets was performed in the early 1930s at the Soviet Group for the Study of Reactive Motion. Mikhail Klavdievich Tikhonravov, who would later supervise the design of Sputnik I and the Luna programme, was responsible for the first hybrid propelled rocket launch, the GIRD-9, on 17 August 1933, which reached an altitude of . In the late 1930s at IG Farben in Germany and concurrently at the California Rocket Society in the United States. Leonid Andrussow, working in Germany, theorized hybrid propellant rockets. O. Lutz, W. Noeggerath, and Andrussow tested a hybrid rocket motor using coal and gaseous N2O as the propellants. Oberth also worked on a hybrid rocket motor using LOX as the oxidizer and graphite as the fuel. The high heat of sublimation of carbon prevented these rocket motors from operating efficiently, as it resulted in a negligible burning rate.\nIn the 1940s, the California Pacific Rocket Society used LOX in combination with several different fuel types, including wood, wax, and rubber. The most successful of these tests was with the rubber fuel, which is still the dominant fuel in use today. In June\u00a01951, a LOX / rubber rocket was flown to an altitude of .\nTwo major efforts occurred in the 1950s. One of these efforts was by G. Moore and K. Berman at General Electric. The duo used 90% high test peroxide (HTP, or H2O2) and polyethylene (PE) in a rod and tube grain design. They drew several significant conclusions from their work. The fuel grain had uniform burning. Grain cracks did not affect combustion, like it does with solid rocket motors. No hard starts were observed (a hard start is a pressure spike seen close to the time of ignition, typical of liquid rocket engines). The fuel surface acted as a flame holder, which encouraged stable combustion. The oxidizer could be throttled with one valve, and a high oxidizer to fuel ratio helped simplify combustion. The negative observations were low burning rates and that the thermal instability of peroxide was problematic for safety reasons. Another effort that occurred in the 1950s was the development of a reverse hybrid. In a standard hybrid rocket motor, the solid material is the fuel. In a reverse hybrid rocket motor, the oxidizer is solid. William Avery of the Applied Physics Laboratory used jet fuel and ammonium nitrate, selected for their low cost. His O/F ratio was 0.035, which was 200\u00a0times smaller than the ratio used by Moore and Berman.\nIn 1953 Pacific Rocket Society (est. 1943) was developing the XDF-23, a hybrid rocket, designed by Jim Nuding, using LOX and rubber polymer called \"Thiokol\". They had already tried other fuels in prior iterations including cotton, paraffin wax and wood. The XDF name itself comes from \"experimental Douglas fir\" from one of the first units.\nIn the 1960s, European organizations also began work on hybrid rockets. ONERA, based in France, and Volvo Flygmotor, based in Sweden, developed sounding rockets using hybrid rocket motor technology. The ONERA group focused on a hypergolic rocket motor, using nitric acid and an amine fuel, developing the LEX sounding rocket. The company flew eight rockets: Once in April\u00a01964, three times in June\u00a01965, and four times in 1967. The maximum altitude the flights achieved was over . The Volvo Flygmotor group also used a hypergolic propellant combination. They also used nitric acid for their oxidizer, but used Tagaform (polybutadiene with an aromatic amine) as their fuel. Their flight was in 1969, lofting a payload to .\nMeanwhile, in the United States, United Technologies Center (Chemical Systems Division) and Beech Aircraft were working on a supersonic target drone, known as Sandpiper. It used MON-25 (mixed 25% NO, 75% N2O4) as the oxidizer and polymethyl methacrylate (PMM) and Mg for the fuel. The drone flew six times in 1968, for more than 300\u00a0seconds and to an altitude greater than . The second iteration of the rocket, known as the HAST, had IRFNA-PB/PMM for its propellants and was throttleable over a 10/1 range. HAST could carry a heavier payload than the Sandpiper. Another iteration, which used the same propellant combination as the HAST, was developed by Chemical Systems Division and Teledyne Aircraft. Development for this program ended in the mid-1980s. Chemical Systems Division also worked on a propellant combination of lithium and FLOx (mixed F2 and O2). This was an efficient hypergolic rocket that was throttleable. The vacuum specific impulse was 380\u00a0seconds at 93% combustion efficiency.\nAmerican Rocket Company (AMROC) developed the largest hybrid rockets ever created in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The first version of their engine, fired at the Air Force Phillips Laboratory, produced of thrust for 70\u00a0seconds with a propellant combination of LOX and hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) rubber. The second version of the motor, known as the H-250F, produced more than of thrust.\nKorey Kline of Environmental Aeroscience Corporation (eAc) first fired a gaseous oxygen and rubber hybrid in 1982 at Lucerne Dry Lake, CA, after discussions on the technology with Bill Wood, formerly with Westinghouse. The first SpaceShipOne hybrid tests were successfully conducted by Kline and eAc at Mojave, CA.\nIn 1994, the U.S. Air Force Academy flew a hybrid sounding rocket to an altitude of . The rocket used HTPB and LOX for its propellant, and reached a peak thrust of and had a thrust duration of 16\u00a0seconds.\nBasic concepts.\nIn its simplest form, a hybrid rocket consists of a pressure vessel (tank) containing the liquid oxidizer, the combustion chamber containing the solid propellant, and a mechanical device separating the two. When thrust is desired, a suitable ignition source is introduced in the combustion chamber and the valve is opened. The liquid oxidiser (or gas) flows into the combustion chamber where it is vaporized and then reacted with the solid propellant. Combustion occurs in a boundary layer diffusion flame adjacent to the surface of the solid propellant.\nGenerally, the liquid propellant is the oxidizer and the solid propellant is the fuel because solid oxidizers are extremely dangerous and lower performing than liquid oxidizers. Furthermore, using a solid fuel such as Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) or paraffin wax allows for the incorporation of high-energy fuel additives such as aluminium, lithium, or metal hydrides.\nCombustion.\nThe governing equation for hybrid rocket combustion shows that the regression rate is dependent on the oxidizer mass flux rate, which means the rate that the fuel will burn is proportional to the amount of oxidizer flowing through the port. This differs from a solid rocket motor, in which the regression rate is proportional to the chamber pressure of the motor.\nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the regression rate, ao is the regression rate coefficient (incorporating the grain length), Go is the oxidizer mass flux rate, and n is the regression rate exponent.\nAs the motor burns, the increase in diameter of the fuel port results in an increased fuel mass flow rate. This phenomenon makes the oxidizer to fuel ratio (O/F) shift during the burn. The increased fuel mass flow rate can be compensated for by also increasing the oxidizer mass flow rate. In addition to the O/F varying as a function of time, it also varies based on the position down the fuel grain. The closer the position is to the top of the fuel grain, the higher the O/F ratio. Since the O/F varies down the port, a point called the stoichiometric point may exist at some point down the grain.\nProperties.\nHybrid rocket motors exhibit some obvious as well as some subtle advantages over liquid-fuel rockets and solid-fuel rockets. A brief summary of some of these is given below:\nDisadvantages of hybrid rockets.\nHybrid rockets also exhibit some disadvantages when compared with liquid and solid rockets. These include:\nIn general, much less development work has been completed with hybrids than liquids or solids and it is likely that some of these disadvantages could be rectified through further investment in research and development.\nOne problem in designing large hybrid orbital rockets is that turbopumps become necessary to achieve high flow rates and pressurization of the oxidizer. This turbopump must be powered by something. In a traditional liquid-propellant rocket, the turbopump uses the same fuel and oxidizer as the rocket, since they are both liquid and can be fed to the pre-burner. But in a hybrid, the fuel is solid and cannot be fed to a turbopump's engine. Some hybrids use an oxidizer that can also be used as a monopropellant, such as hydrogen peroxide, and so a turbopump can run on it alone. However, hydrogen peroxide is significantly less efficient than liquid oxygen, which cannot be used alone to run a turbopump. Another fuel would be needed, requiring its own tank and decreasing rocket performance.\nFuel.\nCommon fuel choices.\nA reverse-hybrid rocket, which is not very common, is one where the engine uses a solid oxidizer and a liquid fuel. Some liquid fuel options are kerosene, hydrazine, and LH2. Common fuels for a typical hybrid rocket engine include polymers such as acrylics, polyethylene (PE), cross-linked rubber, such as HTPB, or liquefying fuels such as paraffin wax. Plexiglass was a common fuel, since the combustion could be visible through the transparent combustion chamber. Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) synthetic rubber is currently the most popular fuel for hybrid rocket engines, due to its energy, and due to how safe it is to handle. Tests have been performed in which HTPB was soaked in liquid oxygen, and it still did not become explosive. These fuels are generally not as dense as solid rocket motors, so they are often doped with aluminum to increase the density and therefore the rocket performance.404\nGrain manufacturing methods.\nCast.\nHybrid rocket fuel grains can be manufactured via casting techniques, since they are typically a plastic or a rubber. Complex geometries, which are driven by the need for higher fuel mass flow rates, makes casting fuel grains for hybrid rockets expensive and time-consuming due in part to equipment costs. On a larger scale, cast grains must be supported by internal webbing, so that large chunks of fuel do not impact or even potentially block the nozzle. Grain defects are also an issue in larger grains. Traditional fuels that are cast are hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) and paraffin waxes.\nAdditive manufacturing.\nAdditive manufacturing is currently being used to create grain structures that were otherwise not possible to manufacture. Helical ports have been shown to increase fuel regression rates while also increasing volumetric efficiency. An example of material used for a hybrid rocket fuel is acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS). The printed material is also typically enhanced with additives to improve rocket performance. Recent work at the University of Tennessee Knoxville has shown that, due to the increased surface area, the use of powdered fuels (i.e. graphite, coal, aluminum) encased in a 3D printed, ABS matrix can significantly increase the fuel burn rate and thrust level as compared to traditional polymer grains.\nOxidizer.\nCommon oxidizer choices.\nCommon oxidizers include gaseous or liquid oxygen, nitrous oxide, and hydrogen peroxide. For a reverse hybrid, oxidizers such as frozen oxygen and ammonium perchlorate are used.405\u2013406\nProper oxidizer vaporization is important for the rocket to perform efficiently. Improper vaporization can lead to very large regression rate differences at the head end of the motor when compared to the aft end. One method is to use a hot gas generator to heat the oxidizer in a pre-combustion chamber. Another method is to use an oxidizer that can also be used as a monopropellant. A good example is hydrogen peroxide, which can be catalytically decomposed over a silver bed into hot oxygen and steam. A third method is to inject a propellant that is hypergolic with the oxidizer into the flow. Some of the oxidizer will decompose, heating up the rest of the oxidizer in the flow.\nHybrid safety.\nGenerally, well designed and carefully constructed hybrids are very safe. The primary hazards associated with hybrids are:\nBecause the fuel in a hybrid does not contain an oxidizer, it will not combust explosively on its own. For this reason, hybrids are classified as having no TNT equivalent explosive power. In contrast, solid rockets often have TNT equivalencies similar in magnitude to the mass of the propellant grain. Liquid-fuel rockets typically have a TNT equivalence calculated based on the amount of fuel and oxidizer which could realistically intimately combine before igniting explosively; this is often taken to be 10\u201320% of the total propellant mass. For hybrids, even filling the combustion chamber with oxidizer prior to ignition will not generally create an explosion with the solid fuel, the explosive equivalence is often quoted as 0%.\nOrganizations working on hybrids.\nCommercial companies.\nIn 1998 SpaceDev acquired all of the intellectual property, designs, and test results generated by over 200\u00a0hybrid rocket motor firings by the American Rocket Company over its eight-year life. SpaceShipOne, the first private crewed spacecraft, was powered by SpaceDev's hybrid rocket motor burning HTPB with nitrous oxide. However, nitrous oxide was the prime substance responsible for the explosion that killed three in the development of the successor of SpaceShipOne at Scaled Composites in 2007. The Virgin Galactic SpaceShipTwo follow-on commercial suborbital spaceplane uses a scaled-up hybrid motor.\nSpaceDev was developing the SpaceDev Streaker, an expendable small launch vehicle, and SpaceDev Dream Chaser, capable of both suborbital and orbital human space flight. Both Streaker and Dream Chaser use hybrid rocket motors that burn nitrous oxide and the synthetic HTPB rubber. SpaceDev was acquired by Sierra Nevada Corporation in 2009, becoming its Space Systems division, which continues to develop Dream Chaser for NASA's Commercial Crew Development contract. Sierra Nevada also developed RocketMotorTwo, the hybrid engine for SpaceShipTwo. On October 31, 2014, when SpaceShipTwo was lost, initial speculation had suggested that its hybrid engine had in fact exploded and killed one test pilot and seriously injured the other. However, investigation data now indicates an early deployment of the SpaceShip-Two feather system was the cause for aerodynamic breakup of the vehicle.\nU.S. Rockets manufactured and deployed hybrids using self-pressurizing nitrous oxide (N2O) and hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) as well as mixed High-test peroxide (HTP) and HTPB. The High-test peroxide (H2O2) 86% and (HTPB) and aluminum hybrids developed by U.S. Rockets produced a sea level delivered specific impulse (Isp) of 240, well above the typical 180 of N2O-HTPB hybrids. In addition to that, they were self-starting, restartable, had considerably lower combustion instability making them suitable for fragile or crewed missions such as Bloodhound SSC, SpaceShipTwo or SpaceShipThree. The company had successfully tested and deployed both pressure fed and pump fed versions of the latter HTP-HTPB style. Deliverables to date have ranged from diameter, and developed units up to diameter. The vendor claimed scalability to over diameter with regression rates approaching solids, according to literature distributed at the November\u00a02013 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) meeting for XS-1. U.S.\u00a0Rockets is no longer manufacturing large-scale rockets.\nGilmour Space Technologies began testing Hybrid rocket engines in 2015 with both N2O and HP with HDPE and HDPE+wax blends. For 2016 testing includes a HP/PE engine. The company is planning to use hybrids for both sounding and orbital rockets.\nOrbital Technologies Corporation (Orbitec) has been involved in some U.S. government-funded research on hybrid rockets including the \"Vortex Hybrid\" concept.\nEnvironmental Aeroscience Corporation (eAc) was incorporated in 1994 to develop hybrid rocket propulsion systems. It was included in the design competition for the SpaceShipOne motor but lost the contract to SpaceDev. Environmental Aeroscience Corporation still supplied parts to SpaceDev for the oxidizer fill, vent, and dump system.\nRocket Lab formerly sold hybrid sounding rockets and related technology.\nThe Reaction Research Society (RRS), although known primarily for their work with liquid rocket propulsion, has a long history of research and development with hybrid rocket propulsion.\nCopenhagen Suborbitals, a Danish rocket group, has designed and test-fired several hybrids using N2O at first and currently LOX. Their fuel is epoxy, paraffin wax, or polyurethane. The group eventually moved away from hybrids because of thrust instabilities, and now uses a motor similar to that of the V-2 rocket.\nTiSPACE is a Taiwanese company which is developing a family of hybrid-propellant rockets.\nbluShift Aerospace in Brunswick, Maine, won a NASA SBIR grant to develop a modular hybrid rocket engine for its proprietary bio-derived fuel in June 2019. Having completed the grant bluShift has launched its first sounding rocket using the technology.\nVaya Space based out of Cocoa, Florida, is expected to launch its hybrid fuel rocket Dauntless in 2028.\nReaction Dynamics based out Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec, began developing a hybrid rocket engine in 2017 capable of producing 21.6\u00a0kN of thrust. Their Aurora rocket will use nine engines on the first stage and one engine on the second stage and will be capable of delivering a payload of 50\u2013150\u00a0kg to LEO. In May 2022, Reaction Dynamics announced they were partnering with Maritime Launch Services to launch the Aurora rocket from their launch site currently under construction in Canso, Nova Scotia, beginning with suborbital test flights in Summer, 2023 with a target of 2024 for the first orbital launch.\nIn 2017 DeltaV Uzay Teknolojileri A.\u015e. was founded by Savunma Sanayi Teknolojileri A.\u015e (SSTEK), a state company of Turkey, for hybrid-propellant-rocket research. The company CEO Arif Karabeyoglu is former Consulting Professor of Stanford University in the area of rocket propulsion and combustion. According to company web site DeltaV achieved many firsts in hybrid-propellant-rocket technology including first paraffin/LOX dual fuel rocket launch, highest specific impulses for a hybrid-propellant-rocket, first sounding rocket to reach 100 km altittude, first orbital hybrid-propellant-rocket design, first orbital firing of hybrid-propellant-rocket.\nUniversities.\nSpace Propulsion Group was founded in 1999 by Arif Karabeyoglu, Brian Cantwell, and others from Stanford University to develop high regression-rate liquefying hybrid rocket fuels. They have successfully fired motors as large as . diameter which produce using the technology and are currently developing a diameter, motor to be initially fired in 2010. Stanford University is the institution where liquid-layer combustion theory for hybrid rockets was developed. The SPaSE group at Stanford is currently working with NASA Ames Research Center developing the Peregrine sounding rocket which will be capable of 100\u00a0km altitude. Engineering challenges include various types of combustion instabilities. Although the proposed motor was test fired in 2013, the Peregrine program eventually switched to a standard solid rocket for its 2016 debut.\nThe University of Tennessee Knoxville has carried out hybrid rocket research since 1999, working in collaboration with NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and private industry. This work has included the integration of a water-cooled calorimeter nozzle, one of the first 3D-printed, hot section components successfully used in a rocket motor. Other work at the university has focused on the use of helical oxidizer injection, bio-derived fuels and powdered fuels encased in a 3D-printed, ABS matrix, including the successful launch of a coal-fired hybrid at the 2019 Spaceport America Cup.\nAt the Delft University of Technology, the student team Delft Aerospace Rocket Engineering (DARE) is very active in the design and building of hybrid rockets. In October\u00a02015, DARE broke the European student altitude record with the Stratos\u00a0II+ sounding rocket. Stratos\u00a0II+ was propelled by the DHX-200 hybrid rocket engine, using a nitrous oxide oxidizer and fuel blend of paraffin, sorbitol and aluminium powder. On July 26, 2018, DARE attempted to launch the Stratos\u00a0III hybrid rocket. This rocket used the same fuel/oxidizer combination as its predecessor, but with an increased impulse of around 360\u00a0kNs. At the time of development, this was the most powerful hybrid rocket engine ever developed by a student team in terms of total impulse. The Stratos III vehicle was lost 20\u00a0seconds into the flight.\nFlorida Institute of Technology has successfully tested and evaluated hybrid technologies with their Panther Project. The WARR student-team at the Technical University of Munich has been developing hybrid engines and rockets since the early 1970s. Using acids, oxygen, or nitrous oxide in combination with polyethylene, or HTPB. The development includes test stand engines as well as airborne versions, like the first German hybrid rocket Barbarella. They are currently working on a hybrid rocket with Liquid oxygen as its oxidizer, to break the European height record of amateur rockets. They are also working with Rocket Crafters and testing their hybrid rockets.\nBoston University's student-run \"Rocket Propulsion Group\", which in the past has launched only solid motor rockets, is attempting to design and build a single-stage hybrid sounding rocket to launch into sub-orbital space by July\u00a02015.\nBrigham Young University (BYU), the University of Utah, and Utah State University launched a student-designed rocket called Unity\u00a0IV in 1995 which burned the solid fuel hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) with an oxidizer of gaseous oxygen, and in 2003 launched a larger version which burned HTPB with nitrous oxide.\nThe University of Brasilia's (UnB) Hybrid Rocket Team initiated their endeavors in 1999 within the Faculty of Technology, marking the pioneering institution in the Southern Hemisphere to engage with hybrid rockets. Over time, the team has achieved notable milestones, encompassing the creation of various sounding rockets and hybrid rocket engines. Presently, the team is known as the Chemical Propulsion Laboratory (CPL) and is situated at Campus UnB Gama. CPL has made significant strides in the advancement of critical hybrid engine technologies. This includes the development of a modular 1\u00a0kN hybrid rocket engine for the SARA platform, an innovative methane-oxygen gas-torch ignition system, an efficient oxidizer feed system, precision flow control valves, and thrust vector control mechanisms tailored for hybrid engines. Additionally, they've achieved a breakthrough with a 3D-printed, actively cooled hybrid rocket engine. Furthermore, the Laboratory is actively engaged in diverse areas of research and development, with current projects spanning the formulation of hybrid engine fuels using paraffin wax and N2O, numerical simulations, optimization techniques, and rocket design. CPL collaborates extensively with governmental agencies, private investors, and other educational institutions, including FAPDF, FAPESP, CNPq, and AEB. A notable collaborative effort includes the Capital Rocket Team (CRT), a group of students from UnB, who are currently partnering with CPL to develop hybrid sounding rockets. In a remarkable achievement, CRT clinched the top spot in the 2022 Latin American Space Challenge (LASC).\nUniversity of California, Los Angeles's student-run \"Rocket Project at UCLA\" launches hybrid propulsion rockets using nitrous oxide as an oxidizer and HTPB as the fuel. They are currently in the development process of their fifth student-built hybrid rocket engine.\nUniversity of Toronto's student-run \"University of Toronto Aerospace Team\", designs and builds hybrid engine powered rockets. They are currently constructing a new engine testing facility at the University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies, and are working towards breaking the Canadian amateur rocketry altitude record with their new rocket, Defiance MKIII, currently under rigorous testing. Defiance MK\u00a0III's engine, QUASAR, is a Nitrous-Paraffin hybrid engine, capable of producing 7\u00a0kN of thrust for a period of 9\u00a0seconds.\nIn 2016, Pakistan's DHA Suffa University successfully developed Raheel-1, hybrid rocket engines in 1\u00a0kN class, using paraffin wax and liquid oxygen, thereby becoming the first university run rocket research program in the country. In India, Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra Space engineering and rocketry department has been working on Hybrid Projects with various fuels and oxidizers.\nPars Rocketry Group from Istanbul Technical University has designed and built the first hybrid rocket engine of Turkey, the rocket engine extensively tested in May\u00a02015.\nA United Kingdom-based team (laffin-gas) is using four N2O hybrid rockets in a drag-racing style car. Each rocket has an outer diameter of 150\u00a0mm and is 1.4\u00a0m long. They use a fuel grain of high-density wound paper soaked in cooking oil. The N2O supply is provided by Nitrogen-pressurised piston accumulators which provide a higher rate of delivery than N2O gas alone and also provide damping of any reverse shock.\nIn Italy one of the leading centers for research in hybrid propellants rockets is CISAS (Center of Studies and Activities for Space) \"G. Colombo\", University of Padua. The activities cover all stages of the development: from theoretical analysis of the combustion process to numerical simulation using CFD codes, and then by conducting ground tests of small scale and large-scale rockets (up to 20\u00a0kN, N2O-Paraffin wax based motors). One of these engines flew successfully in 2009. Since 2014, the research group is focused on the use of high test peroxide as oxidizer, in partnership with \"Technology for Propulsion and Innovation\", a university of Padua spin-off company.\nIn Taiwan, hybrid rocket system developments began in 2009 through R&amp;D projects of NSPO with two university teams. Both teams employed nitrous oxide / HTPB propellant system with different improvement schemes. Several hybrid rockets have been successfully launched by NCKU and NCTU teams so far, reaching altitudes of 10\u201320\u00a0km. Their plans include attempting 100\u2013200\u00a0km altitude launch to test nanosatellites, and developing orbital launch capabilities for nanosatellites in the long run. A sub-scale N2O/PE dual-vortical-flow (DVF) hybrid engine hot-fire test in 2014 has delivered an averaged Isp of 280 sec, which indicates that the system has reached around 97% combustion efficiency.\nIn (Germany) the University of Stuttgart's Student team HyEnD is the current world record holder for the highest-flying student-built hybrid rocket with their HEROS rockets.\nIn Bangladesh, Amateur Experimental Rocketry Dhaka supported by the American International University Bangladesh has also tested the country's first hybrid rocket engine, and are now working towards larger paraffin/nitrous oxide based prototypes.\nThe \"Aerospace Team\" of the TU Graz, Austria, is also developing a hybrid-propellant rocket.\nThe Polish Student team PWr in Space at Wroc\u0142aw University of Science and Technology has developed three hybrid rockets: R2 \"Setka\", R3 \"Dziewi\u0119\u0107dziesi\u0105tka dziewi\u0105tka\" and the most powerful of all - R4 \"Lynx\" with a successful test at their test stand \nMany other universities, such as Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, the University of Washington, Purdue University, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Hendrix College, the University of Illinois, Portland State University, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Texas A&amp;M University, Aarhus University, Rice University, and AGH University of Science and Technology have hybrid motor test stands that allow for student research with hybrid rockets.\nHigh power rocketry.\nThere are a number of hybrid rocket motor systems available for amateur/hobbyist use in high-powered model rocketry. These include the popular HyperTek systems and a number of 'Urbanski-Colburn Valved' (U/C) systems such as RATTWorks, Contrail Rockets, and Propulsion Polymers.\nAll of these systems use nitrous oxide as the oxidizer and a plastic fuel (such as Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), Polypropylene), or a polymer-based fuel such as HTPB. This reduces the cost per flight compared to solid rocket motors, although there is generally more ground support equipment required with hybrids.\nIn popular culture.\nAn October 26, 2005 episode of the television show \"MythBusters\" entitled \"Confederate Rocket\" featured a hybrid rocket motor using liquid nitrous oxide and paraffin wax. The myth purported that during the American Civil War, the Confederate Army was able to construct a rocket of this type. The myth was revisited in a later episode entitled \"Salami Rocket\", using hollowed out dry salami as the solid fuel.\nIn the February 18, 2007, episode of \"Top Gear\", a Reliant Robin was used by Richard Hammond and James May in an attempt to modify a normal K-reg Robin into a reusable Space Shuttle. Steve Holland, a professional radio-controlled aircraft pilot, helped Hammond to work out how to land a Robin safely. The craft was built by senior members of the United Kingdom Rocketry Association (UKRA) and achieved a successful launch, flew for several seconds into the air and managed to successfully jettison the solid-fuel rocket boosters on time. This was the largest rocket launched by a non-government organisation in Europe. It used 6 \u00d7 40960 NS O motors by Contrail Rockets giving a maximum thrust of 8\u00a0tonnes. However, the car failed to separate from the large external fuel tank due to faulty explosive bolts between the Robin and the external tank, and the Robin subsequently crashed into the ground and seemed to have exploded soon after. This explosion was added for dramatic effect as neither Reliant Robins nor hybrid rocket motors explode in the way depicted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37832", "revid": "37017796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37832", "title": "Monopropellant rocket", "text": "Rocket that uses a single propellant with a catalyst\nA monopropellant rocket (or \"monochemical rocket\") is a rocket that uses a single chemical as its propellant. Monopropellant rockets are commonly used as small altitude and trajectory control rockets in satellites, rocket upper stages, crewed spacecraft, and spaceplanes.\nChemical-reaction based monopropellant rockets.\nThe simplest monopropellant rockets depend on the chemical decomposition of a storable propellant after passing it over a catalyst bed. The power for the thruster comes from the high pressure gas created during the decomposition reaction that allows a rocket nozzle to speed up the gas to create thrust.\nThe most commonly used monopropellant is hydrazine (), a compound unstable in the presence of a catalyst and which is also a strong reducing agent. The most common catalyst is granular alumina (aluminum oxide, ) coated with iridium. These coated granules are usually under the commercial labels Aerojet S-405 (previously made by Shell) or W.C. Heraeus H-KC 12 GA (previously made by Kali Chemie). There is no igniter with hydrazine. Aerojet S-405 is a spontaneous catalyst, that is, hydrazine decomposes on contact with the catalyst. The decomposition is highly exothermic and produces a gas that is a mixture of nitrogen, hydrogen and ammonia. The main limiting factor of the monopropellant rocket is its life, which mainly depends on the life of the catalyst. The catalyst may be subject to catalytic poisoning and catalytic attrition which results in the catalyst failure. Another monopropellant is hydrogen peroxide, which, when purified to 90% or higher concentration, is self-decomposing at high temperatures or when a catalyst is present.\nMost chemical-reaction monopropellant rocket systems consist of a fuel tank, usually a titanium or aluminium sphere, with an ethylene-propylene rubber container or a surface tension propellant management device filled with the fuel. The tank is then pressurized with helium or nitrogen, which pushes the fuel out to the motors. A pipe leads from the tank to a poppet valve, and then to the decomposition chamber of the rocket motor. Typically, a satellite will have not just one motor, but two to twelve, each with its own valve.\nThe attitude control rocket motors for satellites and space probes are often very small, or so in diameter, and mounted in groups that point in four directions (within a plane).\nThe rocket is fired when the computer sends direct current through a small electromagnet that opens the poppet valve. The firing is often very brief, a few milliseconds, and \u2014 if operated in air \u2014 would sound like a pebble thrown against a metal trash can; if on for long, it would make a piercing hiss.\nChemical-reaction monopropellants are not as efficient as some other propulsion technologies. Engineers choose monopropellant systems when the need for simplicity and reliability outweigh the need for high delivered impulse. If the propulsion system must produce large amounts of thrust, or have a high specific impulse, as on the main motor of an interplanetary spacecraft, other technologies are used.\nSolar-thermal based monopropellant thrusters.\nA concept to provide low Earth orbit (LEO) propellant depots that could be used as way-stations for other spacecraft to stop and refuel on the way to beyond-LEO missions has proposed that waste gaseous hydrogen\u2014an inevitable byproduct of long-term liquid hydrogen storage in the radiative heat environment of space\u2014would be usable as a monopropellant in a solar-thermal propulsion system. The waste hydrogen would be productively utilized for both orbital station-keeping and attitude control, as well as providing limited propellant and thrust to use for orbital maneuvers to better rendezvous with other spacecraft that would be inbound to receive fuel from the depot.\nSolar-thermal monopropellant thrusters are also integral to the design of a next-generation cryogenic upper stage rocket proposed by U.S. company United Launch Alliance (ULA). The Advanced Common Evolved Stage (ACES) is intended as a lower-cost, more-capable and more-flexible upper stage that would supplement, and perhaps replace, the existing ULA Centaur and ULA Delta Cryogenic Second Stage (DCSS) upper stage vehicles. The ACES Integrated Vehicle Fluids option eliminates all hydrazine and helium from the space vehicle\u2014normally used for attitude control and station keeping\u2014and depends instead on solar-thermal monopropellant thrusters using waste hydrogen.\nHistory.\nSoviet designers had begun experimenting with monopropellant rockets as early as 1933. They believed their monopropellant mixes of nitrogen tetroxide with gasoline, or toluene, and kerosene would lead to an overall simpler system; however, they ran into problems with violent explosions with pre-mixed fuel and oxidizer serving as a monopropellant that led the designers to abandon this approach.\nGerman engineer Helmuth Walter was an early pioneer of monopropellant rockets using hydrogen peroxide as fuel. Initially developing a peroxide gas turbine for use in submarines, monopropellant motors of his design were used to power the Heinkel He 176 (the first aircraft solely powered by a liquid rocket motor) and early Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet prototypes (the only operational rocket-powered fighter).\nAfter World War II the British continued to experiment with hydrogen peroxide monopropellants. They developed the de Havilland Sprite, a motor that could produce 5000lbf (22.2 kN) of thrust over 16 seconds. This rocket was tested on 30 flights on the de Havilland Comet 1 (the first commercial jet airliner) in an effort to boost hot and high takeoff performance, but was never used operationally. \nIn the United States, when NASA began studying monopropellants at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) the properties of the existing propellants demanded that the thrusters be impractically large. The addition of a catalyst and pre-heating propellant made them more efficient, but raised concerns over safety and handling of hazardous propellants like anhydrous hydrazine. However the simplicity of the thrusters designed around early monopropellants offered many simplicities and were first tested in 1959 on the Able-4 mission. This test allowed for the Ranger and Mariner missions to use a similar thruster for correction maneuvers and in the orbital insertion of Telstar, considered by the National Air and Space Museum to be the most significant communications satellite in the beginning of the space race.\nIn 1964, NASA began use of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle to train Apollo astronauts in piloting the Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) using an attitude control system consisting of 16 hydrogen peroxide monopropellant thrusters to steer the LEM to the lunar surface.\nUpper stage vehicles began using monopropellant thrusters as a convenient control device in the early 1960s when General Dynamics proposed the Centaur upper stage to the United States Airforce of which versions are still in use in United Launch Alliance's Atlas and Vulcan rockets.\nNew developments.\nNASA is developing a new monopropellant propulsion system for small, cost-driven spacecraft with delta-v requirements in the range of 10\u2013150\u00a0m/s. This system is based on a hydroxylammonium nitrate (HAN)/water/fuel monopropellant blend which is extremely dense, environmentally benign, and promises good performance and simplicity.\nThe EURENCO Bofors company produced LMP-103S as a 1-to-1 substitute for hydrazine by dissolving 65% ammonium dinitramide, NH4N(NO2)2, in 35% water solution of methanol and ammonia. LMP-103S has 6% higher specific impulse and 30% higher impulse density than hydrazine monopropellant. Additionally, hydrazine is highly toxic and carcinogenic, while LMP-103S is only moderately toxic. LMP-103S is UN Class 1.4S allowing for transport on commercial aircraft, and was demonstrated on the Prisma satellite in 2010. Special handling is not required. LMP-103S could replace hydrazine as the most commonly used monopropellant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37833", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37833", "title": "Bipropellant rocket", "text": ""}
{"id": "37834", "revid": "46624289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37834", "title": "Dual mode propulsion rocket", "text": "Dual mode propulsion systems combine the high efficiency of bipropellant rockets with the reliability and simplicity of monopropellant rockets.\nDual mode systems are either hydrazine/nitrogen tetroxide, or monomethylhydrazine/hydrogen peroxide (the former is much more common). Typically, this system works as follows: During the initial high-impulse orbit-raising maneuvers, the system operates in a bipropellant fashion, providing high thrust at higher specific impulse; when it arrives on orbit, it closes off either the fuel or oxidizer, and conducts the remainder of its mission in a simple, predictable monopropellant fashion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37835", "revid": "41663213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37835", "title": "Resistojet rocket", "text": "Method of spacecraft propulsion\nA resistojet is a method of spacecraft propulsion (electric propulsion) that provides thrust by heating a typically non-reactive fluid. Heating is usually achieved by sending electricity through a resistor consisting of a hot incandescent filament, with the expanded gas expelled through a conventional nozzle.\nResistojets have been flown in space since 1965 on board military Vela satellites. However, they only became used in commercial applications in 1980 with the launch of the first satellites in the Intelsat-V program. Many GEO spacecraft, and all 95 Iridium, used Aerojet MR-501/MR-502 series resistojet engines. Nowadays resistojet propulsion is used for orbit insertion, attitude control, and deorbit of LEO satellites, and do well in situations where energy is much less of a constraint than mass, and where propulsion efficiency needs to be reasonably high but low thrust is acceptable.\nResistojets have also been proposed as means of using biowaste as reaction mass, particularly in conjunction with hydrazine. Studies focus on the characteristics of steam and carbon dioxide as major constituents of a biowaste stream, and typically use cubic zirconia as a heating element.\nAdvantages.\nMany satellite missions necessitate an ability for minor alterations in trajectory even after the craft has been inserted into orbit. Most satellites use monopropellant rocket motors or cold gas thrusters for such orbital adjustments. Both methods, however, suffer from some limiting drawbacks: Hydrazine, the most commonly used monopropellant, is highly expensive and due to its volatile nature unsuitable for smaller satellites that are sent to space as secondary cargo. Cold gas thrusters, while utilizing relatively cheap, inert and therefore \"safe\" gasses like nitrogen, suffer from low specific impulse in comparison to monopropellant motors. Resistojets are designed to bridge the gap between these two methods of propulsion, offering the safety of an inert propellant coupled with specific impulse nearing that of hydrazine.\nDisadvantages.\nThe main disadvantage of a resistojet design in comparison to simpler cold gas thrusters is the need for a power supply, which takes up space and is therefore sometimes a prohibitive factor for Microsat missions. In addition, the increased technical complexity of a resistojet relative to simpler solutions results in a greater risk of technical failure.\nSince they do not take advantage of chemical combustion, resistojets (and similar designs) have a lower thrust that is orders of magnitude lower than those of more conventional solid fuel and liquid-propellant rockets. As a result, they are unsuitable for orbital maneuvers that require high delta V over shorter periods.\nPhysical principles.\nResistojets can be considered an evolution of traditional cold gas thrusters, which are the simplest form of rocket engine available. Their fuel tank holds the propellant, which is then led into the nozzle where it decompresses, propelling the craft forward. In a resistojet, a resistor is used to heat the fluid before it enters the nozzle, making it expand more forcefully, resulting in higher specific impulse.\nA resistor is an electrical component which converts electrical energy into heat. Therefore, the thrust of a resistojet engine can be regulated by simply altering the wattage flowing through the resistor.\nHeating a room-temperature (27\u00a0\u00b0C) fluid by 300\u00a0\u00b0C in such a way results in a 41% increase in specific impulse. If heated by 900\u00a0\u00b0C, specific impulse could be doubled in comparison to a cold gas thruster using the same propellant. In other words, a quadrupling of the temperature yields a doubling in specific impulse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37836", "revid": "3146208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37836", "title": "Arcjet rocket", "text": "Type of spacecraft electric propulsion system\nAn arcjet rocket or arcjet thruster is a form of electrically powered spacecraft propulsion, in which an electrical discharge (arc) is created in a flow of propellant (typically hydrazine or ammonia). This imparts additional energy to the propellant, so that one can extract more work out of each kilogram of propellant, at the expense of increased power consumption and (usually) higher cost. Also, the thrust levels available from typically used arcjet engines are very low compared with chemical engines.\nWhen the energy is available, arcjets are well suited to keeping stations in orbit and can replace monopropellant rockets.\nAerojet MR-510 series arcjet engines are currently used on Lockheed Martin A2100 satellites using hydrazine as a propellant, providing over 585 s average specific impulse at 2 kW.\nThe ammonia-based ESEX arcjet on the ARGOS satellite operated with a specific impulse of 786.2 \u00b1 43.0 s over five test firings.\nIn Germany, researchers at the University of Stuttgart's Institute of Space Systems have been working with arcjets for years and have developed various hydrogen-powered arcjet engines capable of power outputs from 1 to 100\u00a0kW. The heated hydrogen reaches exit speeds of . An arcjet-propelled test satellite by the name of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg 1 (BW1) was scheduled to go to the Moon by 2010. No such launch has yet occurred. Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg 1 would have used polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) propellant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37838", "revid": "16364713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37838", "title": "Hall-effect thruster", "text": "Type of electric propulsion system\nIn spacecraft propulsion, a Hall-effect thruster (HET, sometimes referred to as a Hall thruster or Hall-current thruster) is a type of ion thruster in which the propellant is accelerated by an electric field. Based on the discovery by Edwin Hall, Hall-effect thrusters use a magnetic field to limit the electrons' axial motion and then use them to ionize propellant, efficiently accelerate the ions to produce thrust, and neutralize the ions in the plume. The Hall-effect thruster is classed as a moderate specific impulse (1,600s) space propulsion technology and has benefited from considerable theoretical and experimental research since the 1960s.\nHall thrusters operate on a variety of propellants, the most common being xenon and krypton. Other propellants of interest include argon, bismuth, iodine, magnesium, zinc and adamantane.\nHall thrusters are able to accelerate their exhaust to speeds between 10 and 80\u00a0km/s (1,000\u20138,000\u00a0s specific impulse), with most models operating between 15 and 30\u00a0km/s. The thrust produced depends on the power level. Devices operating at 1.35\u00a0kW produce about 83\u00a0mN of thrust. High-power models have demonstrated up to 5.4\u00a0N in the laboratory. Power levels up to 100\u00a0kW have been demonstrated for xenon Hall thrusters.\nAs of 2009,[ [update]] Hall-effect thrusters ranged in input power levels from 1.35 to 10 kilowatts and had exhaust velocities of 10\u201350 kilometers per second, with thrust of 40\u2013600 millinewtons and efficiency in the range of 45\u201360 percent.\nThe applications of Hall-effect thrusters include control of the orientation and position of orbiting satellites and use as a main propulsion engine for medium-size robotic space vehicles.\nHistory.\nHall thrusters were studied independently in the United States and the Soviet Union. They were first described publicly in the US in the early 1960s. However, the Hall thruster was first developed into an efficient propulsion device in the Soviet Union. In the US, scientists focused on developing gridded ion thrusters.\nSoviet designs.\nTwo types of Hall thrusters were developed in the Soviet Union:\nThe SPT design was largely the work of A. I. Morozov. The first SPT to operate in space, an SPT-50 aboard a Soviet Meteor spacecraft, was launched December 1971. They were mainly used for satellite stabilization in north\u2013south and in east\u2013west directions. Since then until the late 1990s 118 SPT engines completed their mission and some 50 continued to be operated. Thrust of the first generation of SPT engines, SPT-50 and SPT-60 was 20 and 30\u00a0mN respectively. In 1982, the SPT-70 and SPT-100 were introduced, their thrusts being 40 and 83\u00a0mN, respectively. In the post-Soviet Russia high-power (a few kilowatts) SPT-140, SPT-160, SPT-200, T-160, and low-power (less than 500 W) SPT-35 were introduced.\nSoviet and Russian TAL-type thrusters include the D-38, D-55, D-80, and D-100.\nNon-Soviet designs.\nSoviet-built thrusters were introduced to the West in 1992 after a team of electric propulsion specialists from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Glenn Research Center, and the Air Force Research Laboratory, under the support of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, visited Russian laboratories and experimentally evaluated the SPT-100 (i.e., a 100\u00a0mm diameter SPT thruster). Hall thrusters continue to be used on Russian spacecraft and have also flown on European and American spacecraft. Space Systems/Loral, an American commercial satellite manufacturer, now flies Fakel SPT-100's on their GEO communications spacecraft.\nSince in the early 1990s, Hall thrusters have been the subject of a large number of research efforts throughout the United States, India, France, Italy, Japan, and Russia (with many smaller efforts scattered in various countries across the globe). Hall thruster research in the US is conducted at several government laboratories, universities and private companies. Government and government funded centers include NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA's Glenn Research Center, the Air Force Research Laboratory (Edwards AFB, California), and The Aerospace Corporation. Universities include the US Air Force Institute of Technology, University of Michigan, Stanford University, The Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Princeton University, Michigan Technological University, and Georgia Tech. In 2023, students at the Olin College of Engineering demonstrated the first undergraduate designed steady-state hall thruster. A considerable amount of development is being conducted in industry, such as IHI Corporation in Japan, Aerojet and Busek in the US, Safran Spacecraft Propulsion in France, LAJP in Ukraine, SITAEL in Italy, and Satrec Initiative in South Korea.\nThe first use of Hall thrusters on lunar orbit was the European Space Agency (ESA) lunar mission SMART-1 in 2003.\nHall thrusters were first demonstrated on a western satellite on the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) STEX spacecraft, which flew the Russian D-55. The first American Hall thruster to fly in space was the Busek BHT-200 on TacSat-2 technology demonstration spacecraft. The first flight of an American Hall thruster on an operational mission, was the Aerojet BPT-4000, which launched August 2010 on the military Advanced Extremely High Frequency GEO communications satellite. At 4.5\u00a0kW, the BPT-4000 is also the highest power Hall thruster ever flown in space. Besides the usual stationkeeping tasks, the BPT-4000 is also providing orbit-raising capability to the spacecraft. The X-37B has been used as a testbed for the Hall thruster for the AEHF satellite series. Several countries worldwide continue efforts to qualify Hall thruster technology for commercial uses. The SpaceX Starlink constellation, the largest satellite constellation in the world, uses Hall-effect thrusters. Starlink initially used krypton gas, but with its V2 satellites swapped to argon due to its cheaper price and widespread availability.\nThe first deployment of Hall thrusters beyond Earth's sphere of influence was the \"Psyche\" spacecraft, launched in 2023 towards the asteroid belt to explore 16 Psyche.\nIndian designs.\nResearch in India is carried out by both public and private research institutes and companies.\nIn 2010, ISRO used Hall-effect ion propulsion thrusters in GSAT-4 carried by GSLV-D3. It had four xenon powered thrusters for north-south station keeping. Two of them were Russian and the other two were Indian. The Indian thrusters were rated at 13\u00a0mN. However, GSLV-D3 did not make it to orbit.\nThe following year in 2014, ISRO was pursuing development of 75\u00a0mN &amp; 250\u00a0mN SPT thrusters to be used in its future high power communication satellites. The 75\u00a0mN thrusters were put to use aboard the GSAT-9 communication satellite.\nBy 2021 development of a 300\u00a0mN thruster was complete. Alongside it, RF-powered 10\u00a0kW plasma engines and krypton based low power electric propulsion were being pursued.\nWith private firms entering the space domain, Bellatrix Aerospace became the first commercial firm to bring out commercial Hall-effect thrusters. The current model of the thruster uses xenon as fuel. Tests were carried out at the spacecraft propulsion research laboratory in the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru. Heaterless cathode technology was used to increase the system's lifespan and redundancy. Bellatrix Aerospace had previously developed the first commercially available microwave electrothermal thruster, for which the company received an order from ISRO. The ARKA-series of HET was launched on PSLV-C55 mission. It was successfully tested on POEM-2.\nPrinciple of operation.\nThe essential working principle of the Hall thruster is that it uses an electrostatic potential to accelerate ions up to high speeds. In a Hall thruster, the attractive negative charge is provided by an electron plasma at the open end of the thruster instead of a grid. A radial magnetic field of about is used to confine the electrons, where the combination of the radial magnetic field and axial electric field cause the electrons to drift in azimuth thus forming the Hall current from which the device gets its name.\nA schematic of a Hall thruster is shown in the adjacent image. An electric potential of between 150 and 800 volts is applied between the anode and cathode.\nThe central spike forms one pole of an electromagnet and is surrounded by an annular space, and around that is the other pole of the electromagnet, with a radial magnetic field in between.\nThe propellant, such as xenon gas, is fed through the anode, which has numerous small holes in it to act as a gas distributor. As the neutral xenon atoms diffuse into the channel of the thruster, they are ionized by collisions with circulating high-energy electrons (typically 10\u201340\u00a0eV, or about 10% of the discharge voltage). Most of the xenon atoms are ionized to a net charge of +1, but a noticeable fraction (c. 20%) have +2 net charge.\nThe xenon ions are then accelerated by the electric field between the anode and the cathode. For discharge voltages of 300\u00a0V, the ions reach speeds of around for a specific impulse of 1,500\u00a0s (15\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg). Upon exiting, however, the ions pull an equal number of electrons with them, creating a plasma plume with no net charge.\nThe radial magnetic field is designed to be strong enough to substantially deflect the low-mass electrons, but not the high-mass ions, which have a much larger gyroradius and are hardly impeded. The majority of electrons are thus stuck orbiting in the region of high radial magnetic field near the thruster exit plane, trapped in \"E\"\u00d7\"B\" (axial electric field and radial magnetic field). This orbital rotation of the electrons is a circulating Hall current, and it is from this that the Hall thruster gets its name. Collisions with other particles and walls, as well as plasma instabilities, allow some of the electrons to be freed from the magnetic field, and they drift towards the anode.\nAbout 20\u201330% of the discharge current is an electron current, which does not produce thrust, thus limiting the energetic efficiency of the thruster; the other 70\u201380% of the current is in the ions. Because the majority of electrons are trapped in the Hall current, they have a long residence time inside the thruster and are able to ionize almost all of the xenon propellant, allowing mass use of 90\u201399%. The mass use efficiency of the thruster is thus around 90%, while the discharge current efficiency is around 70%, for a combined thruster efficiency of around 63% (= 90% \u00d7 70%). Modern Hall thrusters have achieved efficiencies as high as 75% through advanced designs.\nCompared to chemical rockets, the thrust is very small, on the order of 83\u00a0mN for a typical thruster operating at 300\u00a0V and 1.5\u00a0kW. For comparison, the weight of a coin like the U.S. quarter or a 20-cent euro coin is approximately 60\u00a0mN. As with all forms of electrically powered spacecraft propulsion, thrust is limited by available power, efficiency, and specific impulse.\nHowever, Hall thrusters operate at the high specific impulses that are typical for electric propulsion. One particular advantage of Hall thrusters, as compared to a gridded ion thruster, is that the generation and acceleration of the ions takes place in a quasi-neutral plasma, so there is no Child-Langmuir charge (space charge) saturated current limitation on the thrust density. This allows much smaller thrusters compared to gridded ion thrusters.\nAnother advantage is that these thrusters can use a wider variety of propellants supplied to the anode, even oxygen, although something easily ionized is needed at the cathode.\nPropellants.\nXenon.\nXenon has been the typical choice of propellant for many electric propulsion systems, including Hall thrusters. Xenon propellant is used because of its high atomic weight and low ionization potential. Xenon is relatively easy to store, and as a gas at spacecraft operating temperatures does not need to be vaporized before usage, unlike metallic propellants such as bismuth. Xenon's high atomic weight means that the ratio of energy expended for ionization per mass unit is low, leading to a more efficient thruster.\nKrypton.\nKrypton is another choice of propellant for Hall thrusters. Xenon has an ionization potential of 12.1298 eV, while krypton has an ionization potential of 13.996 eV. This means that thrusters utilizing krypton need to expend a slightly higher energy per mole to ionize, which reduces efficiency. Additionally, krypton is a lighter ion, so the unit mass per ionization energy is further reduced compared to xenon. However, xenon can be more than ten times as expensive as krypton per kilogram, making krypton a more economical choice for building out satellite constellations like that of SpaceX's Starlink V1, whose original Hall thrusters were fueled with krypton.\nArgon.\nSpaceX developed a new thruster that used argon as propellant for their Starlink V2 mini. The new thruster had 2.4 times the thrust and 1.5 times the specific impulse as SpaceX's previous thruster that used krypton. Argon is approximately 100 times less expensive than Krypton and 1000 times less expensive than Xenon.\nVariants.\nAs well as the Soviet SPT and TAL types mentioned above, there are:\nCylindrical Hall thrusters.\nAlthough conventional (annular) Hall thrusters are efficient in the kilowatt power regime, they become inefficient when scaled to small sizes. This is due to the difficulties associated with holding the performance scaling parameters constant while decreasing the channel size and increasing the applied magnetic field strength. This led to the design of the cylindrical Hall thruster. The cylindrical Hall thruster can be more readily scaled to smaller sizes due to its nonconventional discharge-chamber geometry and associated magnetic field profile. The cylindrical Hall thruster more readily lends itself to miniaturization and low-power operation than a conventional (annular) Hall thruster. The primary reason for cylindrical Hall thrusters is that it is difficult to achieve a regular Hall thruster that operates over a broad envelope from c.1\u00a0kW down to c. 100\u00a0W while maintaining an efficiency of 45\u201355%.\nExternal discharge Hall thruster.\nSputtering erosion of discharge channel walls and pole pieces that protect the magnetic circuit causes failure of thruster operation. Therefore, annular and cylindrical Hall thrusters have limited lifetime. Although magnetic shielding has been shown to dramatically reduce discharge channel wall erosion, pole piece erosion is still a concern. As an alternative, an unconventional Hall\u00a0thruster design called external discharge Hall thruster or external discharge plasma thruster (XPT) has been introduced. The external discharge Hall thruster does not possess any discharge channel walls or pole pieces. Plasma discharge is produced and sustained completely in the open space outside the thruster structure, and thus erosion-free operation is achieved.\nApplications.\nHall thrusters have been flying in space since December 1971, when the Soviet Union launched an SPT-50 on a Meteor satellite. Over 240 thrusters have flown in space since that time, with a 100% success rate. Hall thrusters are now routinely flown on commercial LEO and GEO communications satellites, where they are used for orbital insertion and stationkeeping.\nThe first Hall thruster to fly on a western satellite was a Russian D-55 built by TsNIIMASH, on the NRO's STEX spacecraft, launched on 3 October 1998.\nThe solar electric propulsion system of the European Space Agency's SMART-1 spacecraft used a Snecma PPS-1350-G Hall thruster. SMART-1 was a technology demonstration mission that orbited the Moon. This use of the PPS-1350-G, starting on 28 September 2003, was the first use of a Hall thruster outside geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO). Like most Hall thruster propulsion systems used in commercial applications, the Hall thruster on SMART-1 could be throttled over a range of power, specific impulse, and thrust. It has a discharge power range of 0.46\u20131.19\u00a0kW, a specific impulse of 1,100\u20131,600\u00a0s and thrust of 30\u201370\u00a0mN.\nEarly small satellites of the SpaceX Starlink constellation used krypton-fueled Hall thrusters for position-keeping and deorbiting, while later Starlink satellites used argon-fueled Hall thrusters.\nTiangong space station is fitted with Hall-effect thrusters. Tianhe core module is propelled by both chemical thrusters and four ion thrusters, which are used to adjust and maintain the station's orbit. Hall-effect thrusters are created with crewed mission safety in mind with effort to prevent erosion and damage caused by the accelerated ion particles. A magnetic field and specially designed ceramic shield was created to repel damaging particles and maintain integrity of the thrusters. According to the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the ion drive used on Tiangong has burned continuously for 8,240 hours without a glitch, indicating their suitability for the Chinese space station's designated 15-year lifespan. This is the world's first Hall thruster on a human-rated mission.\nThe Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) granted exclusive commercial licensing to Apollo Fusion, led by Mike Cassidy, for its Magnetically Shielded Miniature (MaSMi) Hall thruster technology. In January 2021, Apollo Fusion announced they had secured a contract with York Space Systems for an order of its latest iteration named the \"Apollo Constellation Engine\".\nThe NASA mission to the asteroid Psyche utilizes xenon gas Hall thrusters. The electricity comes from the craft's 75 square meter solar panels.\nNASA's first Hall thrusters on a human-rated mission will be a combination of 6\u00a0kW Hall thrusters provided by Busek and NASA Advanced Electric Propulsion System (AEPS) 12.5\u00a0kW Hall thrusters manufactured by Aerojet Rocketdyne, an L3Harris Technologies company. They will serve as the primary propulsion on Maxar's Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) for the Lunar Gateway under NASA's Artemis program. The high specific impulse of Hall thrusters will allow for efficient orbit raising and station keep for the Lunar Gateway's polar near-rectilinear halo orbit.\nIn development.\nThe highest power Hall-effect thruster in development (as of 2021[ [update]]) is the University of Michigan's 100\u00a0kW X3 Nested Channel Hall Thruster. The thruster is approximately 80\u00a0cm in diameter and weighs 230\u00a0kg, and has demonstrated a thrust of 5.4 N.\nOther high power thrusters include NASA's 40\u00a0kW Advanced Electric Propulsion System (AEPS), meant to propel large-scale science missions and cargo transportation in deep space.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37839", "revid": "752761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37839", "title": "Ion thruster", "text": "Spacecraft engine that generates thrust by generating a jet of ions\nAn ion thruster, ion drive, or ion engine is a form of electric propulsion used for spacecraft propulsion. An ion thruster creates a cloud of positive ions from a neutral gas by ionizing it to extract some electrons from its atoms. The ions are then accelerated using electricity to create thrust. Ion thrusters are categorized as either electrostatic or electromagnetic.\nElectrostatic thruster ions are accelerated by the Coulomb force along the electric field direction. Temporarily stored electrons are reinjected by a \"neutralizer\" in the cloud of ions after it has passed through the electrostatic grid, so the gas becomes neutral again and can freely disperse in space without any further electrical interaction with the thruster. \nBy contrast, electromagnetic thruster ions are accelerated by the Lorentz force to accelerate all species (free electrons as well as positive and negative ions) in the same direction whatever their electric charge, and are specifically referred to as plasma propulsion engines, where the electric field is not in the direction of the acceleration.\nIon thrusters in operation typically consume 1\u20137\u00a0kW of power, have exhaust velocities around 20\u201350\u00a0km/s (12\u201330\u00a0mi/s, \"I\"sp 2000\u20135000s), and possess thrusts of 25\u2013250\u00a0mN and a propulsive efficiency of 65\u201380%; experimental ion thrusters have achieved , .\nThe 1998 \"Deep Space 1\" spacecraft changed velocity by with its ion thruster, and consumed of xenon. The 2007 \"Dawn\" spacecraft achieved velocity change of , though with less efficiency, having consumed of xenon.\nApplications include control of the orientation and position of orbiting satellites (some satellites have dozens of low-power ion thrusters), use as a main propulsion engine for low-mass robotic space vehicles (such as \"Deep Space 1\" and \"Dawn\"), and serving as propulsion thrusters for crewed spacecraft and space stations (e.g. Tiangong).\nIon thrust engines are generally practical only in the vacuum of space as the engine's minuscule thrust cannot overcome any significant air resistance without radical design changes, as may be found in the 'Atmosphere Breathing Electric Propulsion' concept. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has created designs that are able to fly for short distances and at low speeds at ground level, using ultra-light materials and low drag aerofoils. An ion engine cannot usually generate sufficient thrust to achieve initial liftoff from any celestial body with significant surface gravity. For these reasons, spacecraft must rely on other methods such as conventional chemical rockets or non-rocket launch technologies to reach their initial orbit.\nA type of electric propulsion, spacecraft such as \"Dawn\" use an ion engine. In an ion engine, electric power is used to create charged particles of the propellant, usually the gas xenon, and accelerate them to extremely high velocities. The exhaust velocity of conventional rockets is limited to about 5\u00a0km/s by the chemical energy stored in the fuel's molecular bonds. They produce a high thrust (about 106 N), but they have a low specific impulse, and that limits their top speed. By contrast, ion engines have low force, but the top speed in principle is limited only by the electrical power available on the spacecraft and on the gas ions being accelerated. The exhaust speed of the charged particles range from 15\u00a0km/s to 35\u00a0km/s.\nOrigins.\nKonstantin Tsiolkovsky first suggested the concept of ion thruster in 1911. The technique was recommended for near-vacuum conditions at high altitude, but thrust was demonstrated with ionized air streams at atmospheric pressure. The idea appeared again in Hermann Oberth's \"Wege zur Raumschiffahrt\" (1929; \"Ways to Spaceflight\"), where he explained his thoughts on the mass savings of electric propulsion, predicted its use in spacecraft propulsion and attitude control, and advocated electrostatic acceleration of charged gasses.\nThe concept of an ion thruster spacecraft was first popularized in a science fiction story by American Jack Williamson in 1947. It subsequently became a staple of genre science fiction stories.\nA working ion thruster was built by Harold R. Kaufman in 1959 at the NASA Glenn Research Center facilities. It was similar to a gridded electrostatic ion thruster and used mercury for propellant. Suborbital tests were conducted during the 1960s and in 1964, and the engine was sent into a suborbital flight aboard the Space Electric Rocket Test-1 (SERT-1). It successfully operated for the planned 31 minutes before falling to Earth. This test was followed by an orbital test, SERT-2, in 1970.\nOn the 12 October 1964 Voskhod 1 carried out tests with ion thrusters that had been attached to the exterior of the spacecraft. \nAn alternate form of electric propulsion, the Hall-effect thruster, was studied independently in the United States and the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s. Hall-effect thrusters operated on Soviet satellites from 1972 until the late 1990s, mainly used for satellite stabilization in north\u2013south and in east\u2013west directions. Some 100\u2013200 engines completed missions on Soviet and Russian satellites. Soviet thruster design was introduced to the West in 1992 after a team of electric propulsion specialists, under the support of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, visited Soviet laboratories.\nGeneral working principle.\nIon thrusters use beams of ions (electrically charged atoms or molecules) to create thrust in accordance with momentum conservation. The method of accelerating the ions varies, but all designs take advantage of the charge/mass ratio of the ions. This ratio means that relatively small potential differences can create high exhaust velocities. This reduces the amount of reaction mass or propellant required, but increases the amount of specific power required compared to chemical rockets. Ion thrusters are therefore able to achieve high specific impulses. The drawback of the low thrust is low acceleration because the mass of the electric power unit directly correlates with the amount of power. This low thrust makes ion thrusters unsuited for launching spacecraft into orbit, but effective for in-space propulsion over longer periods of time.\nIon thrusters are categorized as either electrostatic or electromagnetic. The main difference is the method for accelerating the ions.\nElectric power for ion thrusters is usually provided by solar panels. However, for sufficiently large distances from the sun, nuclear power may be used. In each case, the power supply mass is proportional to the peak power that can be supplied, and both provide, for this application, almost no limit to the energy.\nElectric thrusters tend to produce low thrust, which results in low acceleration. Defining formula_1, the standard gravitational acceleration of Earth, and noting that formula_2, this can be analyzed. An NSTAR thruster producing a thrust force of 92\u00a0mN will accelerate a satellite with a mass of 1ton by 0.092N / 1000\u00a0kg = 9.2\u00d710\u22125m/s2 (or 9.38\u00d710\u22126\"g\"). However, this acceleration can be sustained for months or years at a time, in contrast to the very short burns of chemical rockets.\nformula_3\nWhere:\nThe ion thruster is not the most promising type of electrically powered spacecraft propulsion, but it is the most successful in practice to date. An ion drive would require two days to accelerate a car to highway speed in vacuum. The technical characteristics, especially thrust, are considerably inferior to the prototypes described in literature, technical capabilities are limited by the space charge created by ions. This limits the thrust density (force per cross-sectional area of the engine). Ion thrusters create small thrust levels (the thrust of \"Deep Space 1\" is approximately equal to the weight of one sheet of paper) compared to conventional chemical rockets, but achieve high specific impulse, or propellant mass efficiency, by accelerating the exhaust to high speed. The power imparted to the exhaust increases with the square of exhaust velocity while thrust increase is linear. Conversely, chemical rockets provide high thrust, but are limited in total impulse by the small amount of energy that can be stored chemically in the propellants. Given the practical weight of suitable power sources, the acceleration from an ion thruster is frequently less than one-thousandth of standard gravity. However, since they operate as electric (or electrostatic) motors, they convert a greater fraction of input power into kinetic exhaust power. Chemical rockets operate as heat engines, and Carnot's theorem limits the exhaust velocity.\nElectrostatic thrusters.\nGridded electrostatic ion thrusters.\nGridded electrostatic ion thrusters development started in the 1960s and, since then, they have been used for commercial satellite propulsion and scientific missions. Their main feature is that the propellant ionization process is physically separated from the ion acceleration process.\nThe ionization process takes place in the discharge chamber, where by bombarding the propellant with energetic electrons, as the energy transferred ejects valence electrons from the propellant gas's atoms. These electrons can be provided by a hot cathode filament and accelerated through the potential difference towards an anode. Alternatively, the electrons can be accelerated by an oscillating induced electric field created by an alternating electromagnet, which results in a self-sustaining discharge without a cathode (radio frequency ion thruster).\nThe positively charged ions are extracted by a system consisting of 2 or 3 multi-aperture grids. After entering the grid system near the plasma sheath, the ions are accelerated by the potential difference between the first grid and second grid (called the screen grid and the accelerator grid, respectively) to the final ion energy of (typically) 1\u20132\u00a0keV, which generates thrust.\nIon thrusters emit a beam of positively charged ions. To keep the spacecraft from accumulating a charge, another cathode is placed near the engine to emit electrons into the ion beam, leaving the propellant electrically neutral. This prevents the beam of ions from being attracted (and returning) to the spacecraft, which would cancel the thrust.\nGridded electrostatic ion thruster research (past/present):\nHall-effect thrusters.\nHall-effect thrusters accelerate ions by means of an electric potential between a cylindrical anode and a negatively charged plasma that forms the cathode. The bulk of the propellant (typically xenon) is introduced near the anode, where it ionizes and flows toward the cathode; ions accelerate towards and through it, picking up electrons as they leave to neutralize the beam and leave the thruster at high velocity.\nThe anode is at one end of a cylindrical tube. In the center is a spike that is wound to produce a radial magnetic field between it and the surrounding tube. The ions are largely unaffected by the magnetic field, since they are too massive. However, the electrons produced near the end of the spike to create the cathode are trapped by the magnetic field and held in place by their attraction to the anode. Some of the electrons spiral down towards the anode, circulating around the spike in a Hall current. When they reach the anode they impact the uncharged propellant and cause it to be ionized, before finally reaching the anode and completing the circuit.\nField-emission electric propulsion.\nField-emission electric propulsion (FEEP) thrusters may use caesium or indium propellants. The design comprises a small propellant reservoir that stores the liquid metal, a narrow tube or a system of parallel plates that the liquid flows through and an accelerator (a ring or an elongated aperture in a metallic plate) about a millimeter past the tube end. Caesium and indium are used due to their high atomic weights, low ionization potentials and low melting points. Once the liquid metal reaches the end of the tube, an electric field applied between the emitter and the accelerator causes the liquid surface to deform into a series of protruding cusps, or \"Taylor cones\". At a sufficiently high applied voltage, positive ions are extracted from the tips of the cones. The electric field created by the emitter and the accelerator then accelerates the ions. An external source of electrons neutralizes the positively charged ion stream to prevent charging of the spacecraft.\nElectromagnetic thrusters.\nPulsed inductive thrusters.\nPulsed inductive thrusters (PITs) use pulses instead of continuous thrust and have the ability to run on power levels on the order of megawatts (MW). PITs consist of a large coil encircling a cone shaped tube that emits the propellant gas. Ammonia is the gas most commonly used. For each pulse, a large charge builds up in a group of capacitors behind the coil and is then released. This creates a current that moves circularly in the direction of j\u03b8. The current then creates a magnetic field in the outward radial direction (Br), which then creates a current in the gas that has just been released in the opposite direction of the original current. This opposite current ionizes the ammonia. The positively charged ions are accelerated away from the engine due to the electric field j\u03b8 crossing the magnetic field Br, due to the Lorentz force.\nMagnetoplasmadynamic thruster.\nMagnetoplasmadynamic (MPD) thrusters and lithium Lorentz force accelerator (LiLFA) thrusters use roughly the same idea. The LiLFA thruster builds on the MPD thruster. Hydrogen, argon, ammonia and nitrogen can be used as propellant. In a certain configuration, the ambient gas in low Earth orbit (LEO) can be used as a propellant. The gas enters the main chamber where it is ionized into plasma by the electric field between the anode and the cathode. This plasma then conducts electricity between the anode and the cathode, closing the circuit. This new current creates a magnetic field around the cathode, which crosses with the electric field, thereby accelerating the plasma due to the Lorentz force.\nThe LiLFA thruster uses the same general idea as the MPD thruster, though with two main differences. First, the LiLFA uses lithium vapor, which can be stored as a solid. The other difference is that the single cathode is replaced by multiple, smaller cathode rods packed into a hollow cathode tube. MPD cathodes are easily corroded due to constant contact with the plasma. In the LiLFA thruster, the lithium vapor is injected into the hollow cathode and is not ionized to its plasma form/corrode the cathode rods until it exits the tube. The plasma is then accelerated using the same Lorentz force.\nIn 2013, Russian company the Chemical Automatics Design Bureau successfully conducted a bench test of their MPD engine for long-distance space travel.\nElectrodeless plasma thrusters.\nElectrodeless plasma thrusters have two unique features: the removal of the anode and cathode electrodes and the ability to throttle the engine. The removal of the electrodes eliminates erosion, which limits lifetime on other ion engines. Neutral gas is first ionized by electromagnetic waves and then transferred to another chamber where it is accelerated by an oscillating electric and magnetic field, also known as the ponderomotive force. This separation of the ionization and acceleration stages allows throttling of propellant flow, which then changes the thrust magnitude and specific impulse values.\nHelicon double layer thrusters.\nA helicon double layer thruster is a type of plasma thruster that ejects high velocity ionized gas to provide thrust. In this design, gas is injected into a tubular chamber (the \"source tube\") with one open end. Radio frequency AC power (at 13.56 MHz in the prototype design) is coupled into a specially shaped antenna wrapped around the chamber. The electromagnetic wave emitted by the antenna causes the gas to break down and form a plasma. The antenna then excites a helicon wave in the plasma, which further heats it. The device has a roughly constant magnetic field in the source tube (supplied by solenoids in the prototype), but the magnetic field diverges and rapidly decreases in magnitude away from the source region and might be thought of as a kind of magnetic nozzle. In operation, a sharp boundary separates the high density plasma inside the source region and the low density plasma in the exhaust, which is associated with a sharp change in electrical potential. Plasma properties change rapidly across this boundary, which is known as a \"current-free electric double layer\". The electrical potential is much higher inside the source region than in the exhaust and this serves both to confine most of the electrons and to accelerate the ions away from the source region. Enough electrons escape the source region to ensure that the plasma in the exhaust is neutral overall.\nVariable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR).\nThe proposed Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) functions by using radio waves to ionize a propellant into a plasma, and then using a magnetic field to accelerate the plasma out of the back of the rocket engine to generate thrust. The VASIMR is currently being developed by Ad Astra Rocket Company, headquartered in Houston, Texas, with help from Canada-based Nautel, producing the 200\u00a0kW RF generators for ionizing propellant. Some of the components and \"plasma shoots\" experiments are tested in a laboratory settled in Liberia, Costa Rica. This project is led by former NASA astronaut Franklin Chang-D\u00edaz (CRC-USA). A 200\u00a0kW VASIMR test engine was in discussion to be fitted in the exterior of the International Space Station, as part of the plan to test the VASIMR in space; however, plans for this test onboard ISS were canceled in 2015 by NASA, with a free flying VASIMR test being discussed by Ad Astra instead. An envisioned 200\u00a0MW engine could reduce the duration of flight from Earth to Jupiter or Saturn from six years to fourteen months, and Mars from 7 months to 39 days.\nMicrowave electrothermal thrusters.\nUnder a research grant from the NASA Lewis Research Center during the 1980s and 1990s, Martin C. Hawley and Jes Asmussen led a team of engineers in developing a microwave electrothermal thruster (MET).\nIn the discharge chamber, microwave (MW) energy flows into the center containing a high level of ions (I), causing neutral species in the gaseous propellant to ionize. Excited species flow out (FES) through the low ion region (II) to a neutral region (III) where the ions complete their recombination, replaced with the flow of neutral species (FNS) towards the center. Meanwhile, energy is lost to the chamber walls through heat conduction and convection (HCC), along with radiation (Rad). The remaining energy absorbed into the gaseous propellant is converted into thrust.\nRadioisotope thruster.\nA theoretical propulsion system has been proposed, based on alpha particles (He2+ or 42He2+ indicating a helium ion with a +2 charge) emitted from a radioisotope uni-directionally through a hole in its chamber. A neutralising electron gun would produce a tiny amount of thrust with high specific impulse in the order of millions of seconds due to the high relativistic speed of alpha particles.\nA variant of this uses a graphite-based grid with a static DC high voltage to increase thrust as graphite has high transparency to alpha particles if it is also irradiated with short wave UV light at the correct wavelength from a solid-state emitter. It also permits lower energy and longer half-life sources which would be advantageous for a space application. Helium backfill has also been suggested as a way to increase electron mean free path.\nLifetime.\nIon thrusters' low thrust requires continuous operation for a long time to achieve the necessary change in velocity (delta-v) for a particular mission. Ion thrusters are designed to provide continuous operation for intervals of weeks to years.\nThe lifetime of electrostatic ion thrusters is limited by several processes.\nGridded thruster life.\nIn electrostatic gridded designs, charge-exchange ions produced by the beam ions with the neutral gas flow can be accelerated towards the negatively biased accelerator grid and cause grid erosion. End-of-life is reached when either the grid structure fails or the holes in the grid become large enough that ion extraction is substantially affected \u2013 e.g., by the occurrence of electron backstreaming. Grid erosion cannot be avoided and is the major lifetime-limiting factor. Thorough grid design and material selection enable lifetimes of 20,000 hours or more. \nA test of the NASA Solar Technology Application Readiness (NSTAR) electrostatic ion thruster resulted in 30,472 hours (roughly 3.5 years) of continuous thrust at maximum power. Post-test examination indicated the engine was not approaching failure. NSTAR operated for years on \"Dawn\".\nThe NASA Evolutionary Xenon Thruster (NEXT) project operated continuously for more than 48,000 hours. The test was conducted in a high-vacuum test chamber. Over the course of the test, which lasted more than five and a half years, the engine consumed approximately 870 kilograms of xenon propellant. The total impulse generated would require over 10,000 kilograms of conventional rocket propellant for a similar application.\nHall-effect thruster life.\nHall-effect thrusters suffer from strong erosion of the ceramic discharge chamber by impact of energetic ions: a test reported in 2010 showed erosion of around 1\u00a0mm per hundred hours of operation, though this is inconsistent with observed on-orbit lifetimes of a few thousand hours.\nThe Advanced Electric Propulsion System (AEPS) is expected to accumulate about 5,000 hours and the design aims to achieve a flight model that offers a half-life of at least 23,000 hours and a full life of about 50,000 hours.\nPropellants.\nIonization energy represents a large percentage of the energy needed to run ion drives. The ideal propellant is thus easy to ionize and has a high mass/ionization energy ratio. In addition, the propellant should not erode the thruster to any great degree, so as to permit long life, and should not contaminate the vehicle.\nMany current designs use xenon gas, as it is easy to ionize, has a reasonably high atomic number, is inert and causes low erosion. However, xenon is globally in short supply and expensive (approximately $3,000 per kg in 2021).\nSome older ion thruster designs used mercury propellant. However, mercury is toxic, tended to contaminate spacecraft, and was difficult to feed accurately. A modern commercial prototype may be using mercury successfully however, mercury was formally banned as a propellant in 2022 by the Minamata Convention on Mercury.\nFrom 2018\u20132023, krypton was used to fuel the Hall-effect thrusters aboard Starlink internet satellites, in part due to its lower cost than conventional xenon propellant. Starlink V2-mini satellites have since switched to argon Hall-effect thrusters, providing higher specific impulse.\nOther propellants, such as bismuth and iodine, show promise both for gridless designs such as Hall-effect thrusters, and gridded ion thrusters.\nIodine was used as a propellant for the first time in space, in the NPT30-I2 gridded ion thruster by ThrustMe, on board the Beihangkongshi-1 mission launched in November 2020, with an extensive report published a year later in the journal \"Nature\". The CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster (CAT) used on the Mars Array of Ionospheric Research Satellites Using the CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster (MARS-CAT) mission also proposes to use solid iodine as the propellant to minimize storage volume.\nVASIMR design (and other plasma-based engines) are theoretically able to use practically any material for propellant. However, in current tests the most practical propellant is argon, which is relatively abundant and inexpensive.\nEnergy efficiency.\nIon thruster efficiency is the kinetic energy of the exhaust jet emitted per second divided by the electrical power into the device.\nOverall system energy efficiency is determined by the propulsive efficiency, which depends on vehicle speed and exhaust speed. Some thrusters can vary exhaust speed in operation, but all can be designed with different exhaust speeds. At the lower end of specific impulse, \"I\"sp, the overall efficiency drops because ionization takes up a larger percentage energy and at the high end propulsive efficiency is reduced.\nOptimal efficiencies and exhaust velocities for any given mission can be calculated to give minimum overall cost.\nMissions.\nIon thrusters have many in-space propulsion applications. The best applications make use of the long mission interval when significant thrust is not needed. Examples of this include orbit transfers, attitude adjustments, drag compensation for low Earth orbits, fine adjustments for scientific missions and cargo transport between propellant depots, e.g., for chemical fuels. Ion thrusters can also be used for interplanetary and deep-space missions where acceleration rates are not crucial. Ion thrusters are seen as the best solution for these missions, as they require high change in velocity but do not require rapid acceleration. Continuous thrust over long durations can reach high velocities while consuming far less propellant than traditional chemical rockets.\nDemonstration vehicles.\nSERT.\nIon propulsion systems were first demonstrated in space by the NASA Lewis (now Glenn Research Center) missions Space Electric Rocket Test (SERT)-1 and SERT-2A. A SERT-1 suborbital flight was launched on 20 July 1964, and successfully proved that the technology operated as predicted in space. These were electrostatic ion thrusters using mercury and caesium as the reaction mass. SERT-2A, launched on 4 February 1970, verified the operation of two mercury ion engines for thousands of running hours.\nOperational missions.\nIon thrusters are routinely used for station-keeping on commercial and military communication satellites in geosynchronous orbit. The Soviet Union pioneered this field, using stationary plasma thrusters (SPTs) on satellites starting in the early 1970s.\nTwo geostationary satellites (ESA's Artemis in 2001\u20132003 and the United States military's AEHF-1 in 2010\u20132012) used the ion thruster to change orbit after the chemical-propellant engine failed. Boeing began using ion thrusters for station-keeping in 1997 and planned in 2013\u20132014 to offer a variant on their 702 platform, with no chemical engine and ion thrusters for orbit raising; this permits a significantly lower launch mass for a given satellite capability. AEHF-2 used a chemical engine to raise perigee to and proceeded to geosynchronous orbit using electric propulsion.\nIn Earth orbit.\nTiangong space station.\nChina's Tiangong space station is fitted with ion thrusters. Its Tianhe core module is propelled by both chemical thrusters and four Hall-effect thrusters, which are used to adjust and maintain the station's orbit. The development of the Hall-effect thrusters is considered a sensitive topic in China, with scientists \"working to improve the technology without attracting attention\". Hall-effect thrusters are created with crewed mission safety in mind with effort to prevent erosion and damage caused by the accelerated ion particles. A magnetic field and specially designed ceramic shield was created to repel damaging particles and maintain integrity of the thrusters. According to the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the ion drive used on Tiangong has burned continuously for 8,240 hours without a glitch, indicating their suitability for the Chinese space station's designated 15-year lifespan. This is the world's first Hall thruster on a human-rated mission.\nStarlink.\nSpaceX's Starlink satellite constellation uses Hall-effect thrusters powered by krypton or argon to raise orbit, perform maneuvers, and de-orbit at the end of their use.\nGOCE.\nESA's Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE) was launched on 16 March 2009. It used ion propulsion throughout its twenty-month mission to combat the air-drag it experienced in its low orbit (altitude of 255 kilometres) before intentionally deorbiting on 11 November 2013.\nIn deep space.\nDeep Space 1.\nNASA developed the NSTAR ion engine for use in interplanetary science missions beginning in the late 1990s. It was space-tested in the space probe \"Deep Space 1\", launched in 1998. This was the first use of electric propulsion as the interplanetary propulsion system on a science mission. Based on the NASA design criteria, Hughes Research Labs developed the Xenon Ion Propulsion System (XIPS) for performing station keeping on geosynchronous satellites. Hughes (EDD) manufactured the NSTAR thruster used on the spacecraft.\nHayabusa and Hayabusa2.\nThe Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency's \"Hayabusa\" space probe was launched in 2003 and rendezvoused with the asteroid 25143 Itokawa. It was powered by four xenon ion engines, which used microwave electron cyclotron resonance to ionize the propellant and an erosion-resistant carbon/carbon-composite material for its acceleration grid. Although the ion engines on \"Hayabusa\" experienced technical difficulties, in-flight reconfiguration allowed one of the four engines to be repaired and allowed the mission to successfully return to Earth.\nHayabusa2, launched in 2014, was based on Hayabusa. It also used ion thrusters.\nSmart 1.\nThe European Space Agency's satellite \"SMART-1\" launched in 2003 using a Snecma PPS-1350-G Hall thruster to get from GTO to lunar orbit. This satellite completed its mission on 3 September 2006, in a controlled collision on the Moon's surface, after a trajectory deviation so scientists could see the 3-meter crater the impact created on the visible side of the Moon.\nDawn.\n\"Dawn\" launched on 27 September 2007, to explore the asteroid Vesta and the dwarf planet Ceres. It used three \"Deep Space 1\" heritage xenon ion thrusters (firing one at a time). \"Dawn\"'s ion drive is capable of accelerating from 0 to in 4 days of continuous firing. The mission ended on 1 November 2018, when the spacecraft ran out of hydrazine chemical propellant for its attitude thrusters.\nLISA Pathfinder.\nLISA Pathfinder is an ESA spacecraft launched in 2015 to orbit the Sun-Earth L1 point. It does not use ion thrusters as its primary propulsion system, but uses both colloid thrusters and FEEP for precise attitude control \u2013 the low thrusts of these propulsion devices make it possible to move the spacecraft incremental distances accurately. It is a test for the LISA mission. The mission ended on 30 December 2017.\nBepiColombo.\nESA's BepiColombo mission was launched to Mercury on 20 October 2018. It uses ion thrusters in combination with swing-bys to get to Mercury, where a chemical rocket will complete orbit insertion.\nDouble Asteroid Redirection Test.\nNASA's Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART) was launched in 2021 and operated its NEXT-C xenon ion thruster for about 1,000 hours to reach the target asteroid on 28 September 2022.\nPsyche.\nNASA's Psyche spacecraft was launched in 2023 and is operating its SPT-140 xenon ion thruster in order to reach asteroid 16 Psyche in August 2029.\nTianwen-2.\nCNSA's \"Tianwen-2\" was launched in May 2025, to explore the co-orbital near-Earth asteroid 469219 Kamo\u02bboalewa and the active asteroid 311P/PanSTARRS and collecting samples of the regolith of Kamo'oalewa.\nProposed missions.\nLunar Gateway.\nThe Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) is a module on the Lunar Gateway that provides power generation and propulsion capabilities. It is targeting launch on a Falcon Heavy no earlier than 2027. It would probably use the 50\u00a0kW Advanced Electric Propulsion System (AEPS) under development at NASA Glenn Research Center and Aerojet Rocketdyne.\nMARS-CAT.\nThe MARS-CAT (Mars Array of ionospheric Research Satellites using the CubeSat Ambipolar Thruster) mission is a two 6U CubeSat concept mission to study Mars' ionosphere. The mission would investigate its plasma and magnetic structure, including transient plasma structures, magnetic field structure, magnetic activity and correlation with solar wind drivers. The CAT thruster is now called the RF thruster and manufactured by Phase Four.\nInterstellar missions.\nGeoffrey A. Landis proposed using an ion thruster powered by a space-based laser, in conjunction with a lightsail, to propel an interstellar probe.\nCancelled missions.\nInternational Space Station.\nAs of March\u00a02011[ [update]], a future launch of an Ad Astra VF-200 200 kW VASIMR electromagnetic thruster was under consideration for testing on the International Space Station (ISS). However, in 2015, NASA ended plans for flying the VF-200 to the ISS. A NASA spokesperson stated that the ISS \"was not an ideal demonstration platform for the desired performance level of the engines\". Ad Astra stated that tests of a VASIMR thruster on the ISS would remain an option after a future in-space demonstration.\nThe VF-200 would have been a flight version of the VX-200. Since the available power from the ISS is less than 200\u00a0kW, the ISS VASIMR would have included a trickle-charged battery system allowing for 15 minutes pulses of thrust. The ISS orbits at a relatively low altitude and experiences fairly high levels of atmospheric drag, requiring periodic altitude boosts \u2013 a high-efficiency engine (high specific impulse) for station-keeping would be valuable; theoretically VASIMR reboosting could cut fuel cost from the current US$210 million annually to one-twentieth. VASIMR could in theory use as little as 300\u00a0kg of argon gas for ISS station-keeping instead of 7500\u00a0kg of chemical fuel \u2013 the high exhaust velocity (high specific impulse) would achieve the same acceleration with a smaller amount of propellant, compared to chemical propulsion with its lower exhaust velocity needing more fuel. Hydrogen is generated by the ISS as a by-product and is vented into space.\nNASA previously worked on a 50\u00a0kW Hall-effect thruster for the ISS, but work was stopped in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37840", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37840", "title": "Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster", "text": "Form of electrically powered spacecraft propulsion\nA magnetoplasmadynamic (MPD) thruster (MPDT) is a form of electrically powered spacecraft propulsion which uses the Lorentz force (the force on a charged particle by an electromagnetic field) to generate thrust. It is sometimes referred to as a Lorentz Force Accelerator (LFA) or (mostly in Japan) MPD arcjet.\nGenerally, a gaseous material is ionized and fed into an acceleration chamber, where the magnetic and electric fields are created using a power source. The particles are then propelled by the Lorentz force resulting from the interaction between the current flowing through the plasma and the magnetic field (which is either externally applied or induced by the current) out through the exhaust chamber. Unlike chemical propulsion, there is no combustion of fuel. As with other electric propulsion variations, both specific impulse and thrust increase with power input, while thrust per watt drops.\nThere are two main types of MPD thrusters, applied-field and self-field. Applied-field thrusters have magnetic rings surrounding the exhaust chamber to produce the magnetic field, while self-field thrusters have a cathode extending through the middle of the chamber. Applied fields are necessary at lower power levels, where self-field configurations are too weak. Various propellants such as xenon, neon, argon, hydrogen, hydrazine, and lithium have been used, with lithium generally being the best performer.\nAccording to Edgar Choueiri magnetoplasmadynamic thrusters have input power 100\u2013500 kilowatts, exhaust velocity 15\u201360 kilometers per second, thrust 2.5\u201325 newtons and efficiency 40\u201360 percent. However, additional research has shown that exhaust velocities can exceed 100 kilometers per second.\nOne potential application of magnetoplasmadynamic thrusters is the main propulsion engine for heavy cargo and piloted space vehicles (example engine formula_1 for human missions to Mars).\nAdvantages.\nIn theory, MPD thrusters could produce extremely high specific impulses (Isp) with an exhaust velocity of up to and beyond , triple the value of current xenon-based ion thrusters, and about 25 times better than liquid rockets. MPD technology also has the potential for thrust levels of up to 200 newtons (N) (), by far the highest for any form of electric propulsion, and nearly as high as many interplanetary chemical rockets. This would allow use of electric propulsion on missions which require quick delta-v maneuvers (such as capturing into orbit around another planet), but with many times greater fuel efficiency.\nDevelopment.\nMPD thruster technology has been explored academically, but commercial interest has been low due to several remaining problems. An important issue with MPD thrusters is the power requirements, which are on the order of hundreds of kilowatts required for optimum performance. Current interplanetary spacecraft power systems (such as radioisotope thermoelectric generators and solar arrays) are incapable of producing that much power. NASA's Project Prometheus reactor was expected to generate power in the hundreds of kilowatts range but was discontinued in 2005.\nA project to produce a space-going nuclear reactor designed to generate 600 kilowatts of electrical power began in 1963 and ran for most of the 1960s in the USSR. It was to power a communication satellite which was in the end not approved. Nuclear reactors supplying kilowatts of electrical power (of the order of ten times more than current RTG power supplies) have been orbited by the USSR: RORSAT; and TOPAZ.\nPlans to develop a megawatt-scale nuclear reactor for the use aboard a crewed spaceship were announced in 2009 by Russian nuclear Kurchatov Institute, national space agency Roskosmos, and confirmed by Russian president Dmitry Medvedev in his November 2009 address to the Federal Assembly.\nAnother plan, proposed by Bradley C. Edwards, is to beam power from the ground. This plan utilizes 5 200\u00a0kW free electron lasers at 0.84 micrometres with adaptive optics on the ground to beam power to the MPD-powered spacecraft, where it is converted to electricity by GaAs photovoltaic panels. The tuning of the laser wavelength of 0.840 micrometres ( per photon) and the photovoltaic panel bandgap of to each other produces an estimated conversion efficiency of 59% and a predicted power density of up to . This would be sufficient to power a MPD upper stage, perhaps to lift satellites from LEO to GEO.\nAnother problem with MPD technology has been the degradation of cathodes due to evaporation driven by high current densities (in excess of ). The use of lithium and barium propellant mixtures and multi-channel hollow cathodes has been shown in the laboratory to be a promising solution for the cathode erosion problem.\nResearch.\nResearch on MPD thrusters has been carried out in the US, the former Soviet Union, Japan, Germany, and Italy. Experimental prototypes were first flown on Soviet spacecraft and, most recently, in 1996, on the Japanese Space Flyer Unit, which demonstrated the successful operation of a quasi-steady pulsed MPD thruster in space. Research at Moscow Aviation Institute, RKK Energiya, , Institute of Space Systems of the University of Stuttgart, ISAS, Centrospazio, Alta S.p.A., Osaka University, University of Southern California, Princeton University's Electric Propulsion and Plasma Dynamics Lab (EPPDyL) (where MPD thruster research has continued uninterrupted since 1967), and NASA centers (Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Glenn Research Center), has resolved many problems related to the performance, stability and lifetime of MPD thrusters.\nAn MPD thruster was tested on board the Japanese Space Flyer Unit as part of EPEX (Electric Propulsion Experiment) that was launched March 18, 1995 and retrieved by space shuttle mission STS-72 January 20, 1996. To date, it is the only operational MPD thruster to have flown in space as a propulsion system. Experimental prototypes were first flown on Soviet spacecraft.\nThe applied-field MPD thruster in development at the Institute of Space Systems of the University of Stuttgart reached a thruster efficiency of 61.99% in 2019, corresponding to a specific impulse of Isp = 4665 s and 2.75 N of thrust."}
{"id": "37841", "revid": "50708223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37841", "title": "Pulsed plasma thruster", "text": "Type of propulsion for spacecraft\nA pulsed plasma thruster (PPT) or as a plasma jet engine (PJE), is a form of electric spacecraft propulsion. PPTs are generally considered the simplest form of electric spacecraft propulsion and were the first form of electric propulsion to be flown in space, having flown on two Soviet probes (Zond 2 and Zond 3) starting in 1964. PPTs are generally flown on spacecraft with a surplus of electricity from abundantly available solar energy.\nPulsed Plasma Thrusters (PPT's) are not to be confused with the Pulsed Plasma Rocket (PPR) developed by Howe Industries, as the PPT is an electric propulsion system and the PPR is a nuclear propulsion system which uses a significantly different approach. \nOperation.\nMost PPTs use a solid material (normally PTFE, more commonly known as Teflon) for propellant, although very few use liquid or gaseous propellants. The first stage in PPT operation involves an arc of electricity passing through the fuel, causing ablation and sublimation of the fuel. The heat generated by this arc causes the resultant gas to turn into plasma, thereby creating a charged gas cloud. Due to the force of the ablation, the plasma is propelled at low speed between two charged plates (an anode and cathode). Since the plasma is charged, the fuel effectively completes the circuit between the two plates, allowing a current to flow through the plasma. This flow of electrons generates a strong electromagnetic field which then exerts a Lorentz force on the plasma, accelerating the plasma out of the PPT exhaust at high velocity. Its mode of operation is similar to a railgun. The pulsing occurs due to the time needed to recharge the plates following each burst of fuel, and the time between each arc. The frequency of pulsing is normally very high and so it generates an almost continuous and smooth thrust. While the thrust is very low, a PPT can operate continuously for extended periods of time, yielding a large final speed.\nThe energy used in each pulse is stored in a capacitor. By varying the time between each capacitor discharge, the thrust and power draw of the PPT can be varied allowing versatile use of the system.\nComparison to chemical propulsion.\nThe equation for the change in velocity of a spacecraft is given by the rocket equation as follows:\nformula_1\nwhere:\nformula_2 is delta-v - the maximum change of speed of the vehicle (with no external forces acting),\nformula_3 is the effective exhaust velocity (formula_4 where formula_5 is the specific impulse expressed as a time period and formula_6 is standard gravity),\nformula_7 refers to the natural logarithm function,\nformula_8 is the initial total mass, including propellant,\nformula_9 is the final total mass.\nPPTs have much higher exhaust velocities than chemical propulsion engines, but have a much smaller fuel flow rate. From the Tsiolkovsky equation stated above, this results in a proportionally higher final velocity of the propelled craft. The exhaust velocity of a PPT is of the order of tens of km/s while conventional chemical propulsion generates thermal velocities in the range of 2\u20134.5\u00a0km/s. Due to this lower thermal velocity, chemical propulsion units become exponentially less effective at higher vehicle velocities, necessitating the use of electric spacecraft propulsion such as PPTs. It is therefore advantageous to use an electric propulsion system such as a PPT to generate high interplanetary speeds in the range 20\u201370\u00a0km/s.\nNASA's research PPT (flown in 2000) achieved an exhaust velocity of 13,700\u00a0m/s, generated a thrust of 860\u00a0\u03bcN, and consumed 70W of electrical power.\nA newer PPT variant called the Fiber-fed PPT (FPPT) has been developed by CU Aerospace, L.L.C. on NASA Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) funds and demonstrated to have an &gt; 3,500 s.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nPPTs are very robust due to their inherently simple design (relative to other electric spacecraft propulsion techniques). As an electric propulsion system, PPTs benefit from reduced fuel consumption compared to traditional chemical rockets, reducing launch mass and therefore launch costs, as well as high specific impulse improving performance.\nHowever, due to energy losses caused by late time ablation and rapid conductive heat transfer from the propellant to the rest of the spacecraft, propulsive efficiency (kinetic energy of exhaust / total energy used) is very low compared to other forms of electric propulsion, at around just 10%.\nUses.\nPPTs are well-suited to uses on relatively small spacecraft with a mass of less than 100\u00a0kg (particularly CubeSats) for roles such as attitude control, station keeping, de-orbiting manoeuvres and deep space exploration. Using PPTs could double the life-span of these small satellite missions without significantly increasing complexity or cost due to the inherent simplicity and relatively low cost nature of PPTs.\nThe first use of PPTs was on the Soviet Zond 2 space probe which carried six PPTs that served as actuators of the attitude control system. The PPT propulsion system was tested for 70 minutes on the 14 December 1964 when the spacecraft was 4.2 million kilometers from Earth.\nA PPT was flown by NASA in November, 2000, as a flight experiment on the Earth Observing-1 spacecraft. The thrusters successfully demonstrated the ability to perform roll control on the spacecraft and demonstrated that the electromagnetic interference from the pulsed plasma did not affect other spacecraft systems. Pulsed plasma thrusters are also an avenue of research used by universities for starting experiments with electric propulsion due to the relative simplicity and lower costs involved with PPTs as opposed to other forms of electric propulsion such as Hall-effect ion thrusters.\nOngoing NASA research.\nOn July 11, 2024 Howe Industries announced that it had contracted with NASA via a $725,000.00 grant to continue research on PPR propulsion technology. Howe Industries claimed that should PPR propulsion technology succeed in becoming a fully functional means of propelling space ships to Mars, then PPR technology should be capable of shortening travel time to Mars, down from the current requirement of approximately 1 year, to a much shorter travel time of only 2 months. Howe Industries further stated that at the current rate of their PPR research and development program, the technology may not be fully ready to propel a crewed space ship to Mars for approximately another 20 years (as of 2024).\nAn FPPT flight unit was qualified and integrated into CU Aerospace\u2019s NASA-funded Dual Propulsion Experiment (\u201cDUPLEX\u201d) 6U CubeSat. The DUPLEX satellite was launched on the Space X Northrup Grumman CRS-23 Mission on September 14, 2025 and successfully docked with the International Space Station September 18, 2025. Subsequent in-space demonstration of the CU Aerospace FPPT-Fiber-fed Pulsed Plasma Thruster and MVP-Monofilament Vaporization Propulsion Thruster technologies is scheduled for early November 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37842", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37842", "title": "Nuclear thermal rocket", "text": "Nuclear spacecraft propulsion technology\nA nuclear thermal rocket (NTR) is a type of thermal rocket where the heat from a nuclear reaction replaces the chemical energy of the propellants in a chemical rocket. In an NTR, a working fluid, usually liquid hydrogen, is heated to a high temperature in a nuclear reactor and then expands through a rocket nozzle to create thrust. The external nuclear heat source theoretically allows a higher effective exhaust velocity and is expected to double or triple payload capacity compared to chemical propellants that store energy internally.\nNTRs have been proposed as a spacecraft propulsion technology, with the earliest ground tests occurring in 1955. The United States maintained an NTR development program through 1973 when it was shut down for various reasons, including to focus on Space Shuttle development. Although more than ten reactors of varying power output have been built and tested, as of 2025[ [update]], no nuclear thermal rocket has flown.\nWhereas all early applications for nuclear thermal rocket propulsion used fission processes, research in the 2010s has moved to fusion approaches. The Direct Fusion Drive project at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory is one such example, although \"energy-positive fusion has remained elusive\". In 2019, the U.S. Congress approved US$125 million in development funding for nuclear thermal propulsion rockets.\nIn May 2022 DARPA issued an RFP for the next phase of their Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar Operations (DRACO) nuclear thermal engine program. This follows on their selection, in 2021, of an early engine design by General Atomics and two spacecraft concepts from Blue Origin and Lockheed Martin. The next phases of the program would have focus on the design, development, fabrication, and assembly of a nuclear thermal rocket engine. In July 2023, Lockheed Martin was awarded the contract to build the spacecraft and BWX Technologies (BWXT) would have developed the nuclear reactor. A launch was expected in 2027, but this was put on indefinite hold due to nuclear reactor test requirements, later compounded by proposed cuts by the second Donald Trump administration in the FY2026 budget before being cancelled. \nIn June 2025, the European Space Agency proposed its own NTP engine called Alumni. At the same time, another form of nuclear thermal propulsion, called centrifugal nuclear thermal rocket, uses liquid uranium for fuel.\nPrinciple of operation.\nNuclear-powered thermal rockets are more effective than chemical thermal rockets, primarily because they can use low-molecular-mass propellants such as hydrogen.\nAs thermal rockets, nuclear thermal rockets work almost exactly like chemical rockets: a heat source releases thermal energy into a gaseous propellant inside the body of the engine, and a nozzle at one end acts as a very simple heat engine: it allows the propellant to expand away from the vehicle, carrying momentum with it and converting thermal energy to coherent kinetic energy. The specific impulse (Isp) of the engine is set by the speed of the exhaust stream. That, in turn, varies as the square root of the kinetic energy loaded on each unit mass of propellant. The kinetic energy per molecule of propellant is determined by the temperature of the heat source (whether it be a nuclear reactor or a chemical reaction). At any particular temperature, lightweight propellant molecules carry just as much kinetic energy as heavier propellant molecules and therefore have more kinetic energy per unit mass. This makes low-molecular-mass propellants more effective than high-molecular-mass propellants.\nBecause chemical rockets and nuclear rockets are made from refractory solid materials, they are both limited to operate below , by the strength characteristics of high-temperature metals. Chemical rockets use the most readily available propellant, which is waste products from the chemical reactions producing their heat energy. Most liquid-fueled chemical rockets use either hydrogen or hydrocarbon combustion, and the propellant is therefore mainly water (molecular mass 18) and carbon dioxide (molecular mass 44). Nuclear thermal rockets using gaseous hydrogen propellant (molecular mass 2) therefore have a theoretical maximum specific impulse that is 3 to 4.5 times greater than those of chemical rockets.\nEarly history.\nIn 1944, Stanis\u0142aw Ulam and Frederic de Hoffmann contemplated the idea of controlling the power of nuclear explosions to launch space vehicles. After World War II, the U.S. military started the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) based on the German V-2 rocket designs. Some large rockets were designed to carry nuclear warheads with nuclear-powered propulsion engines. As early as 1946, secret reports were prepared for the U.S. Air Force, as part of the NEPA project, by North American Aviation and Douglas Aircraft Company's Project Rand. These groundbreaking reports identified a reactor engine in which a working fluid of low molecular weight is heated using a nuclear reactor as the most promising form of nuclear propulsion but identified many technical issues that needed to be resolved.\nIn January 1947, not aware of this classified research, engineers of the Applied Physics Laboratory published their research on nuclear power propulsion and their report was eventually classified. In May 1947, American-educated Chinese scientist Qian Xuesen presented his research on \"thermal jets\" powered by a porous graphite-moderated nuclear reactor at the Nuclear Science and Engineering Seminars LIV organized by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\nIn 1948 and 1949, physicist Leslie Shepherd and rocket scientist Val Cleaver produced a series of groundbreaking scientific papers that considered how nuclear technology might be applied to interplanetary travel. The papers examined both nuclear-thermal and nuclear-electric propulsion.\nEarly NASA engine development.\nThrough Project Rover, Los Alamos National Laboratory began developing nuclear thermal engines as soon as 1955 and tested the world's first experimental nuclear rocket engine, KIWI-A, in 1959. This work at Los Alamos was then continued through the NASA's NERVA program (1961\u20131973). NERVA achieved many successes and improved upon the early prototypes to create powerful engines that were several times more efficient than chemical counterparts. However, the program was cancelled in 1973 due to budget constraints. To date no nuclear thermal propulsion system has ever been implemented in space.\nNuclear fuel types.\nA nuclear thermal rocket can be categorized by the type of reactor, ranging from a relatively simple solid reactor up to the much more difficult to construct but theoretically more efficient gas core reactor. As with all thermal rocket designs, the specific impulse produced is proportional to the square root of the temperature to which the working fluid (reaction mass) is heated. To extract maximum efficiency, the temperature must be as high as possible. For a given design, the temperature that can be attained is typically determined by the materials chosen for reactor structures, the nuclear fuel, and the fuel cladding. Erosion is also a concern, especially the loss of fuel and associated releases of radioactivity.\nSolid core.\nSolid core nuclear reactors have been fueled by compounds of uranium that exist in solid phase under the conditions encountered and undergo nuclear fission to release energy. Flight reactors must be lightweight and capable of tolerating extremely high temperatures, as the only coolant available is the working fluid/propellant. A nuclear solid core engine is the simplest design to construct and is the concept used on all tested NTRs.\nUsing hydrogen as a propellant, a solid core design would typically deliver specific impulses (Isp) on the order of 850 to 1000 seconds, which is about twice that of liquid hydrogen-oxygen designs such as the Space Shuttle main engine. Other propellants have also been proposed, such as ammonia, water, or LOX, but these propellants would provide reduced exhaust velocity and performance at a marginally reduced fuel cost. Yet another mark in favor of hydrogen is that at low pressures it begins to dissociate at about 1500\u00a0K, and at high pressures around 3000\u00a0K. This lowers the mass of the exhaust species, increasing Isp.\nEarly publications were doubtful of space applications for nuclear engines. In 1947, a complete nuclear reactor was so heavy that solid core nuclear thermal engines would be entirely unable to achieve a thrust-to-weight ratio of 1:1, which is needed to overcome the gravity of the Earth at launch. Over the next twenty-five years, U.S. nuclear thermal rocket designs eventually reached thrust-to-weight ratios of approximately 7:1. This is still a much lower thrust-to-weight ratio than what is achievable with chemical rockets, which have thrust-to-weight ratios on the order of 70:1. Combined with the large tanks necessary for liquid hydrogen storage, this means that solid core nuclear thermal engines are best suited for use in orbit outside Earth's gravity well, not to mention avoiding the radioactive contamination that would result from atmospheric use (if an \"open-cycle\" design was used, as opposed to a lower-performance \"closed cycle\" design where no radioactive material was allowed to escape with the rocket propellant.)\nOne way to increase the working temperature of the reactor is to change the nuclear fuel elements. This is the basis of the particle-bed reactor, which is fueled by several (typically spherical) elements that \"float\" inside the hydrogen working fluid. Spinning the entire engine could prevent the fuel element from being ejected out of the nozzle. This design is thought to be capable of increasing the specific impulse to about 1000 seconds (9.8\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg) at the cost of increased complexity. Such a design could share design elements with a pebble-bed reactor, several of which are currently generating electricity. From 1987 through 1991, the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) Office funded Project Timberwind, a non-rotating nuclear thermal rocket based on particle bed technology. The project was canceled before testing.\nPulsed nuclear thermal rocket.\nIn a conventional solid core design, the maximum exhaust temperature of the working mass is that of the reactor, and in practice, lower than that. That temperature represents an energy far below that of the individual neutrons released by the fission reactions. Their energy is spread out through the reactor mass, causing it to thermalize. In power plant designs, the core is then cooled, typically using water. In the case of a nuclear engine, the water is replaced by hydrogen, but the concept is otherwise similar.\nPulsed reactors attempt to transfer the energy directly from the neutrons to the working mass, allowing the exhaust to reach temperatures far beyond the melting point of the reactor core. As specific impulse varies directly with temperature, capturing the energy of the relativistic neutrons allows for a dramatic increase in performance.\nTo do this, pulsed reactors operate in a series of brief pulses rather than the continual chain reaction of a conventional reactor. The reactor is normally off, allowing it to cool. It is then turned on, along with the cooling system or fuel flow, operating at a very high power level. At this level the core rapidly begins to heat up, so once a set temperature is reached, the reactor is quickly turned off again. During these pulses, the power being produced is far greater than the same sized reactor could produce continually. The key to this approach is that while the total amount of fuel that can be pumped through the reactor during these brief pulses is small, the resulting efficiency of these pulses is much higher.\nGenerally, the designs would not be operated solely in the pulsed mode but could vary their duty cycle depending on the need. For instance, during a high-thrust phase of flight, like exiting a low earth orbit, the engine could operate continually and provide an Isp similar to that of traditional solid-core design. But during a long-duration cruise, the engine would switch to pulsed mode to make better use of its fuel.\nLiquid core.\nLiquid core nuclear engines are fueled by compounds of fissionable elements in liquid phase. A liquid-core engine is proposed to operate at temperatures above the melting point of solid nuclear fuel and cladding, with the maximum operating temperature of the engine instead of being determined by the reactor pressure vessel and neutron reflector material. The higher operating temperatures would be expected to deliver specific impulse performance on the order of 1300 to 1500 seconds (12.8-14.8\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg).\nA liquid-core reactor would be extremely difficult to build with current technology. One major issue is that the reaction time of the nuclear fuel is much longer than the heating time of the working fluid. If the nuclear fuel and working fluid are not physically separated, this means that the fuel must be trapped inside the engine while the working fluid is allowed to easily exit through the nozzle. One possible solution is to rotate the fuel/fluid mixture at very high speeds to force the higher-density fuel to the outside, but this would expose the reactor pressure vessel to the maximum operating temperature while adding mass, complexity, and moving parts.\nAn alternative liquid-core design is the nuclear salt-water rocket. In this design, water is the working fluid and also serves as the neutron moderator. Nuclear fuel is not retained, which drastically simplifies the design. However, the rocket would discharge massive quantities of extremely radioactive waste and could only be safely operated well outside the Earth's atmosphere and perhaps even magnetosphere.\nGas core.\nThe final fission classification is the gas-core engine. This is a modification to the liquid-core design which uses rapid circulation of the fluid to create a toroidal pocket of gaseous uranium fuel in the middle of the reactor, surrounded by hydrogen. In this case, the fuel does not touch the reactor wall at all, so temperatures could reach several tens of thousands of degrees, which would allow specific impulses of 3000 to 5000 seconds (30 to 50\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg). In this basic design, the \"open cycle\", the losses of nuclear fuel would be difficult to control, which has led to studies of the \"closed cycle\" or nuclear lightbulb engine, where the gaseous nuclear fuel is contained in a super-high-temperature quartz container, over which the hydrogen flows. The closed-cycle engine has much more in common with the solid-core design, but this time is limited by the critical temperature of quartz instead of the fuel and cladding. Although less efficient than the open-cycle design, the closed-cycle design is expected to deliver a specific impulse of about 1500 to 2000 seconds (15 to 20\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg).\nSolid core fission designs in practice.\nSoviet Union and Russia.\nThe Soviet RD-0410 went through a series of tests at the nuclear test site near Semipalatinsk Test Site.\nIn October 2018, Russia's Keldysh Research Center confirmed a successful ground test of waste heat radiators for a nuclear space engine, as well as previous tests of fuel rods and ion engines.\nUnited States.\nDevelopment of solid core NTRs started in 1955 under the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) as Project Rover and ran to 1973. Work on a suitable reactor was conducted at Los Alamos National Laboratory and Area 25 (Nevada National Security Site) in the Nevada Test Site. Four basic designs came from this project: KIWI, Phoebus, Pewee, and the Nuclear Furnace. Twenty individual engines were tested, with a total of over 17 hours of engine run time. In 1968, Phoebus-2A reactor generated over 4,000 megawatts of thermal power, making it the most powerful nuclear propulsion reactor of its era. While Phoebus-2A was not designed for space missions, scientists had hoped it could eventually be adapted for a Mars journey. \nWhen NASA was formed in 1958, it was given authority over all non-nuclear aspects of the Rover program. To enable cooperation with the AEC and keep classified information compartmentalized, the Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) was formed at the same time. The 1961 NERVA program was intended to lead to the entry of nuclear thermal rocket engines into space exploration. Unlike the AEC work, which was intended to study the reactor design itself, NERVA's goal was to produce a real engine that could be deployed on space missions. The thrust baseline NERVA design was based on the KIWI B4 series.\nTested engines included Kiwi, Phoebus, NRX/EST, NRX/XE, Pewee, Pewee 2, and the Nuclear Furnace. Progressively higher power densities culminated in the Pewee. Tests of the improved Pewee 2 design were canceled in 1970 in favor of the lower-cost Nuclear Furnace (NF-1), and the U.S. nuclear rocket program officially ended in the spring of 1973. During this program, the NERVA accumulated over 2 hours of run time, including 28 minutes at full power. The SNPO considered NERVA to be the last technology development reactor required to proceed to flight prototypes.\nSeveral other solid-core engines have also been studied to some degree. The Small Nuclear Rocket Engine, or SNRE, was designed at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) for upper stage use, both on uncrewed launchers and the Space Shuttle. It featured a split-nozzle that could be rotated to the side, allowing it to take up less room in the Shuttle cargo bay. The design provided 73\u00a0kN of thrust and operated at a specific impulse of 875 seconds (8.58\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg), and it was planned to increase this to 975 seconds, achieving a mass fraction of about 0.74, compared with 0.86 for the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME).\nA related design that saw some work, but never made it to the prototype stage, was Dumbo. Dumbo was similar to KIWI/NERVA in concept, but used more advanced construction techniques to lower the weight of the reactor. The Dumbo reactor consisted of several large barrel-like tubes, which were in turn constructed of stacked plates of corrugated material. The corrugations were lined up so that the resulting stack had channels running from the inside to the outside. Some of these channels were filled with uranium fuel, others with a moderator, and some were left open as a gas channel. Hydrogen was pumped into the middle of the tube and would be heated by the fuel as it traveled through the channels as it worked its way to the outside. The resulting system was lighter than a conventional design for any particular amount of fuel.\nBetween 1987 and 1991, an advanced engine design was studied under Project Timberwind, under the Strategic Defense Initiative, which was later expanded into a larger design in the Space Thermal Nuclear Propulsion (STNP) program. Advances in high-temperature metals, computer modeling, and nuclear engineering, in general, resulted in dramatically improved performance. While the NERVA engine was projected to weigh about , the final STNP offered just over 1/3 the thrust from an engine of only by improving the Isp to between 930 and 1000 seconds.\nTest firings.\nKIWI was the first to be fired, starting in July 1959 with KIWI 1. The reactor was not intended for flight and was named after the flightless bird, Kiwi. The core was simply a stack of uncoated uranium oxide plates onto which the hydrogen was dumped. The thermal output of 70\u00a0MW at an exhaust temperature of 2683\u00a0K was generated. Two additional tests of the basic concept, A1 and A3, added coatings to the plates to test fuel rod concepts.\nThe KIWI B series was fueled by tiny uranium dioxide (UO2) spheres embedded in a low-boron graphite matrix and coated with niobium carbide. Nineteen holes ran the length of the bundles, through which the liquid hydrogen flowed. On the initial firings, immense heat and vibration cracked the fuel bundles. The graphite materials used in the reactor's construction were resistant to high temperatures but eroded under the stream of superheated hydrogen, a reducing agent. The fuel species was later switched to uranium carbide, with the last engine run in 1964. The fuel bundle erosion and cracking problems were improved but never completely solved, despite promising materials work at the Argonne National Laboratory.\nNERVA NRX (Nuclear Rocket Experimental), started testing in September 1964. The final engine in this series was the XE, designed with flight representative hardware and fired into a low-pressure chamber to simulate a vacuum. SNPO fired NERVA NRX/XE twenty-eight times in March 1968. The series all generated 1100 MW, and many of the tests concluded only when the test-stand ran out of hydrogen propellant. NERVA NRX/XE produced the baseline thrust that Marshall Space Flight Center required in Mars mission plans. The last NRX firing lost of nuclear fuel in 2 hours of testing, which was judged sufficient for space missions by SNPO.\nBuilding on the KIWI series, the Phoebus series were much larger reactors. The first 1A test in June 1965 ran for over 10 minutes at 1090 MW and an exhaust temperature of 2370 K. The B run in February 1967 improved this to 1500 MW for 30 minutes. The final 2A test in June 1968 ran for over 12 minutes at 4000 MW, at the time the most powerful nuclear reactor ever built.\nA smaller version of KIWI, the Pewee was also built. It was fired several times at 500 MW to test coatings made of zirconium carbide (instead of niobium carbide) but Pewee also increased the power density of the system. A water-cooled system is known as NF-1 (for \"Nuclear Furnace\") used Pewee 2's fuel elements for future materials testing, showing a factor of 3 reductions in fuel corrosion still further. Pewee 2 was never tested on the stand and became the basis for current NTR designs being researched at NASA's Glenn Research Center and Marshall Space flight Center.\nThe NERVA/Rover project was eventually canceled in 1972 with the general wind-down of NASA in the post-Apollo era. Without a human mission to Mars, the need for a nuclear thermal rocket is unclear. Another problem would be public concerns about safety and radioactive contamination.\nKiwi-TNT destructive test.\nIn January 1965, the U.S. Rover program intentionally modified a Kiwi reactor (KIWI-TNT) to go prompt critical, resulting in immediate destruction of the reactor pressure vessel, nozzle, and fuel assemblies. Intended to simulate a worst-case scenario of a fall from altitude into the ocean, such as might occur in a booster failure after launch, the resulting release of radiation would have caused fatalities out to and injuries out to . The reactor was positioned on a railroad car in the Jackass Flats area of the Nevada Test Site.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAs of January 2012, the propulsion group for Project Icarus was studying an NTR propulsion system, but has seen little activity since 2019.\nIsrael.\nIn 1987, Ronen &amp; Leibson published a study on applications of 242mAm (one of the isotopes of americium) as nuclear fuel to space nuclear reactors, noting its extremely high thermal cross section and energy density. Nuclear systems powered by 242mAm require less fuel by a factor of 2 to 100 compared to conventional nuclear fuels.\nFission-fragment rocket using 242mAm was proposed by George Chapline at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) in 1988, who suggested propulsion based on the direct heating of a propellant gas by fission fragments generated by a fissile material. Ronen et al. demonstrate that 242mAm can maintain sustained nuclear fission as an extremely thin metallic film, less than 1/1000 of a millimeter thick. 242mAm requires only 1% of the mass of 235U or 239Pu to reach its critical state. Ronen's group at the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev further showed that nuclear fuel based on 242mAm could speed space vehicles from Earth to Mars in as little as two weeks.\nThe 242mAm as a nuclear fuel is derived from the fact that it has the highest thermal fission cross section (thousands of barns), about 10x the next highest cross section across all known isotopes. The 242mAm is fissile (because it has an odd number of neutrons) and has a low critical mass, comparable to that of 239Pu.\nIt has a very high cross section for fission, and, if in a nuclear reactor, is destroyed relatively quickly. Another report claims that 242mAm can sustain a chain reaction even as a thin film, and could be used for a novel type of nuclear rocket.\nSince the thermal absorption cross section of 242mAm is very high, the best way to obtain 242mAm is by the capture of fast or epithermal neutrons in Americium-241 irradiated in a fast reactor. However, fast spectrum reactors are not readily available. Detailed analysis of 242mAm breeding in existing pressurized water reactors (PWRs) was provided. Proliferation resistance of 242mAm was reported by the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2008 study.\nItaly.\nIn 2000, Carlo Rubbia at CERN further extended the work by Ronen and Chapline on a fission-fragment rocket using 242mAm as a fuel. Project 242 based on Rubbia's design studied a concept of 242mAm based \"thin-film fission fragment heated NTR\" by using a direct conversion of the kinetic energy of fission fragments into increasing of enthalpy of a propellant gas. Project 242 studied the application of this propulsion system to a crewed mission to Mars. Preliminary results were very satisfactory, and it has been observed that a propulsion system with these characteristics could make the mission feasible. Another study focused on the production of 242mAm in conventional thermal nuclear reactors.\nEuropean Space Agency.\nIn 2022, the European Space Agency launched an initiative called \"Preliminary European Reckon on Nuclear Electric Propulsion for Space Applications\" (RocketRoll) and commissioned a consortium of companies to conduct a study on electric thrusters powered by nuclear energy, known as Nuclear Electric Propulsion. The study outlines the roadmap for the launch of a nuclear propulsion demonstrator in 2035.\nCurrent research in the US since 2000.\nCurrent solid-core nuclear thermal rocket designs are intended to greatly limit the dispersion and break-up of radioactive fuel elements in the event of a catastrophic failure.\nAs of 2013, an NTR for interplanetary travel from Earth orbit to Mars orbit is being studied at Marshall Space Flight Center with Glenn Research Center. In historical ground testing, NTRs proved to be at least twice as efficient as the most advanced chemical engines, which would allow for quicker transfer time and increased cargo capacity. The shorter flight duration, estimated at 3\u20134 months with NTR engines, compared to 6\u20139 months using chemical engines, would reduce crew exposure to potentially harmful and difficult to shield cosmic rays. NTR engines, such as the Pewee of Project Rover, were selected in the Mars Design Reference Architecture (DRA).\nIn 2017, NASA continued research and development on NTRs, designing for space applications with civilian approved materials, with a three-year, US$18.8 million contract.\nIn 2019, an appropriation bill passed by the U.S. Congress included US$125 million in funding for nuclear thermal propulsion research, including planning for a flight demonstration mission by 2024.\nAs of 2021, there has been much interest in nuclear thermal rockets by the United States Space Force and DARPA for orbital and cis-lunar uses. In addition to the U.S. military, NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine has also expressed interest in the project and its potential applications for a future mission to Mars. DARPA awarded two contracts for their Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar Operations (DRACO) program, which aimed to demonstrate a nuclear thermal propulsion system in orbit: one award in September 2020 to Gryphon Technologies for US$14 million, and another award in April 2021 to General Atomics for US$22 million, both for preliminary designs for the reactor. Two conceptual spacecraft designs by Blue Origin and Lockheed Martin were selected. Proposals for a flight demonstration of nuclear thermal propulsion in FY2026 were due on 5 August 2022.\nIn January 2023, NASA and DARPA announced a partnership on DRACO to demonstrate an NTR engine in space, an enabling capability for NASA crewed missions to Mars. In July 2023, U.S. agencies announced that Lockheed Martin had been awarded a $499 million contract to assemble the experimental nuclear thermal reactor vehicle (X-NTRV) and its engine.\nIn 2025, DRACO was cancelled due to decreasing launch costs and new analysis, and by budget cuts from the second Donald Trump administration, which may lead to a total ban on both nuclear thermal propulsion and nuclear electric propulsion leading to the destruction of all research. However, a spending bill advanced by the Senate Appropriations Committee in July 2025 rejected the cuts, directing NASA to spend at least $110 million on nuclear propulsion, which also includes $10 million to create a \"center of excellence\" for nuclear propulsion research to be located in a region that does not have a NASA center but does have \"a large population of industry partners who are also invested in nuclear propulsion research.\"\nRisks.\nAn atmospheric or orbital rocket failure could result in the dispersal of radioactive material into the environment. A collision with orbital debris, material failure due to uncontrolled fission, material imperfections or fatigue, or human design flaws could cause a containment breach of the fissile material. Such a catastrophic failure while in flight could release radioactive material over the Earth in a wide and unpredictable area. The amount of contamination would depend on the size of the nuclear thermal rocket engine, while the zone of contamination and its concentration would be dependent on prevailing weather and orbital parameters at the time of re-entry.\nIt is considered unlikely that a reactor's fuel elements would be spread over a wide area, as they are composed of materials such as carbon composites or carbides and are normally coated with zirconium hydride. Before criticality occurs, solid core NTR fuel is not particularly hazardous. Once the reactor has been started for the first time, extremely radioactive short-life fission products are produced, as well as less radioactive but extremely long-lived fission products. The amount of fission products is zero at fresh-fueled startup, and roughly proportional to (actually: limited by) the total amount of fission heat produced since fresh-fueled startup. Additionally, all engine structures are exposed to direct neutron bombardment, resulting in their radioactive activation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37843", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37843", "title": "Nuclear electric rocket", "text": "Type of spacecraft propulsion system\nA nuclear electric rocket (more properly nuclear electric propulsion) is a type of spacecraft propulsion system where thermal energy from a nuclear reactor is converted to electrical energy, which is used to drive an ion thruster or other electrical spacecraft propulsion technology. The nuclear electric rocket terminology is slightly inconsistent, as technically the \"rocket\" part of the propulsion system is non-nuclear and could also be driven by solar panels. This is in contrast with a nuclear thermal rocket, which directly uses reactor heat to add energy to a working fluid, which is then expelled out of a rocket nozzle.\nConceptual overview.\nThe key elements to NEP are:\nHistory.\nUnited States.\nSNAP-10A, launched into orbit by USAF in 1965, was the first use of a nuclear reactor in space and of an ion thruster in orbit.\nA 1963 paper by Myron Levoy proposed a hybrid nuclear-electric engine design, which would have been able to work both in open-cycle mode as a nuclear thermal engine during mission phases requiring high thrust, as well as in closed-cycle mode as a nuclear-electric engine with low thrust, but high efficiency during remaining mission phases. The proposed application of this engine design was for a fast human-crewed round-trip mission to Mars.\nIn 2001, the Safe affordable fission engine was under development, with a tested 30\u00a0kW nuclear heat source intended to lead to the development of a 400\u00a0kW thermal reactor with Brayton cycle gas turbines to produce electric power. Waste heat rejection was intended to be accomplished using low-mass heat pipe technology. Safety was intended to be assured by a rugged design.\nProject Prometheus was an early 2000s NASA study on nuclear electric spacecraft.\nKilopower is the latest NASA reactor development program, but is intended for surface use only.\nProposed cuts by the second Donald Trump administration in the FY2026 budget has no funding for nuclear electric propulsion and nuclear thermal propulsion, raising the possibility that, given the current political climate, NTP and NEP could be banned, with all research could possibly be destroyed.\nSoviet Union and Russia.\nUS-A satellite series, launched by into orbit by the USSR, included Kosmos 1818 and Kosmos 1867 in 1987, using the TOPAZ nuclear reactor and a \"Plazma-2 SPT\" Hall-effect thruster.\nThe TEM project started in 2009 with the goal of powering a Mars engine.\nMarch 2016 - First batch of nuclear fuel received\nConcepts.\nPebble bed reactor combined with gas turbine.\nA pebble bed reactor using high mass-flow gaseous nitrogen coolant near normal atmospheric pressures is a possible heat source. Power generation could be accomplished with gas turbine technology, which is well developed. Nuclear fuel would be highly enriched uranium encapsulated in low-boron graphite balls probably 5\u201310\u00a0cm in diameter. The graphite would also moderate the neutrons of the nuclear reaction.\nThis style of reactor can be designed to be inherently safe. As it heats, the graphite expands, separating the fuel and reducing the reactor's criticality. This property can simplify the operating controls to a single valve throttling the turbine. When closed, the reactor heats, but produces less power. When open, the reactor cools, but becomes more critical and produces more power.\nThe graphite encapsulation simplifies refueling and waste handling. Graphite is mechanically strong, and resists high temperatures. This reduces the risk of an unplanned release of radioactive elements, including fission products. Since this style of reactor produces high power without heavy castings to contain high pressures, it is well suited to power spacecraft.\nNovel electric propulsion concepts.\nA variety of electric propulsion technologies have been proposed for use with high power nuclear electrical generation systems, including VASIMR, DS4G, and pulsed inductive thruster (PIT). PIT and VASIMR are unique in their ability to trade between power usage, specific impulse (a measure of efficiency, see specific impulse) and thrust in-flight. PIT has the additional advantage of not needing conditioned power.\nElectrical generation.\nA number of heat-to-electricity schemes have been proposed. In the near term, Rankine cycle, Brayton cycle, and Stirling cycle generators go through an intermediate mechanical phase, with attendant energy losses. More exotic technologies have also been proposed: thermoelectric (including graphene-based thermal power conversion), pyroelectric, thermophotovoltaic, thermionic and magnetohydrodynamic type thermoelectric materials.\nOther types of nuclear power concepts in space.\nRadioisotope thermoelectric generators, radioisotope heater units, radioisotope piezoelectric generators, and the radioisotope rocket all use the heat from a static radioactive source (usually Plutonium-238) for a low level of electric or direct propulsion power. Other concepts include the nuclear thermal rocket, the fission fragment rocket, nuclear pulse propulsion, and the possibility of a fusion rocket, assuming that nuclear fusion technology is developed at some point in the near future.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37844", "revid": "43844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37844", "title": "Mass driver", "text": "Proposed spacelaunch method\nA mass driver or electromagnetic catapult is a proposed method of non-rocket spacelaunch which would use a linear motor to accelerate and catapult payloads up to high speeds. Existing and proposed mass drivers use coils of wire energized by electricity to make electromagnets, though a rotary mass driver has also been proposed. Sequential firing of a row of electromagnets accelerates the payload along a path.\nAlthough any device used to propel a ballistic payload is technically a mass driver, in this context a mass driver is essentially a coilgun that magnetically accelerates a package consisting of a magnetizable holder containing a payload. Once the payload has been accelerated, the two separate, and the holder is slowed and recycled for another payload. Alternatively, a mass driver may be based on linear induction motors used as the Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS) on the aircraft carrier .\nMass drivers can be used to propel spacecraft in three different ways: A large, ground-based mass driver could launch spacecraft away from Earth, the Moon, or another body. A small mass driver could act as a rocket engine on board a spacecraft, flinging pieces of material into space to propel itself. Another variation would have a massive facility on a moon or asteroid send projectiles to assist a distant craft.\nMiniaturized mass drivers can also be used as weapons in a similar manner as classic firearms or cannon using chemical combustion. Hybrids between coilguns and railguns such as helical railguns are also possible.\nFixed mass drivers.\nMass drivers need no physical contact between moving parts because they guide their projectiles by dynamic magnetic levitation, allowing extreme reusability in the case of solid-state power switching, and a functional life of\u00a0\u2013 theoretically\u00a0\u2013 up to millions of launches. While marginal costs tend to be accordingly low, initial development and construction costs are highly dependent on performance, especially the intended mass, acceleration, and velocity of projectiles. For instance, while Gerard O'Neill built his first mass driver in 1976\u20131977 with a $2000 budget, a short test model firing a projectile at 40\u00a0m/s and 33 g,\nhis next model had an order-of-magnitude greater acceleration\nafter a comparable increase in funding, and, a few years later, researchers at the University of Texas estimated that a mass driver firing a 10 kilogram projectile at 6000\u00a0m/s would cost $47 million.\nFor a given amount of energy involved, heavier objects go proportionally slower. Lightweight objects may be projected at 20\u00a0km/s or more. The limits are generally the expense of energy storage able to be discharged quickly enough and the cost of power switching, which may be by semiconductors or by gas-phase switches (which still often have a niche in extreme pulse power applications). However, energy can be stored inductively in superconducting coils. A 1\u00a0km long mass driver made of superconducting coils can accelerate a 20\u00a0kg vehicle to 10.5\u00a0km/s at a conversion efficiency of 80%, and average acceleration of 5,600 g.\nEarth-based mass drivers for propelling vehicles to orbit, such as the StarTram concept, would require considerable capital investment. The Earth's relatively strong gravity and relatively thick atmosphere make the implementation of a practical solution difficult. Also, most if not all plausible launch sites would propel spacecraft through heavily-traversed air routes. Due to the massive turbulence such launches would cause, significant air traffic control measures would be needed to ensure the safety of other aircraft operating in the area.\nWith the proliferation of reusable rockets to launch from Earth (especially first stages) whatever potential might have once existed for any economic advantage in using mass drivers as an alternative to chemical rockets to launch from Earth is becoming increasingly doubtful. For these reasons many proposals feature installing mass drivers on the Moon where the lower gravity and lack of atmosphere greatly reduce the required velocity to reach lunar orbit. Lunar launches from a fixed position are much less likely to generate issues with respect to matters such as traffic control due to its low population and difficulties in lunar air travel.\nMost serious mass-driver designs use superconducting coils to achieve reasonable energetic efficiency (often 50% to 90+%, depending on design). Equipment may include a superconducting bucket or aluminum coil as the payload. The coils of a mass driver can induce eddy currents in a payload's aluminum coil, and then act on the resulting magnetic field. There are two sections of a mass driver. The maximum acceleration part spaces the coils at constant distances, and synchronizes the coil currents to the bucket. In this section, the acceleration increases as the velocity increases, up to the maximum that the bucket can take. After that, the constant acceleration region begins. This region spaces the coils at increasing distances to give a fixed amount of velocity increase per unit of time.\nBased on this mode, a major proposal for the use of mass drivers involved transporting lunar-surface material to space habitats for processing using solar energy. The Space Studies Institute showed that this application was reasonably practical.\nIn some designs, the payload would be held in a bucket and then released, so that the bucket can be decelerated and reused. A disposable bucket, on the other hand, would avail acceleration along the whole track. Alternatively, if a track were constructed along the entire circumference of the Moon (or any other celestial body without a significant atmosphere) then a reusable bucket's acceleration would not be limited by the length of the track\u00a0\u2013 however, such a system would need to be engineered to withstand substantial centrifugal forces if it were intended to accelerate passengers and/or cargo to very high velocities. \nOn Earth.\nIn contrast to cargo-only chemical space-gun concepts, a mass driver could be any length, affordable, and with relatively smooth acceleration throughout, optionally even lengthy enough to reach target velocity without excessive g forces for passengers. It can be constructed as a very long and mainly horizontally aligned launch track for spacelaunch, targeted upwards at the end, partly by bending of the track upwards and partly by Earth's curvature in the other direction.\nNatural elevations, such as mountains, may facilitate the construction of the distant, upwardly targeted part. The higher up the track terminates, the less resistance from the atmosphere the launched object will encounter.\nThe 40 megajoules per kilogram or less kinetic energy of projectiles launched at up to 9000\u00a0m/s velocity (if including extra for drag losses) towards low Earth orbit is a few kilowatt-hours per kilogram if efficiencies are relatively high, which accordingly has been hypothesized to be under $1 of electrical energy cost per kilogram shipped to LEO, though total costs would be far more than electricity alone. By being mainly located slightly above, on or beneath the ground, a mass driver may be easier to maintain compared with many other structures of non-rocket spacelaunch. Whether or not underground, it needs to be housed in a pipe that is vacuum pumped in order to prevent internal air drag, such as with a mechanical shutter kept closed most of the time but a plasma window used during the moments of firing to prevent loss of vacuum.\nA mass driver on Earth would usually be a compromise system. A mass driver would accelerate a payload up to some high speed which would not be enough for orbit. It would then release the payload, which would complete the launch with rockets. This would drastically reduce the amount of velocity needed to be provided by rockets to reach orbit. Well under a tenth of orbital velocity from a small rocket thruster is enough to raise perigee if a design prioritizes minimizing such, but hybrid proposals optionally reduce requirements for the mass driver itself by having a greater portion of delta-v by a rocket burn (or orbital momentum exchange tether). On Earth, a mass-driver design could possibly use well-tested maglev components.\nTo launch a space vehicle with humans on board, a mass driver's track would need to be almost 1000 kilometres long if providing almost all the velocity to Low Earth Orbit, though a lesser length could still provide major launch assist. Required length, if accelerating mainly at near a constant maximum acceptable g-force for passengers, is proportional to velocity squared. For instance, half of the velocity goal could correspond to a tunnel a quarter as long needing to be constructed, for the same acceleration. For rugged objects, much higher accelerations may suffice, allowing a far shorter track, potentially circular or helical (spiral). Another concept involves a large ring design whereby a space vehicle would circle the ring numerous times, gradually gaining speed, before being released into a launch corridor leading skyward.\nMass drivers have been proposed for the disposal of nuclear waste in space: a projectile launched at much above Earth's escape velocity would escape the Solar System, with atmospheric passage at such speed calculated as survivable through an elongated projectile and a very substantial heatshield.\nSpacecraft-based mass drivers.\nA spacecraft could carry a mass driver as its primary engine. With a suitable source of electrical power (probably a nuclear reactor) the spaceship could then use the mass driver to accelerate pieces of matter of almost any sort, boosting itself in the opposite direction. At the smallest scale of reaction mass, this type of drive is called an ion drive.\nNo absolute theoretical limit is known for the size, acceleration or muzzle energy of linear motors. However, practical engineering constraints apply for such as the power-to-mass ratio, waste heat dissipation, and the energy intake able to be supplied and handled. Exhaust velocity is best neither too low nor too high.\nThere is a mission-dependent limited optimal exhaust velocity and specific impulse for any thruster constrained by a limited amount of onboard spacecraft power. Thrust and momentum from exhaust, per unit mass expelled, scales up linearly with its velocity (momentum = mv), yet kinetic energy and energy input requirements scale up faster with velocity squared (kinetic energy = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;+1\u20442 mv2). Too low an exhaust velocity would excessively increase propellant mass needed under the rocket equation, with too high a fraction of energy going into accelerating propellant not used yet. Higher exhaust velocity has both benefit and tradeoff, increasing propellant usage efficiency (more momentum per unit mass of propellant expelled) but decreasing thrust and the current rate of spacecraft acceleration if available input power is constant (less momentum per unit of energy given to propellant).\nElectric propulsion methods like mass drivers are systems where energy does not come from the propellant itself. (This contrasts with chemical rockets where propulsive efficiency varies with the ratio of exhaust velocity to vehicle velocity at the time, but near maximum obtainable specific impulse tends to be a design goal when corresponding to the most energy released from reacting propellants). Although the specific impulse of an electric thruster itself optionally could range up to where mass drivers merge into particle accelerators with fractional-lightspeed exhaust velocity for tiny particles, trying to use extreme exhaust velocity to accelerate a far slower spacecraft could be suboptimally low thrust when the energy available from a spacecraft's reactor or power source is limited (a lesser analogue of feeding onboard power to a row of spotlights, photons being an example of an extremely low momentum to energy ratio).\nFor instance, if limited onboard power fed to its engine was the dominant limitation on how much payload a hypothetical spacecraft could shuttle (such as if intrinsic propellant economic cost was minor from usage of extraterrestrial soil or ice), ideal exhaust velocity would rather be around 62.75% of total mission delta v if operating at constant specific impulse, except greater optimization could come from varying exhaust velocity during the mission profile (as possible with some thruster types, including mass drivers and variable specific impulse magnetoplasma rockets).\nSince a mass driver could use any type of mass for reaction mass to move the spacecraft, a mass driver or some variation seems ideal for deep-space vehicles that scavenge reaction mass from found resources.\nOne possible drawback of the mass driver is that it has the potential to send solid reaction mass travelling at dangerously high relative speeds into useful orbits and traffic lanes. To overcome this problem, most schemes plan to throw finely-divided dust. Alternatively, liquid oxygen could be used as reaction mass, which upon release would boil down to its molecular state. Propelling the reaction mass to solar escape velocity is another way to ensure that it will not remain a hazard.\nHybrid mass drivers.\nA mass driver on a spacecraft could be used to \"reflect\" masses from a stationary mass driver. Each deceleration and acceleration of the mass contributes to the momentum of the spacecraft. The lightweight, fast spacecraft need not carry reaction mass, and does not need much electricity beyond the amount needed to replace losses in the electronics, while the immobile support facility can run off power plants able to be much larger than the spacecraft if needed. This could be considered a form of beam-powered propulsion (a macroscopic-scale analogue of a particle beam propelled magsail). A similar system could also deliver pellets of fuel to a spacecraft to power another propulsion system.\nAnother theoretical use for this concept of propulsion can be found in space fountains, a system in which a continuous stream of pellets in a circular track holds up a tall structure.\nMass drivers as weapons.\nSmall to moderate size high-acceleration electromagnetic projectile launchers are currently undergoing active research by the US Navy for use as ground-based or ship-based weapons (most often railguns but coilguns in some cases). On larger scale than weapons currently near deployment but sometimes suggested in long-range future projections, a sufficiently high velocity linear motor, a mass driver, could in theory be used as intercontinental artillery (or, if built on the Moon or in orbit, used to attack a location on Earth's surface). As the mass driver would be located further up the gravity well than the theoretical targets, it would enjoy a significant energy imbalance in terms of counter-attack.\nPractical attempts.\nOne of the first engineering descriptions of an \"Electric Gun\" appears in the technical supplement of the 1937 science fiction novel \"Zero to Eighty\" by \"Akkad Pseudoman\", a pen name for the Princeton physicist and electrical entrepreneur Edwin Fitch Northrup. Dr. Northrup built prototype coil guns powered by kHz-frequency three-phase electrical generators, and the book contains photographs of some of these prototypes. The book describes a fictional circumnavigation of the moon by a two-person vehicle launched by a Northrup electric gun.\nLater prototype mass drivers have been built since 1976 (Mass Driver 1), some constructed by the U.S. Space Studies Institute in order to prove their properties and practicality. Military R&amp;D on coilguns is related, as are maglev trains.\nSpinLaunch, a company founded in 2014, conducted the initial test of their test accelerator in October 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37845", "revid": "50282760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37845", "title": "Magnetic sail", "text": "Proposed spacecraft propulsion method\nA magnetic sail is a proposed method of spacecraft propulsion where an onboard magnetic field source interacts with a plasma wind (e.g., the solar wind) to form an artificial magnetosphere (similar to Earth's magnetosphere) that acts as a sail, transferring force from the wind to the spacecraft requiring little to no propellant as detailed for each proposed magnetic sail design in this article.\nThe animation and the following text summarize the magnetic sail physical principles involved. The spacecraft's magnetic field source, represented by the purple dot, generates a magnetic field, shown as expanding black circles. Under conditions summarized in the overview section, this field creates a magnetosphere whose leading edge is a magnetopause and a bow shock composed of charged particles captured from the wind by the magnetic field, as shown in blue, which deflects subsequent charged particles from the plasma wind coming from the left.\nSpecific attributes of the artificial magnetosphere around the spacecraft for a specific design significantly affect performance as summarized in the overview section. A magnetohydrodynamic model (verified by computer simulations and laboratory experiments) predicts that the interaction of the artificial magnetosphere with the oncoming plasma wind creates an effective sail blocking area that transfers force as shown by a sequence of labeled arrows from the plasma wind, to the spacecraft's magnetic field, to the spacecraft's field source, which accelerates the spacecraft in the same direction as the plasma wind.\nThese concepts apply to all proposed magnetic sail system designs, with the difference how the design generates the magnetic field and how efficiently the field source creates the artificial magnetosphere described above. The History of concept section summarizes key aspects of the proposed designs and relationships between them as background. The cited references are technical with many equations and in order to make the information more accessible, this article first describes in text (and illustrations where available) beginning in the overview section and prior to each design, section or groups of equations and plots intended for the technically oriented reader. The beginning of each proposed design section also contains a summary of the important aspects so that a reader can skip the equations for that design. The differences in the designs determine performance measures, such as the mass of the field source and necessary power, which in turn determine force, mass and hence acceleration and velocity that enable a performance comparison between magnetic sail designs at the end of this article. A comparison with other spacecraft propulsion methods includes some magnetic sail designs where the reader can click on the column headers to compare magnetic sail performance with other propulsion methods. The following observations result from this comparison: magnetic sail designs have insufficient thrust to launch from Earth, thrust (drag) for deceleration for the magsail in the interstellar medium is relatively large, and both the magsail and magnetoplasma sail have significant thrust for travel away from Earth using the force from the solar wind.\nHistory of concept.\nAn overview of many of the magnetic sail proposed designs with illustrations from the references was published in 2018 by Djojodihardjo. The earliest method proposed by Andrews and Zubrin in 1988, dubbed the magsail, has the significant advantage of requiring no propellant and is thus a form of field propulsion that can operate indefinitely. A drawback of the magsail design was that it required a large (50\u2013100\u00a0km radius) superconducting loop carrying large currents with a mass on the order of . The magsail design also described modes of operation for interplanetary transfers, thrusting against a planetary ionosphere or magnetosphere, escape from low Earth orbit as well as deceleration of an interstellar craft over decades after being initially accelerated by other means, for example. a fusion rocket, to a significant fraction of light speed, with a more detailed design published in 2000. In 2015, Freeland validated most of the initial magsail analysis, but determined that thrust predictions were optimistic by a factor of 3.1 due to a numerical integration error.\nSubsequent designs proposed and analyzed means to significantly reduce mass. These designs require little to modest amounts of exhausted propellant and can thrust for years. All proposed designs describe thrust from solar wind outwards from the Sun. In 2000, Winglee and Slough proposed a Mini-Magnetospheric Plasma Propulsion (M2P2) design that injected low energy plasma into a much smaller coil with much lower mass that required low power. Simulations predicted impressive performance relative to mass and required power; however, a number of critiques raised issues: that the assumed magnetic field falloff rate was optimistic and that thrust was dramatically overestimated.\nStarting in 2003, Funaki and others published a series of theoretical, simulation and experimental investigations at JAXA in collaboration with Japanese universities addressing some of the issues from criticisms of M2P2 and named their approach the MagnetoPlasma Sail (MPS). In 2011, Funaki and Yamakawa authored a chapter in a book that is a good reference for magnetic sail theory and concepts. MPS research resulted in many published papers that advanced the understanding of physical principles for magnetic sails. Best performance occurred when the injected plasma had a lower density and velocity than considered in M2P2. Thrust gain was computed as compared with performance with a magnetic field only in 2013 and 2014. Investigations and experiments continued reporting increased thrust experimentally and numerically considering use of a Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster (aka MPD Arc jet in Japan) in 2015, multiple antenna coils in 2019, and a multi-pole MPD thruster in 2020.\nSlough published in 2004 and 2006 a method to generate the static magnetic dipole for a magnetic sail in a design called the Plasma magnet (PM) that was described as an AC induction motor turned inside out. A pair of small perpendicularly oriented coils acted as the stator powered by an alternating current to generate a rotating magnetic field (RMF) that analysis predicted and laboratory experiments demonstrated that a current disc formed as the rotor outside the stator. The current disk formed from electrons captured from the plasma wind, therefore requiring little to no plasma injection. Predictions of substantial improvements in terms of reduced coil size (and hence mass) and markedly lower power requirements for significant thrust hypothesized the same optimistic magnetic field falloff rate as assumed for M2P2. In 2022, a spaceflight trial dubbed Jupiter Observing Velocity Experiment (JOVE) proposed using a plasma magnet based sail for a spacecraft named Wind Rider using the solar wind to accelerate away from a point near Earth and decelerate against the magnetosphere of Jupiter.\nA 2012, study by Kirtley and Slough investigated using the plasma magnet technology to use plasma in a planetary ionosphere as a braking mechanism and was called the Plasma Magnetoshell. This paper restated the magnetic field falloff rate to the value suggested in the critiques of M2P2 that dramatically reduces analytical predicted performance. Initial missions targeted deceleration in the ionosphere of Mars. Kelly and Little in 2019 published simulation results using a multi-turn coil and not the plasma magnet showed that the magnetoshell was viable for orbital insertion around Mars, Jupiter, Neptune and Uranus and in 2021 showed that it was more efficient than aerocapture for Neptune.\nIn 2021, Zhenyu Yang and others published an analysis, numerical calculations and experimental verification for a propulsion system that was a combination of the magnetic sail and the electric sail called an electromagnetic sail. A superconducting magsail coil augmented by an electron gun at the coil's center generates an electric field as in an electric sail that deflects positive ions in the plasma wind thereby providing additional thrust, which could reduce overall system mass.\nOverview.\nThe Modes of operation section describes the important parameters of plasma particle density and wind velocity in conjunction with a use case for:\nThe Physical principles section details aspects of how charged particles in a plasma wind interact with a magnetic field and conditions that determine how much thrust force results on the spacecraft in terms of particle's behavior in a plasma wind, as well as the form and magnitude of the magnetic field related to conditions within the magnetosphere that differ for the proposed designs.\nCharged particles such as electrons, protons and ions travel in straight lines in a vacuum in the absence of a magnetic field. As shown in the illustration in the presence of a magnetic field shown in green, charged particles gyrate in circular arcs with blue indicating positively charged particles (e.g., protons) and red indicating electrons. The particle's gyroradius is proportional to the ratio of the particle's momentum (product of mass and velocity) over the magnetic field. At 1 Astronomical Unit (AU), the distance from the Sun to the Earth, the gyroradius of a proton is ~72\u00a0km and since a proton is ~1,836 times the mass of an electron, the gyroradius of an electron is ~40 m with the illustration not drawn to scale. For the magsail deceleration in the interstellar medium (ISM) mode of operation the velocity is a significant fraction of light speed, for example 5% c, the gyroradius is ~ 500\u00a0km for protons and ~280 m for electrons. When the magsail magnetopause radius is much less than the proton gyroradius the magsail kinematic model by Gros in 2017, which considered only protons, predicts a marked reduction in thrust force for initial ship velocity greater than 10% c prior to deceleration.\nWhen the magnetosphere radius is much greater than the spacecraft's magnetic field source radius, all proposed designs, except for the magsail, use a magnetic dipole approximation for an Amperian loop shown in the center of the illustration with the X indicating current flowing into the page and the dot indicating current flowing out of the page. The illustration shows the resulting magnetic field lines and their direction, where the closer spacing of lines indicates a stronger field. Since the magsail uses a large superconducting coil that has a radius on the same order as the magnetosphere the details of that design use the magsail MHD model employing the Biot\u2013Savart law that predicts stronger magnetic fields near and inside the coil than the dipole model. A Lorentz force occurs only for the portion of a charged particle's velocity at a right angle to the magnetic field lines and this constitutes the magnetic force depicted in the summary animation. Electrically neutral particles, such as neutrons, atoms and molecules are unaffected by a magnetic field.\nA condition for applicability of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) theory, which models charged particles as fluid flows, is that to achieve maximum force the radius of the artificial magnetosphere be on the same order as the ion gyroradius for the plasma environment for a particular mode of operation. Another important condition is how the proposed design affects the magnetic field falloff rate inside the magnetosphere, which impacts the field source mass and power requirements. For a radial distance r from the spacecraft's magnetic field source in a vacuum the magnetic field falls off as formula_1, where formula_2 is the falloff rate. Classic magnetic dipole theory covers the case of formula_2=3 as used in the magsail design. When plasma is injected and/or captured near the field source, the magnetic field falls off at a rate of formula_4, a topic that has been a subject of much research, criticism and differs between designs and has changed over time for the plasma magnet. The M2P2 and plasma magnet designs initially assumed formula_2=1 that as shown in numerical examples summarized at the end of the corresponding design sections predicted a very large performance gain. Several researchers independently created a magnetic field model where formula_6 and asserted that an formula_2=2 falloff rate was the best achievable. In 2011 the plasma magnet author changed the falloff rate formula_2 from 1 to 2 and that is the value used for the plasma magnet for performance comparison in this article. The magnetoplasma sail (MPS) design is an evolution of the M2P2 concept that has been extensively documented, numerically analyzed and simulated and reported a falloff rate formula_2 between 1.5 and 2.\nThe falloff rate formula_2 has a significant impact on performance or the mode of operation accelerating away from the Sun where the mass density of ions in the plasma decreases according to an Inverse-square law with distance from the Sun (e.g., AU) increases. The illustration shows in a semi-log plot the impact of falloff rate formula_2 on relative force F from Equation MFM.6 versus distance from the Sun ranging from 1 to 20 AU, the approximate distance of Neptune. The distance to Jupiter is approximately 5 AU. Constant force independent of distance from the Sun for formula_2=1 is stated in several plasma magnet references, for example Slough and Freeze and results from the effective increase in sail blocking area to exactly offset reduced plasma mass density as a magnetic sail spacecraft accelerates in response to the plasma wind force away from the Sun. As seen from the illustration the impact of falloff rate formula_2 on force, and therefore acceleration, becomes grerater as distance from the Sun increases.\nAt scales where the artificial magnetospheric object radius is much less than the ion gyroradius but greater than the electron gyroradius, the realized force is markedly reduced and electrons create force in proportion much greater than their relative mass with respect to ions as detailed in the General kinematic model section where researchers report results from a compute intensive method that simulates individual particle interactions with the magnetic field source.\nModes of operation.\nMagnetic sail modes of operation cover the mission profile and plasma environment (\"pe\"), such as the solar wind, (\"sw\") a planetary ionosphere (\"pi\") or magnetosphere (\"pm\"), or the interstellar medium (\"ism\"). Symbolically equations in this article use the \"pe\" acronym as a subscript to generic variables, for example as described in this section the plasma mass density formula_14 and from the spacecraft point of view the apparent wind velocity formula_15.\nPlasma mass density and velocity terminology and units.\nA plasma consists exclusively of charged particles that can interact with a magnetic or electric field. It does not include neutral particles, such as neutrons. atoms or molecules.The plasma mass density \u03c1 used in magnetohydrodynamic models only require a weighted average mass density of charged particles that includes neutrons in the ion, while kinematic models use the values for each specific ion type and in some cases the parameters for electrons as well as detailed in the Magnetohydrodynamic model section.\nThe velocity distribution of ions and electrons is another important parameter but often analyses use only the average velocity for the aggregate of particles in a plasma wind for a particular plasma environment (pe) is formula_16. The apparent wind velocity formula_17 as seen by a spacecraft traveling at velocity formula_18 (positive meaning acceleration in the same direction as the wind and negative meaning deceleration opposite the wind direction) for a particular plasma environment (\"pe\") is formula_19.\nAcceleration/deceleration in a stellar plasma wind.\nMany designs, analyses, simulations and experiments focus on using a magnetic sail in the solar wind plasma to accelerate a spacecraft away from the Sun. Near the Earth's orbit at 1 AU the plasma flows at velocity formula_20 dynamically ranges from 250 to 750\u00a0km/s (typically 500), with a density ranging from 3 to 10 particles per cubic centimeter (typically 6) as reported by the NOAA real-time solar wind tracking web site Assuming that 8% of the solar wind is helium and the remainder hydrogen, the average solar wind plasma mass density at 1 AU is formula_21 kg/m3 (typically 10\u221220 kg/m3).\nThe average plasma mass density of ions formula_22 decreases according to an Inverse-square law with the distance from the Sun as stated by Andrews/Zubrin and Borgazzi. The velocity for values near the Sun is nearly constant, falling off slowly after 1 AUFig 5 and then rapidly decreases at heliopause.\nDeceleration in interstellar medium (ISM).\nA spacecraft accelerated to very high velocities by other means, such as a fusion rocket or laser pushed lightsail, can decelerate even from relativistic velocities without onboard propellant by using a magnetic sail to create thrust (drag) against the interstellar medium plasma environment. As shown in the section on Magsail kinematic model (MKM), feasible uses of this involve maximum velocities below 10% c, taking decades to decelerate, for total travel times on the order of a century as described in the magsail specific designs section. \nOnly the magsail references consider deceleration in the ISM on approach to Alpha (formula_23) Centauri, which as shown in the figure is separated by the local bubble and the G-clouds and the Solar System, which is moving at velocity formula_24 and the local cloud is moving at velocity formula_25. Estimates of the number of protons range between 0.005 and 0.5\u00a0cm\u22123 resulting in a plasma mass density formula_26 kg/m3, which covers the range used by references in the magsail specific designs section. As summarized in the magsail specific design section, Gros cited references indicating that regions of the G-clouds may be colder and have a low ion density. A typical value assumed for approach to Alpha Centauri is a proton number density formula_27 of 0.1 protons per cm3 corresponding to formula_28 kg/m3.\nThe spacecraft velocity formula_18 is much greater than the ISM velocity at the beginning of a deceleration maneuver so the apparent plasma wind velocity from the spacecraft's viewpoint s approximately formula_30.\nRadio emissions of cyclotron radiation due to interaction of charged particles in the interstellar medium as they spiral around the magnetic field lines of a magnetic sail would have a frequency of approximately formula_31 kHz. The Earth's ionosphere would prevent detection on the surface, but a space-based antenna could detect such emissions up to several thousands of light years away. Detection of such radiation could indicate activity of advanced extraterrestrial civilizations.\nIn a planetary ionosphere.\nA spacecraft approaching a planet with a significant upper atmosphere such as Saturn or Neptune could use a magnetic sail to decelerate by ionizing neutral atoms such that it behaves as a low beta plasma. The plasma mass in a planetary ionosphere (pi) formula_32 is composed of multiple ion types and varies by altitude. The spacecraft velocity formula_18 is much greater than the planetary ionosphere velocity in a deceleration maneuver so the apparent plasma wind velocity is approximately formula_34 at the beginning of a deceleration maneuver.\nIn a planetary magnetosphere.\nInside or near a planetary magnetosphere, a magnetic sail can thrust against or be attracted to a planet's magnetic field created by a dynamo, especially in an orbit that passes over the planet's magnetic poles. When the magnetic sail and planet's magnetic field are in opposite directions an attractive force occurs and when the fields are in the same direction a repulsive force occurs, which is not stable and means to prevent the sail from flipping over is necessary.\nThe thrust that a magnetic sail delivers within a magnetosphere decreases with the fourth power of its distance from the planet's internal magnetic field. When close to a planet with a strong magnetosphere such as Earth or a gas giant, the magnetic sail could generate more thrust by interacting with the magnetosphere instead of the solar wind. When operating near a planetary or stellar magnetosphere the effect of that magnetic field must be considered if it is on the same order as the gravitational field.\nBy varying the magnetic sail's field strength and orientation a \"perigee kick\" can be achieved raising the altitude of the orbit's apogee higher and higher, until the magnetic sail is able to leave the planetary magnetosphere and catch the solar wind. The same process in reverse can be used to lower or circularize the apogee of a magsail's orbit when it arrives at a destination planet with a magnetic field.\nIn theory, it is possible for a magnetic sail to launch directly from the surface of a planet near one of its magnetic poles, repelling itself from the planet's magnetic field. However, this requires the magnetic sail to be maintained in an \"unstable\" orientation. Furthermore, the magnetic sail must have extraordinarily strong magnetic fields for a launch from Earth, requiring superconductors supporting 80 times the current density of the best known high-temperature superconductors as of 1991.\nIn 2022 a spaceflight trial dubbed Jupiter Observing Velocity Experiment (JOVE) proposed using a plasma magnet to decelerate against the magnetosphere of Jupiter.\nPhysical principles.\nPhysical principles involved include: interaction of magnetic fields with moving charged particles; an artificial magnetosphere model analogous to the Earth's magnetosphere, MHD and kinematic mathematical models for interaction of an artificial magnetosphere with a plasma flow characterized by mass and number density and velocity, and performance measures; such as, force achieved, energy requirements and the mass of the magnetic sail system.\nMagnetic field interaction with charged particles.\nAn ion or electron with charge q in a plasma moving at velocity v in a magnetic field B and electric field E is treated as an idealized point charge in the Lorentz force formula_35. This means that the force on an ion or electron is proportional to the product of their charge q and velocity component formula_36 perpendicular to the magnetic field flux density B, in SI units as teslas (T). A magnetic sail design introduces a magnetic field into a plasma flow which under certain conditions deflects the electrons and ions from their original trajectory with the particle's momentum transferred to the sail and hence the spacecraft thereby creating thrust. An electric sail uses an electric field E that under certain conditions interact with charged particles to create thrust.\nArtificial magnetospheric model.\nThe characteristics of the Earth's magnetosphere have been widely studied as a basis for magnetic sails. The figure shows streamlines of charged particles from a plasma wind from the Sun (or a star) or an effective wind when decelerating in the ISM flowing from left to right. A source attached to a spacecraft generates a magnetic field. Under certain conditions at the boundary where magnetic pressure equals the plasma wind kinetic pressure an artificial bow shock and magnetopause forms at a characteristic length formula_37 from the field source. The ionized plasma wind particles create a current sheet along the magnetopause, which compresses the magnetic field lines facing the oncoming plasma wind by a factor of 2 at magnetopause as shown in Figure 2a. The magnetopause deflects charged particles, which affects their streamlines and increases the density at magnetopause. A magnetospheric bubble or cavity forms that has very low density downstream from the magnetopause. Upstream from the magnetopause a bow shock develops. Simulation results often show the particle density through use of color with an example shown in the legend in the lower left. This figure uses aspects of the general structure from Zubrin,Fig 3 ToivanenFig 1 and FunakiFig 2a and aspects of the plasma density from KhazanovFig 1 and Cruz.Fig 2\nMagnetohydrodynamic model.\nMagnetic sail designs operating in a plasma wind share a theoretical foundation based upon a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model, sometimes called a fluid model, from plasma physics for an artificially generated magnetosphere. Under certain conditions, the plasma wind and the magnetic sail are separated by a magnetopause that blocks the charged particles, which creates a drag force that transfers (at least some) momentum to the magnetic sail, which then applies thrust to the attached spacecraft as described in Andrews/Zubrin, Cattell, Funaki, and Toivanen.\nA plasma environment has fundamental parameters, and if a cited reference uses cgs units these should be converted to SI units as defined in the NRL plasma formulary, which this article uses as a reference for plasma parameter units not defined in SI units. The major parameters for plasma mass density are: the number of ions of type formula_38 per unit volume formula_39 the mass of each ion type accounting for isotopes formula_40 and the number of electrons formula_41 per unit volume each with electron mass formula_42. An average plasma mass density per unit volume for charged particles in a plasma environment formula_43 (formula_44 for stellar wind, formula_45 for planetary ionosphere, formula_46 for interstellar medium) is expressed in equation form from magnetohydrodynamics asformula_47. Note that this definition includes the mass of neutrons in an ion's nucleus. In SI Units per unit volume is cubic metre (m\u22123), mass is kilogram (kg), and mass density is kilogram per cubic metre (kg/m3).\nThe figure depicts the MHD model as described in Funaki and Djojodihardjo. Starting from the left a plasma wind in a plasma environment (e.g., stellar, ISM or an ionosphere) of effective velocity formula_48 with density formula_49 encounters a spacecraft with time-varying velocity formula_50 that is positive if accelerating and negative if decelerating. The apparent plasma wind velocity from the spacecraft's viewpoint is formula_51. The spacecraft and field source generate a magnetic field that creates a magnetospheric bubble extending out to a magnetopause preceded by a bow shock that deflects electrons and ions from the plasma wind. At the magnetopause the field source magnetic pressure equals the kinetic pressure of the plasma wind at a standoff shown at the bottom of the figure. The characteristic length formula_52 is that of a circular sail of effective blocking area formula_53 where formula_54 is the effective magnetopause radius. Under certain conditions the plasma wind pushing on the artificial magnetosphere bow shock and magnetopause creates a force formula_55 on the magnetic field source that is physically attached to the spacecraft so that at least part of the force formula_55 causes a force formula_57 on the spacecraft, accelerating it when sailing downwind or decelerating when sailing into a headwind. Under certain conditions and in some designs, some of the plasma wind force may be lost as indicated by formula_58 on the right side.\nAll magnetic sail designs assume a standoff between plasma wind pressure formula_59 and magnetic pressure formula_60 with SI units of Pascal (Pa, or N/m2) differing only in a constant coefficient formula_61 as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;where formula_62 is the apparent wind velocity and formula_63 is the plasma mass density for a specific plasma environment, formula_64 the magnetic field flux density at magnetopause, \"\u03bc0\" is the vacuum permeability (N A\u22122) and formula_65 is a constant that differs by reference as follows for formula_66 corresponding to formula_67 modeled as dynamic pressure with no magnetic field compression, formula_68 for formula_67 modeled as ram pressure with no magnetic field compression and formula_70 for formula_67 modeled as ram pressure with magnetic field compression by a factor of 2 Equation MHD.1 can be solved to yield the required magnetic field formula_64 that satisfies the pressure balance at magnetopause standoff as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;The force with SI Units of Newtons (N) derived by a magnetic sail for a plasma environment is determined from MHD equations as reported by principal researchers Funaki, Slough, Andrews and Zubrin, and Toivanen as follows: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_73 is a coefficient of drag determined by numerical analysis and/or simulation, formula_74 is the wind pressure, and formula_75 is the effective blocking area of the magnetic sail with magnetopause radius formula_76. Note that this equation has the same form as the drag equation in fluid dynamics. formula_73 is a function of coil attack angle on thrust and steering angle. The power (W) of the plasma wind is the product of velocity and a constant force&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere equation MHD.2 was used to derive the right side.Eq (9)\nMHD applicability test.\nAs summarized in the overview section, an important condition for a magnetic sail to generate maximum force is that the magnetopause radius be on the order of an ion's radius of gyration. Through analysis, numerical calculation, simulation and experimentation an important condition for a magnetic sail to generate significant force is the MHD applicability test, which states that the standoff distance formula_37 must be significantly greater than the ion gyroradius, also called the Larmor radius or cyclotron radius: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere \"formula_79\" is the ion mass, formula_80 is the velocity of a particle perpendicular to the magnetic field, formula_81 is the elementary charge of the ion, formula_82 is the magnetic field flux density at the point of reference formula_83 and formula_84 is a constant that differs by source with formula_85 and formula_86\".\" For example, in the solar wind with 5 ions/cm3 at 1 AU with formula_40 the proton mass (kg), formula_88 = 400\u00a0km/s, formula_89 = 36 nT with formula_61=0.5 from equation MHD.2 at magnetopause and formula_84=2 then formula_92 72\u00a0km.Eq (7) The MHD applicability test is the ratio formula_93. The figure plots formula_94 on the left vertical axis and lost thrust on the right vertical axis versus the ratio formula_93. When formula_96, formula_97 is maximum, at formula_98, formula_99, a decrease of 25% from the maximum and at formula_100, formula_101, a 45% decrease. As formula_102 increases beyond one, formula_94 decreases meaning less thrust from the plasma wind transfers to the spacecraft and is instead lost to the plasma wind. In 2004, Fujita published numerical analysis using a hybrid PIC simulation using a magnetic dipole model that treated electrons as a fluid and a kinematic model for ions to estimate the coefficient of drag formula_94 for a magnetic sail operating in the radial orientation resulting in the following approximate formula:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;The lost thrust is formula_105.\nCoil attack angle effect on thrust and steering angle.\nIn 2005 Nishida and others published results from numerical analysis of an MHD model for interaction of the solar wind with a magnetic field of current flowing in a coil that momentum is indeed transferred to the magnetic field produced by field source and hence to the spacecraft. Thrust force derives from the momentum change of the solar wind, pressure by the solar wind on the magnetopause from equation MHD.1 and Lorentz force from currents induced in the magnetosphere interacting with the field source. The results quantified the coefficient of drag, steering (i.e., thrust direction) angle with the solar wind, and torque generated as a function of attack angle (i.e., orientation) The figure illustrates how the attack (or coil tilt) angle formula_106 orientation of the coil creates a steering angle for the thrust vector and also torque imparted to the coil. Also shown is the vector for the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), which at 1 AU varies with waves and other disturbances in the solar wind, known as space weather, and can significantly increase or decrease the thrust of a magnetic sail.\nFor a coil with radial orientation (like a Frisbee) the attack angle formula_106= 0\u00b0 and with axial orientation (like a parachute) formula_106=90\u00b0. The Nishida 2005 results reported a coefficient of drag formula_94 that increased non-linearly with attack angle from a minimum of 3.6 at formula_106=0 to a maximum of 5 at formula_106=90\u00b0. The steering angle of the thrust vector is substantially less than the attack angle deviation from 45\u00b0 due to the interaction of the magnetic field with the solar wind. Torque increases from formula_106= 0\u00b0 from zero at to a maximum at formula_106=45\u00b0 and then decreases to zero at formula_106=90\u00b0. A number of magnetic sail design and other papers cite these results. In 2012 Kajimura reported simulation results that covered two cases where MHD applicability occurs with formula_102=1.125 and where a kinematic model is applicable formula_102=0.125 to compute a coefficient of drag formula_94 and steering angle. As shown in Figure 4 of that paper when MHD applicability occurs the results are similar in form to Nishida 2005 where the largest formula_94 occurs with the coil in an axial orientation. However, when the kinematic model applies, the largest formula_94 occurs with the coil in a radial orientation. The steering angle is positive when MHD is applicable and negative when a kinematic model applies. The 2012 Nishida and Funaki published simulation results for a coefficient of drag formula_120, coefficient of lift formula_121 and a coefficient of moment formula_122 for a coil radius of formula_123=100\u00a0km and magnetopause radius formula_124=500\u00a0km at 1 AU.\nMagnetic field model.\nIn a design, either the magnetic field source strength or the magnetopause radius formula_125 the characteristic length must be chosen. A good approximation from Cattell and Toivanen for a magnetic field falloff rate formula_126 for a distance formula_127 from the field source to magnetopause starts with the equation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_128 is the magnetic field at a radius formula_129 near the field source that falls off near the source as formula_130 as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_131 is a constant multiplying the magnetic moment (A m2) formula_132 to make formula_133 match a target value at formula_134. When far from the field source, a magnetic dipole is a good approximation and choosing the above value of formula_128 with formula_131 =2 near the field source was used by Andrews and Zubrin.\nThe Amperian loop model for the magnetic moment is formula_137, where formula_138 is the current in amperes (A) and formula_139 is the surface area for a coil (loop) of radius formula_123. Assuming that formula_141 and substituting the expression for the magnetic moment formula_132 into equation MFM.2 yields the following:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen the magnetic field flux density formula_128 is specified, substituting formula_144 from the pressure balance analysis from equation MHD.2 into the above and solving for formula_145 yields the following:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is the expression for formula_37 when formula_147 with formula_148Eq (4) and formula_149Eq (4) and is the same form as the magnetopause distance of the Earth. Equation MFM.4 shows directly how a decreased falloff rate formula_150 dramatically increases the effective sail area formula_151 for a given field source magnetic moment formula_132 and formula_64 determined from the pressure balance equation MHD.1. Substituting this into equation MHD.3 yields the plasma wind force as a function of falloff rate formula_150, plasma density formula_63, coil radius formula_156, coil current formula_138 and plasma wind velocity formula_158 as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nusing equation MFM.3 for formula_128 and equation MHD.2 for formula_64. This is the same expression as equation (10b) when formula_147 and formula_148 andEq (108) and the right hand side from equation (20) specifically applied to M2P2 with other numerical coefficients grouped into the formula_94 term. Note that force increases as falloff rate decreases. For the solar wind case, substituting MHD.2 into MFM.5 and using the function for the solar wind plasma mass density formula_164,Fig 5 with formula_165 the distance from the sun in Astronomical units (AU) results in the following expression: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;where formula_166, the effective sail blocking area.\nThis equation explicitly shows the relationship upon solar wind plasma mass density formula_167 as a function of distance from the Sun formula_165. For the case formula_2=1 the expansion of the magnetopause radius formula_170 exactly matches the decreasing value of formula_167 exactly as the distance from the Sun formula_165 increases, resulting in constant force and hence constant acceleration inside the heliosphere. Note that formula_173 includes the term formula_174, which means that as formula_2 increases that the magnetic field near the field source formula_176 must increase to maintain the same force as compared with a smaller value of formula_2. The example in the overview section set formula_173=1, formula_158=1, formula_129=1, and formula_181=1 so that the force at formula_165=1 was equal to 1 for all values of formula_2 at 1 AU.\nGeneral kinematic model.\nWhen the MHD applicability test of formula_93 &lt;1 then a kinematic simulation model more accurately predicts force transferred from the plasma wind to the spacecraft. In this case the effective sail blocking area formula_185 &lt; formula_186.\nThe left axis of the figure is for plots of magnetic sail force versus characteristic length formula_37. The solid black line plots the MHD model force formula_188 from equation MHD.3. The green line shows the value of ion gyroradius formula_92 72\u00a0km at 1 AU from equation MHD.5. The dashed blue line plots the hybrid MHD/kinematic model from equation MHD.6 from Fujita04. The red dashed line plots a curve fit to simulation results from Ashida14. Although a good fit for these parameters, the curve fit range of this model does not cover some relevant examples. Additional simulation results from Hajiwara15 are shown for the MHD and kinematic model as single data points as indicated in the legend. These models are all in close agreement. The kinematic models predict less force than predicted by the MHD model. In other words, the fraction formula_190 of thrust force predicted by the MHD model is lost when formula_96 as plotted on the right axis. The solid blue and red lines show formula_190 for Fujita04 and Ashida18 respectively, indicating that operation with formula_37 less than 10% of formula_194 will have significant loss. Other factors in a specific magnetic sail design may offset this loss for values of formula_195.\nPerformance measures.\nImportant measures that determine the relative performance of different magnetic sail systems include: mass of the field source generator and its power and energy requirements; thrust achieved; thrust to weight ratio, any limitations and constraints, and propellant system exhausted, if any. Mass of the field source formula_196 in the Magsail design was relatively large and subsequent designs strove to reduce this measure. Total spacecraft mass is formula_197, where formula_198 is the payload mass. Power requirements are significant in some designs and add to field source mass. Thrust is the plasma wind force formula_199 for a particular plasma environment with acceleration formula_200. The thrust to weight ratio formula_201 is also an important performance measure. Other limitations and constraints may be specific to a particular design. The M2P2 and MPS designs, as well as potentially the plasma magnet design, exhaust some plasma as part of inflating the magnetospheric bubble and these cases also have a specific impulse and effective exhaust velocity performance measure.\nProposed magnetic sail systems.\nThis section contains a subsection for each of the proposed magnetic sail designs introduced in the summary. Each subsection begins with a high-level description of that design and an illustration. The cited references are technical and contain many equations, for which this article includes where applicable a common notation described in the Physical principles section, and in other cases the notation from a cited reference. The focus is to include equations used in the Performance comparison section. The subsections include plots of variables with relevant units related to this objective that are preceded by a summary description.\nMagsail (MS).\nAndrews was working on use of a magnetic scoop to gather interstellar material as propellant for a nuclear electric ion drive spacecraft, allowing the craft to operate in a similar manner to a Bussard ramjet, whose history goes back to at least 1973. Andrews asked Zubrin to help compute the magnetic scoop drag against the interplanetary medium, which turned out to be much greater than the ion drive thrust. The ion drive component of the system was dropped, and use of the concept of using the magnetic scoop as a magnetic sail or Magsail (MS) was born.\nThe figure shows the magsail design consisting of a loop of superconducting wire of radius formula_123 on the order of 100\u00a0km that carries a direct current formula_138 that generates a magnetic field, which was modeled according to the Biot\u2013Savart law inside the loop and as a magnetic dipole far outside the loop. With respect to the plasma wind direction a magsail may have a radial (or normal) orientation or an axial orientation that can be adjusted to provide torque for steering. In non-axial configurations lift is generated that can change the spacecraft's momentum. The loop connects via shroud lines (or tethers) to the spacecraft in the center. Because a loop carrying current is forced outwards towards a circular shape by its magnetic field, the sail could be deployed by unspooling the conductor wire and applying a current through it via the peripheral platforms. The loop must be adequately attached to the spacecraft in order to transfer momentum from the plasma wind and would pull the spacecraft behind it as shown in the axial configuration in the right side of the figure. This design has a significant advantage of requiring no propellant and is thus a form of field propulsion that can operate indefinitely.Sec VIII\nMHD model.\nAnalysis of magsail performance was done using a simulation and a fluid (i.e., MHD) model with similar results observed for one case. The magnetic moment of a current loop (A m2) is formula_204 for a current of formula_205 A and a loop of radius formula_206 m. Close to the loop, the magnetic field at a distance formula_207 along the center-line axis perpendicular to the loop is derived from the Biot-Savart law as follows.sec 5-2, Eq (25)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt a distance far from the loop center the magnetic field is approximately that produced by a magnetic dipole. The pressure at the magnetospheric boundary is doubled due to compression of the magnetic field and stated by the following equation at a point along the center-line axis or the target magnetopause standoff distance formula_208.Eq (5)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEquating this to the dynamic pressure for a plasma environment formula_209, inserting formula_210 from equation MS.1 and solving for formula_208 yieldsEq (6)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAndrews and Zubrin derived the drag (thrust) force of the sail formula_212Eq (8) that determined the characteristic length formula_208 for a tilt angle, but according to FreelandSec 6.5 an error was made in numerical integration in choosing the ellipse downstream from the magnetopause instead of the ellipse upstream that made those results optimistic by a factor of approximately 3.1, which should be used to correct any drag(thrust) force results usingEq 8 Instead, this article uses the approximationEq (108) for a spherical bubble that corrects this error and is close to the analytical formula for the axial configuration as the force for the Magsail as follows&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2004 Toivanen and Janhunen did further analysis on the Magsail that they called a Plasma Free MagnetoPause (PFMP) that produced similar results to that of Andrews and Zubrin.\nCoil mass and current (CMC).\nThe minimum required mass to carry the current in equation MS.1 or other magnetic sail designs from Andres/Zubrin (9)Eq (9) and CrowlEq (3) as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_214 is the superconductor critical current density (A/m2) and formula_215 is the coil material density, for example formula_214 = 1x1011 A/m2 and formula_215 = 6,500\u00a0kg/m3 for a superconductor in FreelandApdx A The physical mass of the coil is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_218 is the radius of the superconductor wire, for example that necessary to handle the tension for a particular use case, such as deceleration in the ISM where formula_218 = 10\u00a0mm.Apdx A The formula_220 factor (e.g., 3) accounts for mass of the tether (or shroud) lines to connect the coil to a spacecraft. Note that formula_221 with formula_220=0 must be no less than formula_223 in order for the coil to carry the superconductor critical current formula_224 amperes for a coil wire of radius formula_225, for example formula_226 = 7,854 kiloampere (kA.)Apdx A\nSetting equation CMC.2 with formula_220=0 equal to equation CMC.1 and solving for formula_225 yields the minimum required coil radius\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf operated within the solar system, high temperature superconducting wire (HTS) is necessary to make the magsail practical since required current is large, millions of amperes. Protection from solar heating is necessary closer to the Sun, for example by highly reflective coatings. If operated in interstellar space low temperature superconductors (LTS) could be adequate since the temperature of a vacuum is 2.7Kelvins (K), but radiation and other heat sources from the spacecraft may render LTS impractical. The critical current formula_226 of the HTS YBCO coated superconductor wire increases at lower temperatures with a current density formula_214 of 6x1010 A/m2 at 77K and 9x1011 A/m2 at 5K.\nMagsail kinematic model (MKM).\nThe MHD applicability test of equation MHD.5 fails in some ISM deceleration cases and a kinematic model is necessary, such as the one documented in 2017 by Claudius Gros summarized here. A spacecraft with an overall mass formula_231 and velocity formula_36 followsEq (1) of motion as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;where formula_233 N is force predicted by this model, formula_234 m\u22123 is the proton number density, formula_235 kg is the proton mass, formula_236 kg/m3 the plasma density, and formula_237 m2 the effective reflection area. This equation assumes that the spacecraft encounters formula_238 particles per second and that every particle of mass formula_235 is completed reflected. Note that this equation is of the same form as MFM.5 with formula_94=4, interpreting the formula_94 term as just a number.\nGros numerically determined the effective reflection area formula_242 by integrating the degree of reflection of approaching protons interacting with the superconducting loop magnetic field according to the Biot-Savart law. The reported result was independent of the loop radius formula_123. An accurate curve fit as reported in Figure 4 to the numerical evaluation for the effective reflection area for a magnetic sail in the axial configuration from equation (8) was\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_244 is the area enclosed by the current carrying loop, formula_245 the speed of light, and the value formula_246 A determined a good curve fit for formula_247=105 A, the current through the loop. In 2020, Perakis published an analysis that corroborated the above formula with parameters selected for the solar wind and reported a force no more than 9% less than the Gros model for formula_247=105 A and formula_123=100 m with the coil in an axial orientation.. That analysis also reported on the effect of magsail tilt angle on lift and side forces for a use case in maneuvering within the solar system.\nFor comparison purposes, the effective sail area determined for the magsail by Zubrin from equation MS.3 with the 3.1 correction factor from Freeland applied and using the same velocity value (resolving the discrepancy noted by Gros) as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe figure shows the normalized effective sail area normalized by the coil area formula_244 for the MKM case from Gros of equation MKM.1 and for Zubrin from equation MKM.3 for formula_251, formula_123=100\u00a0km, and formula_234=0.1\u00a0cm\u22123 for the G-cloud on approach to Alpha Centauri corresponding to ISM density formula_254 kg/m3 consistent with that from Freeland plotted versus the spacecraft velocity relative to the speed of light formula_255. A good fit occurs for these parameters, but for different values of formula_123 and formula_247 the fit can vary significantly. Also plotted is the MHD applicability test of ion gyroradius divided by magnetopause radius formula_258 &lt;1 from equation MHD.4 on the secondary axis. Note that MHD applicability occurs at formula_259 &lt; 1%. For comparison, the 2004 Fujita formula_94 as a function of formula_258 from the MHD applicability test section is also plotted. Note that the Gros model predicts a more rapid decrease in effective area than this model at higher velocities. The normalized values of formula_237 and formula_263 track closely until formula_264 10% after which point the Zubrin magsail model of Equation MS.4 becomes increasingly optimistic and equation MKM.2 is applicable instead. Since the models track closely up to formula_265 10%, with the kinematic model underestimating effective sail area for smaller values of formula_266 (hence underestimating force), equation MKM.1 is an approximation for both the MHD and kinematic region. The Gros model is pessimistic for formula_266 &lt; 0.1%.\nGros used the analytic expression for the effective reflection area formula_237 from equation MKM.3 for explicit solution for the required distance formula_269 m to decelerate to final velocity formula_270 m/s fromEq (10) given an initial velocity formula_271 m/s for a spacecraft mass formula_231 kg as follows: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_273. When formula_274=0 the above equation is defined inEq (11) as formula_275, which enabled a closed form solution of the velocity at a distance formula_276 inEq (12) with numerical integration required to compute the time required to decelerate.Eq (14) Equation (16) The optimal current that minimized formula_277 as formula_278 where formula_279.Eq (16) In 2017 Crowl optimized coil current for the ratio of effective area formula_280 over total mass formula_231 and derived the result formula_282.Eq (15) That paper used results from Gros for the stopping distance formula_277 and time to decelerate.\nThe figure plots the distance traveled while decelerating formula_284 and time required to decelerate formula_285 given a starting relative velocity formula_286 and a final velocity formula_287 m/s consistent with that from Freeland for the same parameters above. Equation CMC.1 gives the magsail mass formula_288 as 97 tonnes assuming payload mass formula_198 of 100 tonnes using the same values used by Freeland of formula_214 = 1011 A/m2 and formula_291=6,500\u00a0kg/m3 for the superconducting coil. Equation MS.4 gives Force for the magsail multiplied by formula_94=4 for the Andrews/Zubrin model to align with equation MHD.3 definition of force from the Gros model. Acceleration is force divided by mass, velocity is the integral of acceleration over the deceleration time interval formula_285 and deceleration distance traveled formula_284 is the integral of the velocity over formula_285. Numerical integration resulted in the lines plotted in the figure with deceleration distance traveled plotted on the primary vertical axis on the left and time required to decelerate on the secondary vertical axis on the right. Note that the MHD Zubrin model and the Gros kinematic model predict nearly identical values of deceleration distance up to formula_296~ 5% of c, with the Zubrin model predicting less deceleration distance and shorter deceleration time at greater values of formula_296. This is consistent with the Gros model predicting a smaller effective area formula_280 at larger values of formula_296. The value of the closed form solution for deceleration distance formula_300 from MKM.4 for the same parameters closely tracks the numerical integration result.\nSpecific designs and mission profiles.\nDana Andrews and Robert Zubrin first proposed the magnetic sail concept in 1988 for interstellar travel for acceleration by a fusion rocket, coasting and then deceleration via a magsail at the destination that could reduce flight times by 40\u201350 years In 1989 details for interplanetary travel were reported In 1990 Andrews and Zubrin reported on an example for solar wind parameters one AU away from the Sun, with formula_301 m\u22123 with only protons as ions, apparent wind velocity formula_302=500\u00a0km/s the field strength required to resist the dynamic pressure of the solar wind is 50 nT from equation MHD.2. With radius formula_123=100\u00a0km and magnetospheric bubble of formula_304= reported a thrust of 1980 newtons and a coil mass of 500 tonnes. For the above parameters with the correction factor of 3.1 applied to equation MS.4 yields the same thrust and equation CMC.1 yields the same coil mass. Results for another 4 solar wind cases were reported, but the MHD applicability test of equation MHD.5 fails in these cases.\nIn 2015, Freeland documented a use case with acceleration away from Earth by a fusion drive with a magsail used for interstellar deceleration on approach to Alpha Centaturi as part of a study to update Project Icarus with formula_123=260\u00a0km, an initial formula_306 of 1,320\u00a0km and ISM density formula_254 kg/m3, almost identical to the n(H I) measurement of 0.098\u00a0cm\u22123 by Gry in 2014. The Freeland study predicted deceleration from 5% of light speed in approximately 19 years. The coil parameters formula_214=1011 A/m2, formula_309= 5\u00a0mm, formula_310=6,500\u00a0kg/m3, resulted in an estimated coil mass of formula_311=1,232 tonnes. Although the critical current density formula_214 was based upon a 2000 Zubrin NIAC report projecting values through 2020, the assumed value is close to that for commercially produced YBCO coated superconductor wire in 2020. The mass estimate may be optimistic since it assumed that the entire coil carrying mass is superconducting while 2020 manufacturing techniques place a thin film on a non-superconducting substrate. For the interstellar medium plasma density formula_313=1.67x10\u221222 with an apparent wind velocity 5% of light speed, the ion gyroradius is 570\u00a0km and thus the design value for formula_306 meets the MHD applicability test of equation MHD.5. Equation MFM.3 gives the required coil current as formula_138~7,800 kA and from equation CMC.1 formula_316= 338 tonnes; however, but the corresponding superconducting wire minimum radius from equation CMC.3 is formula_317 =1\u00a0mm, which would be insufficient to handle the decelerating thrust force of formula_318 ~ 100,000 N predicted by equation MS.4 and hence the design specified formula_309= 5\u00a0mm to meet structural requirements. In a complete design, the mass of infrastructure, including coil shielding to maintain critical temperature and survive abrasion in outer space, must also be included. Appendix A estimates these as 90 tonnes for wire shielding and 50 tonnes for the spools and other magsail infrastructure. Freeland compared this magsail deceleration design with one where both acceleration and deceleration were performed by a fusion engine and reported that the mass of such a \"dirty Icarus\" design was over twice that of a magsail used for deceleration. An Icarus design published in 2020 used a Z-pinch fusion drive in an approach called Firefly that dramatically reduced mass of the fusion drive and made fusion only drive performance for acceleration and deceleration comparable to the fusion for acceleration and magsail for deceleration design.\nIn 2017, Gros reported numerical examples for the Magsail kinematic model that used different parameters and coil mass models than those used by Freeland. That paper assumed hydrogen ion (H I) number densities of 0.05-0.2\u00a0cm\u22123 (9x10\u221223 - 3x10\u221222 kg/m3) for the warm local clouds and about 0.005\u00a0cm\u22123 (9x10\u221223 kg/m3) for voids of the local bubble. Patches of cold interstellar clouds with less than 200 AU may have large densities of neutral hydrogen up to 3000\u00a0cm\u22123, which would not respond to a magnetic field. For a high speed mission to Alpha Centauri with initial velocity before deceleration formula_320 using a coil mass of 1500 tons and a coil radius of formula_321=1600\u00a0km, the estimated stopping distance formula_275 was 0.37 light years and the total travel time of 58 years with 1/3 of that being deceleration.\nIn 2017, Crowl documented a design for a mission starting near the Sun and destined for Planet nine approximately 1,000 AU distant that employed the Magsail kinematic model. The design accounted for the Sun's gravity as well as the impact of elevated temperature on the superconducting coil, composed of meta-stable metallic hydrogen, which has a mass density of 3,500\u00a0kg/m3 about half that of other superconductors. The mission profile used the Magsail to accelerate away from 0.25 to 1.0 AU from the Sun and then used the Magsail to brake against the Local ISM on approach to Planet nine for a total travel time of 29 years. Parameters and coil mass models differ from those used by Freeland.\nAnother mission profile uses a magsail oriented at an attack angle to achieve heliocentric transfer between planets moving away from or toward the Sun. In 2013 Quarta and others used Kajimura 2012 simulation results that described the lift (steering angle) and torque to achieve a Venus to Earth transfer orbit of 380 days with a coil radius of formula_123~1\u00a0km with characteristic acceleration formula_324=1\u00a0mm/s2. In 2019 Bassetto and others used the Quarta \"thick\" magnetopause model and predicted a Venus to Earth transfer orbit of approximately 8 years for a coil radius of formula_123~1\u00a0km. with characteristic acceleration formula_324=0.1\u00a0mm/s2. In 2020 Perakis used the Magsail kinematic model with a coil radius of formula_123=350 m, current formula_138=104 A and spacecraft mass of 600\u00a0kg that changed attack angle to accelerate away from the Earth orbit and decelerate to Jupiter orbit within 20 years.\nMini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion (M2P2).\nIn 2000, Winglee, Slough and others proposed a design order to reduce the size and weight of a magnetic sail well below that of the magsail and named it mini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion (M2P2) that reported results adapted from a simulation model of the Earth's magnetosphere. The calculates speeds of 50 to 80\u00a0km s\u22121 could enable spacecraft:\nThe figure based upon Winglee, Hajiwara, Arita, and Funaki illustrates the M2P2 design, which was the basis of the subsequent Magneto plasma sail (MPS) design. Starting at the center with a solenoid coil of radius formula_329 of formula_330=1,000 turns carrying a radio frequency current that generates a helicon wave that injects plasma fed from a source into a coil of radius formula_206 that carries a current of formula_138, which generates a magnetic field. The excited injected plasma enhances the magnetic field and generates a miniature magnetosphere around the spacecraft, analogous to the heliopause where the Sun injected plasma encounters the interstellar medium, coronal mass ejections or the Earth's magnetotail. The injected plasma created an environment that analysis and simulations showed had a magnetic field with a falloff rate of formula_333 as compared with the classical model of a formula_334 falloff rate, making the much smaller coil significantly more effective based upon analysis and simulation. The pressure of the inflated plasma along with the stronger magnetic field pressure at a larger distance due to the lower falloff rate would stretch the magnetic field and more efficiently inflate a magnetospheric bubble around the spacecraft.\nParameters for the coil and solenoid were formula_329=2.5\u00a0cm and for the coil formula_206= 0.1 m, 6 orders of magnitude less than the magsail coil with correspondingly much lower mass. An estimate for the weight of the coil was 10\u00a0kg and 40\u00a0kg for the plasma injection source and other infrastructure. Reported results from Figure 2 were formula_337 \u00d710\u22123 T at formula_338 10\u00a0km and from Figure 3 an extrapolated result with a plasma injection jet force formula_33910\u22123 N resulting in a thrust force of formula_340 1 N. The magnetic-only sail force from equation MHD.3 is formula_199=3x10\u221211 N and thus M2P2 reported a thrust gain of 4x1010 as compared with a magnetic field only design. Since M2P2 injects ionized gas at a formula_342 mass flow rate (kg/s) it is viewed as a propellant and therefore has a \"specific impulse (s)\" formula_343 where formula_344 is the acceleration of Earth's gravity. Winglee stated formula_342=0.5\u00a0kg/day and therefore formula_346=17,621. The equivalent exhaust velocity formula_347 is 173\u00a0km/s for 1 N of thrust force. Winglee assumed total propellant mass of 30\u00a0kg and therefore propellant would run out in 60 days.\nIn 2003, Khazanov published MagnetoHydroDynamic (MHD) and kinetic studies that confirmed some aspects of M2P2 but raised issues that the sail size was too small, and that very small thrust would result and also concluded that the hypothesized formula_348 magnetic field falloff rate was closer to formula_349. The plasma density plots from Khazanov indicated a relatively high density inside the magnetospheric bubble as compared with the external solar wind region that differed significantly from those published by Winglee where the density inside the magnetospheric bubble was much less than outside in the external solar wind region.\nA detailed analysis by Toivanen and others in 2004 compared a theoretical model of Magsail, dubbed Plasma-free Magnetospheric Propulsion (PFMP) versus M2P2 and concluded that the thrust force predicted by Winglee and others was over ten orders of magnitude optimistic since the majority of the solar wind momentum was delivered to the magnetotail and current leakages through the magnetopause and not to the spacecraft. Their comments also indicated that the magnetic field lines may not close near enough to the coil to achieve significant transfer of force. Their analysis made an analogy to the Heliospheric current sheet as an example in astrophysics where the magnetic field could falloff at a rate of between formula_348 and formula_349. They also analyzed current sheets reported by Winglee from the magnetopause to the spacecraft in the windward direction and a current sheet in the magnetotail. Their analysis indicated that the current sheets needed to pass extremely close to the spacecraft to impart significant force could generate significant heat and render this leverage impractical.\nIn 2005, Cattell and others published comments regarding M2P2 that included a lack of magnetic flux conservation in the region outside the magnetosphere that was not considered in the Khazanov studies. Their analysis concluded in Table 1 that Winglee had significantly underestimated the required sail size, mass, and required magnetic flux. Their analysis asserted that the hypothesized formula_348 magnetic field falloff rate was not possible.\nThe expansion of the magnetic field using injected plasma was demonstrated in a large vacuum chamber on Earth, but quantification of thrust was not part of the experiment. The accompanying presentation has some good animations that illustrate physical principles described in the report. A 2004 Winglee paper focused on usage of M2P2 for electromagnetic shielding. Beginning in 2003, the Magneto plasma sail design further investigated the plasma injection augmentation of the magnetic field, used larger coils and reported significantly more modest gains.\nMagnetoplasma sail (MPS).\nIn 2003 Funaki and others proposed an approach similar to the M2P2 design and called it the MagnetoPlasma Sail (MPS) that started with a coil formula_123=0.2 m and a magnetic field falloff rate of formula_2=1.52 with injected plasma creating an effective sail radius of formula_37=26\u00a0km and assumed a conversion efficiency that transferred a fraction of the solar wind momentum to the spacecraft. Simulation results indicated a significant increase in magnetosphere size with plasma injection as compared to the Magsail design, which had no plasma injection. Analysis showed how adjustment of the MPS steering angle created force that could reach the outer planets. A satellite trial was proposed. Preliminary performance results were reported but later modified in subsequent papers.\nMany MPS papers have been published on the magnetic sail contributing to the understanding of general physical principles of an artificial magnetosphere, its magnetohydrodynamic model, and the design approach for computing the magnetopause distance for a given magnetic field source are documented in the linked sections of this article.\nIn 2004 Funaki and others analyzed MPS cases where formula_123=10 m and formula_123=100 m as summarized in Table 2 predicting a characteristic length formula_37 of 50 and 450\u00a0km producing significant thrust with mass substantially less than the Magsail and hence significant acceleration. This paper detailed the MHD applicability test of equation MHD.5 that the characteristic length must be greater than the ion gyroradius formula_194 to effectively transfer solar wind momentum to the spacecraft. In 2005 Yamakawa and others further described a potential trial.\nAn analogy with the Earth's magnetosphere and magnetopause in determining the penetration of plasma irregularities into the magnetopause defines the key parameter of a local kinetic plasma beta as the ratio of the dynamic pressure formula_360 of the injected plasma over the magnetic pressure formula_360 as follows&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;where formula_362 kg/m3 is the local plasma density, formula_363 m/s is the local velocity of the plasma and formula_364 T is the local magnetic field flux density. Simulations have shown that the kinetic beta is smallest near the field source, at magnetopause and the bow shock.\nThe kinetic formula_365 differs from the thermal plasma beta formula_366 which is the ratio of the plasma thermal pressure to the magnetic pressure, with terms: formula_367 is the plasma pressure with formula_368 the number density, formula_369 the Boltzmann constant and formula_370 the ion temperature; and formula_371 the magnetic pressure for magnetic field flux density formula_372 and formula_373 vacuum permeability. In the context of the MPS, formula_374 determines the propensity of the injected plasma flow to stretch the magnetic field while formula_375 specifies the relative energy of the injected plasma.\nIn 2005 Funaki and others published numerical analysis showing formula_376=1.88 for formula_374=0.1. In 2009 Kajimura published simulation results with formula_374=5 and formula_375 ranging from 6 to 20 that the magnetic field falloff rate formula_376 with argon and xenon plasma injected into the polar region was formula_376=2.1 and with argon plasma injected into the equatorial region was formula_376=1.8.\nIf formula_383 then the Injection of a high-velocity, high-density plasma into a magnetosphere as proposed in M2P2 freezes the motion of a magnetic field into the plasma flow and was believed to inflate the magnetosphere. However experiments and numerical analysis determined that the solar wind cannot compress the magnetosphere and momentum transfer to the spacecraft is limited since momentum is transferred to injected plasma flowing out of the magnetosphere, similar to another criticism of M2P2. \nAn alternative is to reduce the plasma injection velocity and density to result in formula_384 to achieve a plasma in equilibrium with the inflated magnetic field and therefore induce an equatorial diamagnetic current in the same direction as the coil current as shown in the figure, thereby increasing the magnetic moment of the MPS field source and consequently increasing thrust. In 2013 Funaki and others published simulation and theoretical results regarding how characteristics of the injected plasma affected thrust gain through creation of an equatorial ring current. They defined thrust gain for MPS as formula_385: the ratio of the force generated by low beta plasma injection formula_386 divided by that of a pure magnetic sail formula_387 from equation MFM.5 with formula_388 and formula_389 for formula_390 or from equation GKM.1 for formula_391. They reported formula_392 of approximately 40 for magnetospheres less than the MHD applicability test and 3.77 for a larger magnetosphere where MHD applicability occurred, larger than values reported in 2012 of 20 and 3.3, respectively. Simulations revealed that optimum thrust gain occurred for formula_384 and formula_394.\nIn 2014 Arita, Nishida and Funaki published simulation results indicating that plasma injection created an equatorial ring current and that the plasma injection rate had a significant impact on thrust performance, with the lowest value simulated having the best performance of a thrust gain formula_392 of 3.77 with formula_396. They also reported that MPS increased the height of the magnetosphere by a factor of 2.6, which is important since it increases the effective sail blocking area.\nIn 2014 Ashida and others documented Particle In Cell (PIC) simulation results for a kinematic model for cases where formula_397 where MHD is not applicable. Equation (12) of their study included the additional force of the injected plasma jet formula_398 consisting of momentum and static pressure of ions and electrons and defined thrust gain as formula_399, which differs from the definition of a term by the same name in other studies. It represents the gain of MPS over that of simply adding the magnetic sail force and the plasma injection jet force. For the values cited in the conclusion, formula_400 is 7.5 in the radial orientation.\nSince a number of results were published by different authors at different times, the figure summarizes the reported thrust gain formula_392 versus magnetosphere size (or characteristic length formula_37) with the source indicated in the legend as follows for simulation results Arita14, Ashida14, Funaki13, and Kajimura10. Simulation results require significant compute time, for example it took 1024 CPUs 4 days to simulate the simplest case and 4096 CPUs one week to simulate a more complex case. A thrust gain between 2 and 10 is common with the larger gains with a magnetic nozzle injecting plasma in one direction in opposition to the solar wind. The MHD applicability test of equation MHD.5 for the solar wind is formula_40372\u00a0km. Therefore, the estimated force of the MPS is that of equation MHD.3 multiplied by the empirically determined thrust gain formula_392 from the figure multiplied by the percentage thrust loss formula_190 from equation MHD.6\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor example, using solar wind parameters formula_63=8x10\u221221 kg/m3 and formula_158=500\u00a0km/s then formula_194=72\u00a0km and formula_64=4x10\u22128 T. With formula_37=105 m for formula_2=3 then formula_412 and formula_413 11% from equation MHD.6. The magnetic field only force with a coil radius of formula_123=6,300 m and coil current formula_138=1.6x106 A yields formula_416=1.6x10\u22124 T from equation MFM.2 and with formula_94=5 the magnetic force only is 175 N from equation MFM.5. Determining formula_4184 from the figure at formula_37=105 m as the multiplier for the magnetic-only force then the MPS force formula_420700 N.\nSince MPS injects ionized gas at a rate of formula_342 that can be viewed as a propellant it has a \"specific impulse\" formula_422 where formula_344 is the acceleration of Earth's gravity. Funaki and Arita stated formula_342=0.31\u00a0kg/day. Therefore formula_346=28,325 s per newton of thrust force. The equivalent exhaust velocity formula_347 is 278\u00a0km/s per newton of thrust force.\nIn 2015 Kajimura and others published simulation results for thrust performance with plasma injected by a magnetic nozzle, a technology used in VASIMR. They reported a thrust gain formula_392 of 24 when the ion gyroradius formula_428 (see equation MHD.5) was comparable to the characteristic length formula_429, at the boundary of the MHD applicability test. The optimal result occurred with a thermal formula_430 with some decrease for higher values of thermal beta.\nIn 2015 Hagiwara and Kajimura published experimental thrust performance test results with plasma injection using a magnetoplasmadynamic thruster (aka MPD thruster or MPD Arcjet) in a single direction opposite the solar wind direction and a coil with the axial orientation. This meant that formula_431 provided additional propulsive force. Density plots explicitly show the increased plasma density upwind of the bow shock originating from the MPD thruster. They reported that formula_432 showing how MPS inflated the magnetic field to create more thrust than the magnetic sail alone plus that of the \u00abtext gap here\u00bb. The conclusion of the experiment was that the thrust gain formula_392 was approximately 12 for a scaled characteristic length of formula_429 = 60\u00a0km. In the above figure, note the significant improvement in thrust gain at formula_429 = 60\u00a0km.as compared with only plasma injection.\nIn this example, using solar wind parameters formula_63=8x10\u221221 kg/m3 and formula_158=500\u00a0km/s then formula_194=72\u00a0km and formula_64=4x10\u22128 T. With formula_37=60\u00a0km for formula_2=3 then formula_442 and formula_413 28% from equation MHD.6. The magnetic field only force with a coil radius of formula_123=2,900 m and coil current formula_138=1.6x106 A yields formula_416=3.5x10\u22124 T from equation MFM.2 and with formula_94=5 the magnetic force only is 51 N from equation MFM.5. Given formula_392=12 as the multiplier for the magnetic only force then the MPS force formula_420611 N.\nIn 2017 Ueno published a design proposing use of multiple coils to generate a more complex magnetic field to increase thrust production. In 2020 Murayama and others published additional experimental results for a multi-pole MPD thruster. In 2017 Djojodihardjo published a conceptual design using MPS for a small (~500\u00a0kg) Earth observation satellite.\nIn 2020 Peng and others published MHD simulation results for a magnetic dipole with plasma injection operating in Low Earth orbit at 500\u00a0km within the Earth's Ionosphere where the ion number density is approximately 1011 m\u22123. As reported in Figure 3, the magnetic field strength initially falls off as 1/r and then approaches 1/r2 at larger distances from the dipole. The radius of the artificial mini-magnetosphere could extend up to 200 m for this scenario. They reported that the injected plasma reduced magnetic field fall off rate and created of a drift current, similar to earlier reported MPS results for the solar wind.\nPlasma magnet (PM).\nThe plasma magnet (PM) sail design introduced a different approach to generate a static magnetic dipole as illustrated in the figure. As shown in the detailed view on the right the field source is two relatively small crossed perpendicularly oriented antenna coils each of radius formula_123 (m), each carrying a sinusoidal alternating current (AC) with the total current of \"formula_138\" (A) generated by an onboard power supply. The AC current applied to each coil is out of phase by 90\u00b0 and consequently generates a rotating magnetic field (RMF) with rotational frequency (s\u22121) formula_452 chosen that is fast enough that positive ions do not rotate but the less massive electrons rotate at this speed. The figure illustrates rotation using color coded contours of constant magnetic strength, not magnetic field lines. In order to inflate the magnetospheric bubble the thermal plasma beta formula_453 must be high and initially a plasma injection may be necessary, analogous to inflating a balloon when small and internal tension is high. After initial inflation, protons and rotating electrons are captured from the plasma wind through the leaky magnetopause and as shown in the left create a current disc shown as transparent red in the figure with darker shading indicating greatest density near the coil pair and extending out to the magnetopause radius \"Rmp\", which is orders of magnitude larger than the coil radius \"Rc\" (figure not drawn to scale). See RMDCartoon.avi for an animation of this effect. The induced current disc carries a direct current formula_454 orders of magnitude larger than the input alternating current \"formula_138\" and forms a static dipole magnetic field oriented perpendicular to the current disc reaching a standoff balance with the plasma wind pressure at distance formula_456 at the magnetopause boundary according to the MHD model of an artificial magnetosphere.\nThe magnetic field falloff rate was assumed in 2001Eq (7) and 2006Eq (8) to be formula_150 =1. However, as described by Khazanov in 2003 and restated by Slough, Kirtley and Pancotti in 2011Eq (2) and Kirtley and Slough in a 2012 NIAC reportEq (4) that formula_150=2 as demanded by conservation of magnetic flux. Several MPS studies concluded that formula_150 is closer to 2. The falloff rate formula_150 is a critical parameter in the determination of performance.\nThe RMF-induced rotating disc of electrons has current density (A m\u22122) formula_461 at distance \"r\" from the antenna for formula_462Eq (5) and for formula_463,Eq (6) which states that flux conservation requires this falloff rate, consistent with a criticism of M2P2 by Cattell as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_464 T is the magnetic field flux density at radius formula_465 m near the antenna coils. Note that the current density is highest at formula_466 and falls off at a rate of formula_467. A critical condition for the plasma magnet designEq (1a) provides a lower bound on the RMF frequency formula_468 rad/s as follows so that electrons in the plasma wind are magnetized and rotate but the ions are not magnetized and do not rotate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_469 is the ion gyrofrequency (s\u22121) in the RMF near the antenna coils, formula_470 is charge number of the ion, formula_471 is the elementary charge, and formula_472 kg is the (average) mass of the ion(s). Specifying the magnetic field near the coils at radius formula_129 is critical since this is where the current density is greatest. Choosing a magnetic field at magnetopause yields a lower value of formula_468 but ions closer to the coils will rotate. Another condition is that formula_468 be small enough such that collisions are extremely unlikely.\nThe required power to generate the RMF formula_476 is derived by integrating the product of the square of the current density from equation PM.1 and the resistivity of the plasma formula_477 from formula_129 to formula_124 with the result as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_477 is the Spitzer resistivity (W m) of the plasma of ~1.2x10\u22123 formula_481 where \"formula_482\" is the electron temperature assumed to be 15 eV, the same result for formula_462Eq (7) and for formula_463.Eq (7)\nStarting with the definition of plasma wind force from equation MFM.5, noting that formula_485 rearranging and recognizing that equation PM.3 gives the solution for formula_176, which can be substituted and then using equation MHD.2 for formula_64 yields the following expression\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich when multiplied by formula_488 with formula_489 is the same as for formula_462Eq (10) Note that solution for formula_476 and formula_129 must also satisfy equation MHD.3, to which the comments followingEq (10) regarding a \"tremendous leverage of power\" do not address.\nNote that a number of the examples cited in assume a magnetopause radius formula_124 that do not meet the MHD applicability test of equation MHD.5. From the definition of power in physics a constant force is power divided by velocity, the force generated by the plasma magnet (PM) sail is as follows from equation PM.4&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;Comparing the above with Equation (MFM.6), note the dependence on plasma mass density formula_63 is of the same form formula_495. Note from Equation PM.5 that as the falloff rate formula_2 increases that the force derived from the plasma wind decreases, or to maintain the same force formula_476 and/or formula_129 must increase to maintain the same force formula_499.\nEquation CMC.2 gives the mass for each physical coil of radius formula_123 m. Since the RMF requires alternating current and semiconductors are not efficient at higher frequencies, aluminum was specified with mass density formula_501 = 2,700\u00a0kg/m3. Estimates of the coil mass are optimistic by a factor of formula_502 since only one coil was sized and the coil circumference was specified as formula_123 instead of formula_504.\nThe coil resistance is the product of coil material resistivity (\u03a9 m) formula_505 (e.g., ~3x10\u22128 \u03a9m for aluminum) and the coil length formula_504 divided by the coil wire cross sectional area where formula_225 is the radius of the coil wire as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome additional power must compensate for resistive loss but it is orders of magnitude less than formula_476. The peak current carried by a coil is specified by the RMF power and coil resistance from the definition of electrical power in physics as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe current induced in the disc by the RMF formula_509 is the integral of the current density formula_510 from equation PM.1 on the surface of the disc with inner radius formula_206 and outer radius formula_512 with result:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nthe same result for formula_2=1.Eq 11\nLaboratory experiments validated that the RMF creates a magnetospheric bubble, electron temperature near the coils increases indicating presence of the rotating disc of electrons and that thrust was generated. Since the scale of a terrestrial experiment is limited, simulations or a flight trial was recommended. Some of these concepts adapted to an ionospheric plasma environment were carried on in the plasma magnetoshell design.\nIn 2022 Freeze, Greason and others published a detailed design for a plasma magnet based sail for a spacecraft named Wind Rider that would use solar wind force to accelerate away from near Earth and decelerate against the magnetosphere of Jupiter in a spaceflight trial mission called Jupiter Observing Velocity Experiment (JOVE). This design employed a pair of superconducting coils each with radius formula_123 of 9 m, an alternating current of formula_138 of 112 A with formula_516 and a falloff rate of formula_462.Eq (5) A transit time to Jupiter of 25 days was reported for a 21\u00a0kg spacecraft design launched in a 16 U Cubesat format.\nUsing formula_2=1 creates very optimistic performance numbers, but since Slough changed this to formula_2=2 in 2011 and 2012, the case of formula_462 is not compared in this article. An example for formula_2=2 using solar wind parameters formula_63=8x10\u221221 kg/m3, formula_158=500\u00a0km/s then formula_194=72\u00a0km and formula_64=4x10\u22128 T with formula_124=105 m results in formula_412 where MHD applicability occurs. With a coil radius of formula_123=1,000 m yields formula_416=4x10\u22124 T from equation MFM.2. The required RMF power from equation PM.3 is 13\u00a0kW with a required AC coil current formula_138=10 A from equation PM.3 resulting in an induced current of formula_509=2 kA from equation PM.7 . With formula_94=5 the plasma magnet force from equation PM.3 is 197 N. The magnetic force only for the above parameters is 2.8 N from equation MFM.5 and therefore the plasma magnet thrust gain is 71. The performance comparison section gives and optimistic estimate using constant acceleration for formula_2=2 results in a transit time of ~100 days.\nPlasma magnetoshell (PMS).\nA 2011 paper by Slough and others and a 2012 NIAC report by Kirtley investigated use of the plasma magnet technology with 1/r2 magnetic field falloff rate for use in the ionosphere of a planet as a braking mechanism in an approach dubbed Plasma magnetoshell (PMS). The magnetoshell creates drag by ionizing neutral atoms in a planet's ionosphere then magnetically deflecting them. A tether attaching the plasma magnet coils to the spacecraft transfers momentum such that orbital insertion occurs. Analytical models, laboratory demonstrations and mission profiles to Neptune and Mars were described.\nIn 2017, Kelly described using a single-coil magnet with 1/r3 magnetic field falloff rate and more experimental results. In 2019 Kelly and Little published simulation results for magnetoshell performance scaling. A magnet with radius formula_123=1 m was tethered to a spacecraft with batteries for 1,000 seconds of operation (longer than aerocapture designs). The simulations assumed a magnet mass formula_535=1,000\u00a0kg and total magnetoshell system mass of 1,623\u00a0kg, suitable for a Cassini\u2013Huygens or Juno size orbiter. The planet's mass and atmosphere atomic composition and density determine a threshold velocity where magnetoshell operation is feasible. Saturn and Neptune have a hydrogen atmosphere and a threshold velocity of approximately 22\u00a0km/s. In a Neptune mission a formula_536=6\u00a0km is required for a 5,000\u00a0kg spacecraft and must average 50\u00a0kN for the maneuver duration. The model overestimates performance for N2 (Earth, Titan) and CO2 (Venus, Mars) atmospheres since multiple ion species are created and more complex interactions occur. Furthermore, the relatively lower mass of Venus and Mars reduces the threshold velocity below that of feasible magnetoshell operation. The paper states that aerocapture technologies are mature enough for these mission profiles.\nIn 2021, Kelly and Little published further details for use of drag-modulated plasma aerocapture (DMPA) that when compared to Adaptable Deployable Entry and Placement Technology (ADEPT) for drag-modulated aerocapture (DMA) to Neptune that could deliver 70% higher orbiter mass and experience 30% lower stagnation heating.\nBeam powered magsail (BPM).\nA beam-powered of M2P2 variant, MagBeam was proposed in 2011. In this design a magnetic sail is used with beam-powered propulsion, by using a high-power particle accelerator to fire a beam of charged particles at the spacecraft. The magsail would deflect this beam, transferring momentum to the vehicle, that could provide higher acceleration than a solar sail driven by a laser, but a charged particle beam would disperse in a shorter distance than a laser due to the electrostatic repulsion of its component particles. This dispersion problem could potentially be resolved by accelerating a stream of sails which then in turn transfer their momentum to a magsail vehicle, as proposed by Jordin Kare.\nPerformance comparison.\nThe table below compares performance measures for the magnetic sail designs with the following parameters for the solar wind (sw) at 1 AU: velocity formula_537= 500\u00a0km/s, number density formula_39= 5x106 m\u22123, ion mass formula_40 = 1.67x10\u221227 kg a proton mass, resulting in mass density formula_540 = 8.4x10\u221221 kg/m3, and coefficient of drag formula_94=5 where applicable. Equation MHD.2 gives the magnetic field at magnetopause as formula_64\u2248 36 nT, equation MHD.5 gives the ion gyroradius formula_428\u2248 72\u00a0km for formula_544=2. Table entries in boldface are from a cited source as described in the following:\nEquation MS.4 determines force for the Magsail (MS) divided by the Freeland correction factor 3.1, equation PM.5 defines the force for the plasma magnet (PM) with the assumed magnetic field falloff rate formula_2=2. The force for the magnetic sail alone formula_387 is from equation MFM.5. Thrust gain formula_547 for the magneto plasma sail (MPS) is the simulation and/or experimentally determined value with force defined equation MPS.2 to account for thrust loss due to operation in a kinematic region. The last column headed MPS+MPD adds a magnetoplasma dynamic thruster (MPD) that has a higher thrust gain as determined by experiment and simulation. Further details are in the section for the specific design. For designs other than MPS and MPS+MPD, the thrust gain formula_547 is the achieved force from the first row divided by the force of a magnetic sail alone in the second row. The magnetopause distance formula_76 and the coil radius formula_206 are design parameters. Equation MFM.1 with formula_551 defines the magnetic field near the coil(s) as formula_552.\nThe superconducting coil designs used a critical current density formula_553=2x106 A/m to account for warmer temperatures in the solar system. The plasma magnet uses AC power for the rotating magnetic field, PRMF as specified in Equation PM.3 and cannot use a superconducting coil and assumed an aluminum coil with material density formula_501 = 2,700\u00a0kg/m3 and coil wire radius formula_225=5\u00a0mm. All other designs assumed a superconducting coil with material density formula_501 =6,500\u00a0kg/m3, coil wire radius formula_225=5\u00a0mm, and critical current formula_5581.6 x106 A, above which the coil becomes a normal conductor. The magnetopause distance formula_456 and coil radius formula_123 for superconducting-coil based designs were adjusted to meet this critical current constraint. The values for the plasma magnet used a value of formula_123 for formula_2=2 selected to minimize time to velocity and distance. The MPS values for formula_456 and formula_123 were chosen to match the thrust gain from simulation and scaled experimental results and meet the superconducting-coil critical current constraint.\nEquation CMC.2 gives the physical coil mass formula_311 assuming a coil wire radius formula_225=5\u00a0mm. Equation PM.7 gives the plasma magnet alternating current formula_567. Equation MFM.3 gives the direct current formula_567 with formula_131=2 for all other designs. The plasma magnet RMF uses the input alternating current formula_138 (kA) to rotate electrons in captured plasma to create an induced direct current disc carrying formula_509 kA as defined in equation PM.8.\nSuperconducting coils do not require continuous power (except possibly for cooling); however, the plasma magnet design does, as specified in equation PM.3. An estimate for the plasma magnet power supply mass assumes ~3\u00a0kg/W for nuclear power in space. Other mass was assumed to be 10 tonnes for MS and 1 tonne for PM and MPS. Acceleration formula_572 is the thrust force formula_573 from the first row divided by the total mass (coil plus other). An optimistic approximation is constant acceleration formula_572, for which the time to reach a target velocity V of 10% of the solar wind velocity is formula_575 and time to cover a specified distance formula_576 \u2248 7.8x108 km (approximate distance from Earth to Jupiter) is formula_577 . For comparison purposes the time for a Hohmann transfer from Earth orbit to Jupiter orbit is 2.7 years (almost 1,000 days) but that would allow orbital insertion whereas a magnetic sail would do a flyby unless the magnetosphere and gravity of Jupiter could provide deceleration. Another comparison is the New Horizons interplanetary space probe with a 30\u00a0kg payload that flew by Jupiter after 405 days on its way to Pluto.\nThe best time to velocity formula_578 and distance formula_579 performance occurs for the PM and MPS designs due primarily to much reduced coil and other mass. As described in the M2P2 section, several criticisms asserted that the falloff rate formula_2=1 was questionable and hence it was not included in this table. Simulations and experiments as described in the MPS section showed that formula_2=2 is valid with injection of plasma to inflate the magnetic field in a manner similar to M2P2. As described in the PM section, plasma is not injected but instead captured to achieve a falloff rate of formula_2=2, with calculations assuming formula_2=1 being very optimistic. The classic Magsail (MS) design generates the most thrust force and has considerable mass but still has relatively good time performance. Parameters for the other designs were chosen to yield comparable time performance subject to the constraints previously described. As described above and further detailed in the section for the respective design, this article contains the equations and parameters to compute performance estimates for different parameter choices.\nCriticisms.\nIn 1994 Vulpetti published a critical review regarding viability of space propulsion based on solar wind momentum flux. The paper highlighted technology challenges in terms of the magnetic field source, energy required and interaction between the solar wind and the spacecraft's magnetic field, summarizing that these issues were not insurmountable. The major unresolved issue is spacecraft and mission design that account for the potentially highly variable solar wind velocity and plasma density that could complicate maneuvers by a spacecraft employing magnetic sail technology. Some means of modulating thrust is necessary. If the mission objective is to rapidly escape the solar system then the paper states that this is less of an issue.\nIn 2006, Bolonkin published a paper that questioned the theoretical viability of a Magsail and described common mistakes. Equation (2) states that the magnetic field of electrons rotating in the large coil was greater than and opposed the magnetic field generated by the current in the coil and hence no thrust would result. In 2014 Vulpetti published a rebuttal that summarized plasma properties, in particular the fact that plasma is quasi-neutral and noted in equation (B1) that the Bolonkin paper equation (2) assumed that the plasma had a large net negative electrical charge. The plasma charge varies statistically over short intervals and the maximum value has negligible impact on Magsail performance. Furthermore, he argued that observations by many spacecraft have observed compression of a magnetic field by dynamic (or ram) pressure that did not depend on particle charges.\nIn 2017, Gros published results that differed from prior magsail work. A major result was the Magsail kinetic model of equation MKM.2 that is a curve fit to numerical analysis of proton trajectories impacted by a large current carrying superconducting coil. The curve fit scaling relation for the effective sail area formula_280 was logarithmic cubed with argument formula_585 with formula_247 the loop current, formula_587 the curve fit parameter, formula_36 the ship velocity and formula_245 the speed of light. This differed from the power law scaling formula_590 of prior work. The Gros paper could not trace back this difference to underlying physical arguments and noted that the results are inconsistent, stating that the source for these discrepancies was unclear. Appendix B questioned whether a bow shock will form if the initial spacecraft velocity formula_271 is large, for example for deceleration after interstellar travel, since the predicted effective sail area formula_237 is small in this case. One difference is that this analysis used the coil radius formula_123 for computation of the ion gyroradius as compared with prior work use of the magnetopause radius formula_124\nFictional uses in popular culture.\n\"Magnetic sails\" have become a popular trope in many works of science fiction although the solar sail is more popular: \nAlthough not referred to as a \"magnetic sail\", the concept was used in the novel Encounter with Tiber by Buzz Aldrin and John Barnes as a braking mechanism to decelerate starships from relativistic speed."}
{"id": "37846", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37846", "title": "Gaseous fission reactor", "text": "Type of nuclear reactor\nA gas core reactor, and the very closely related vapor core reactor, is a proposed kind of nuclear reactor in which the nuclear fuel would be in a gaseous state rather than liquid or solid. In this type of reactor, the only temperature-limiting materials would be the reactor walls, and with appropriate cooling of the walls, the reactor can run at much higher temperatures. Conventional reactors have stricter limitations because the core would melt if the fuel temperature were to rise too high.\nThere are two proposed roles for the concept, for nuclear power electrical generation, and as an advanced rocket engine. In the former, the advantage to the design is that it directly produces a high-velocity stream of partially ionized gas. This can be used to power a magnetohydrodynamic generator (MHD), which can operate with efficiencies roughly double that of the traditional liquid-cooled reactors which use the Rankine cycle and reach about 35% efficiency. The complexity of the design and the failure to design successful cost-effective MHD devices led to this concept being dropped by the early 1980s. For the rocket role, the highly-energetic exhaust is expanded through a nozzle to produce thrust. Because of the very high energy content, a gas core reactor rocket will have much higher performance than even the best possible liquid rocket propellants, or alternative nuclear designs using a solid or liquid core.\nDepending on the source, this basic concept may be known as a gas fueled reactor, gas nuclear reactor, gaseous fission reactor, and variations on these names. The related \"vapor\" design differs only in that the initial fuel is partially or entirely in the form of aerosol droplets rather than gas.\nTheory of operation.\nThe vapor core reactor (VCR), also called a gas core reactor (GCR), has been studied for some time. It would have a gas or vapor core composed of uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) with some helium (4He) added to increase the electrical conductivity, the vapor core may also have tiny UF4 droplets in it. It has both terrestrial and space based applications. Since the space concept doesn't necessarily have to be economical in the traditional sense, it allows the enrichment to exceed what would be acceptable for a terrestrial system. It also allows for a higher ratio of UF4 to helium, which in the terrestrial version would be kept just high enough to ensure criticality in order to increase the efficiency of direct conversion. The terrestrial version is designed for a vapor core inlet temperature of about and exit temperature of and a UF4-to-helium ratio of around 20% to 60%. It is thought that the outlet temperature could be raised to that of the to range where the exhaust would be a fission-generated non-equilibrium electron gas, which would be of much more importance for a rocket design. A terrestrial version of the VCR's flow schematic can be found in reference 2 and in the summary of non-classical nuclear systems in the second external link. The space based concept would be cut off at the end of the MHD channel.\nReasoning for He-4 addition.\n4He may be used in increase the ability of the design to extract energy and be controlled. A few sentences from Anghaie et al. sheds light on the reasoning:\n \"The power density in the MHD duct is proportional to the product of electrical conductivity, velocity squared and magnetic field squared \"\u03c3v\"2\"B\"2. Therefore, the enthalpy extraction is very sensitive to the MHD input-output fluid conditions. The vapor core reactor provides a hotter-than-most fluid with potential for adequate thermal equilibrium conductivity and duct velocities. Considering the product \"v\"2 \u00d7 \"B\"2, it is apparent that a light working fluid should dominate the thermal properties and the UF4 fraction should be small. Additional electrical conductivity enhancement might be needed from thermal ionization of suitable seed materials, and from non-equilibrium ionization by fission fragments and other ionizing radiation produced by the fissioning process.\"\nSpacecraft.\nThe spacecraft variant of the gaseous fission reactor is called the gas core reactor rocket. There are two approaches: the open and closed cycle. In the open cycle, the propellant, most likely hydrogen, is fed to the reactor, heated up by the nuclear reaction in the reactor, and exits out the other end. Unfortunately, the propellant will be contaminated by fuel and fission products, and although the problem can be mitigated by engineering the hydrodynamics within the reactor, it renders the rocket design completely unsuitable for use in atmosphere.\nOne might attempt to circumvent the problem by confining the fission fuel magnetically, in a manner similar to the fusion fuel in a tokamak. Unfortunately it is not likely that this arrangement will actually work to contain the fuel, since the ratio of ionization to particle momentum is not favourable. Whereas a tokamak would generally work to contain singly ionized deuterium or tritium with a mass of two or three daltons, the uranium vapour would be at most triply ionized with a mass of 235 daltons. Since the force imparted by a magnetic field is proportional to the charge on the particle, and the acceleration is proportional to the force divided by the mass of the particle, the magnets required to contain uranium gas would be impractically large; most such designs have focused on fuel cycles that do not depend upon retaining the fuel in the reactor.\nIn the closed cycle, the reaction is entirely shielded from the propellant. The reaction is contained in a quartz vessel and the propellant merely flows outside of it, being heated in an indirect fashion. The closed cycle avoids contamination because the propellant can't enter the reactor itself, but the solution carries a significant penalty to the rocket's specific impulse.\nEnergy production.\nFor energy production purposes, one might use a container located inside a solenoid. The container is filled with gaseous uranium hexafluoride, where the uranium is enriched, to a level just short of criticality. Afterward, the uranium hexafluoride is compressed by external means, thus initiating a nuclear chain reaction and a great amount of heat, which in turn causes an expansion of the uranium hexafluoride. Since the UF6 is contained within the vessel, it can't escape and thus compresses elsewhere. The result is a plasma wave moving in the container, and the solenoid converts some of its energy into electricity at an efficiency level of about 20%. In addition, the container must be cooled, and one can extract energy from the coolant by passing it through a heat exchanger and turbine system as in an ordinary thermal power plant.\nHowever, there are enormous problems with corrosion during this arrangement, as the uranium hexafluoride is chemically very reactive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37847", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37847", "title": "Mini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion", "text": ""}
{"id": "37849", "revid": "37352466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37849", "title": "Nuclear salt-water rocket", "text": "Proposed rocket propulsion mechanism\nThe nuclear salt-water rocket (NSWR) is a theoretical type of nuclear thermal rocket designed by Robert Zubrin. In place of traditional chemical propellant, such as that in a chemical rocket, the rocket would be fueled by salts of plutonium or 20-percent-enriched uranium. The solution would be contained in a bundle of pipes coated in boron carbide (for its properties of neutron absorption). Through a combination of the coating and space between the pipes, the contents would not reach critical mass until the solution is pumped into a reaction chamber, thus reaching a critical mass, and being expelled through a nozzle to generate thrust.\nProposed design.\nChemical rockets use heat energy produced by a chemical reaction to heat the gas products. The hot products exit through a propulsion nozzle at a very high speed, creating thrust. In a nuclear thermal rocket (NTR), thrust is created by heating a fluid by using a nuclear fission reactor. The lower the molecular weight of the exhaust (hydrogen having the lowest possible), the more efficient the motor can be. However, in this engine the propellant can be any of many fluids having suitable properties as it does not participate in generating heat. In a NSWR, the nuclear salt-water would be made to flow through a reaction chamber and out of an exhaust nozzle in such a way and at such speeds that critical mass will begin once the chamber is filled to a certain point; however, the peak neutron flux of the fission reaction would occur outside the vehicle.\nAdvantages.\nThere are several advantages relative to conventional NTR designs. As the peak neutron flux and fission reaction rates would occur outside the vehicle, these activities could be much more vigorous than they could be if it was necessary to house them in a vessel (which would have temperature limits due to materials constraints). Additionally, a contained reactor can allow only a small percentage of its fuel to undergo fission at any given time; otherwise, it would overheat and melt down (or explode in a runaway fission chain reaction). The fission reaction in an NSWR is dynamic, and because the reaction products are exhausted into space, it does not have a limit on the proportion of fission fuel that reacts. In many ways, NSWRs combine the advantages of fission reactors and fission bombs.\nBecause they can harness the power of what is essentially a continuous nuclear fission explosion, NSWRs would have both very high thrust and very high exhaust velocity, meaning that the rocket would accelerate quickly and be extremely efficient in terms of propellant usage. The combination of high thrust and high specific impulse is a rare trait in the rocket world. One design would generate 13\u00a0meganewtons of thrust at 66\u00a0km/s exhaust velocity (or 6,730\u00a0seconds ISP, compared to about 4.5\u00a0km/s (450\u00a0s ISP) exhaust velocity for the best chemical rockets as of February 2023).\nThe design and calculations discussed above are using 20-percent-enriched uranium salts. However, it would be plausible to use another design which could achieve much higher exhaust velocities (4,725\u00a0km/s) and use a 30,000-tonne ice comet along with 7,500\u00a0tonnes of highly enriched uranium salts to propel a 300-tonne spacecraft up to 7.62% of the speed of light and potentially arrive at Alpha Centauri after a 60-year journey.\n\"NSWRs share many of the features of Orion propulsion systems, except that NSWRs would generate continuous rather than pulsed thrust and may be workable on much smaller scales than the smallest feasible Orion designs (which are generally large, due to the requirements of the shock-absorber system and the minimum size of efficient nuclear explosives).\"\nLimitations.\nThe propellant used in the initial design would contain a rather large amount of the relatively expensive isotope 235U, which would not be very cost effective. However, if the use of NSWR began to rise, it would be possible to replace this with the cheaper isotopes 233U or 239Pu in either fission breeder reactors or (much better) nuclear fusion\u2013fission hybrid reactors. These other fissiles would have the right characteristics to serve nearly as well, at a relatively low cost.\nAnother major limitation of the Zubrin's nuclear salt-water rocket design included the lack of a material to be used in the reaction chamber that could actually sustain such a reaction within a spacecraft. Zubrin claimed in his design that the apparatus was created so that the liquid flow rate or velocity was what mattered most in the process, not the material. Therefore, he argued that if the proper velocity was chosen for the liquid traveling through the reaction chamber, the site of maximum fission release could then be located at the end of the chamber, thus allowing the system to remain intact and safe to operate. These claims have still not been proven due to no test of such a device having ever been conducted.\nFor example, Zubrin argues that if diluted nuclear fuel flows into the chamber at speed similar to diffusion speed of thermal neutrons, then the nuclear reaction is confined in the chamber and does not damage the rest of the system (the nuclear analog of a gas burner). A possible problem in that line of thinking is that neutrons do not all diffuse at the same velocity, but have a broad distribution over several orders of magnitude. It is possible that tails of this velocity distribution would be sufficient to generate enough heat in fuel feeding system (by scattering and fission) to destroy the system. This question can be perhaps answered by detailed Monte Carlo simulations of neutron transport.\nThe vessel's exhaust would contain radioactive isotopes, but in space, these would be rapidly dispersed after travelling only a short distance; the exhaust would also be travelling at high speed (in Zubrin's scenario, faster than Solar escape velocity, allowing it to eventually leave the Solar System). However, this is of little use on the surface of a planet, where a NSWR would eject massive quantities of superheated steam, still containing fissioning nuclear salts. Terrestrial testing might be subject to reasonable objections; as one physicist wrote:\n \"Writing the environmental impact statement for such tests [...] might present an interesting problem ...\".\nIt is also not certain that fission in a NSWR could be controlled:\n \"Whether fast criticality can be controlled in a rocket engine remains an open question\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "37850", "revid": "992015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37850", "title": "Beam-powered propulsion", "text": "Mechanism where confined high-speed particles confer energy to a vehicle\nBeam-powered propulsion, also known as directed energy propulsion, is a class of aircraft or spacecraft propulsion that uses energy beamed to the spacecraft from a remote power plant to provide energy. The beam is typically either a microwave or a laser beam, and it is either pulsed or continuous. A continuous beam lends itself to thermal rockets, photonic thrusters, and light sails. In contrast, a pulsed beam lends itself to ablative thrusters and pulse detonation engines.\nThe rule of thumb that is usually quoted is that it takes a megawatt of power beamed to a vehicle per kg of payload while it is being accelerated to permit it to reach low Earth orbit.\nMore speculative designs, using mass (\"micro-pellet\") beams, would allow for reaching the edge of the solar gravity lens, or even nearby stars, in decades.\nOther than launching to orbit, applications for moving around the world quickly have also been proposed.\nBackground.\nRockets are momentum machines; they use mass ejected from the rocket to provide momentum to the rocket. Momentum is the product of mass and velocity, so rockets generally attempt to put as much velocity into their working mass as possible, thereby minimizing the needed working mass. To accelerate the working mass, energy is required. In a conventional rocket, the fuel is chemically combined to provide the energy, and the resulting fuel products, the ash or exhaust, are used as the working mass.\nThere is no particular reason why the same fuel has to be used for both energy and momentum. In the jet engine, for instance, the fuel is used only to produce energy, and the air provides the working mass the jet aircraft flies through. In modern jet engines, the amount of air propelled is much more significant than the amount used for energy. However, this is not a solution for the rockets as they quickly climb to altitudes where the air is too thin to be useful as a source of working mass.\nRockets can carry their working mass and use other energy sources. The problem is finding an energy source with a power-to-weight ratio that competes with chemical fuels. Small nuclear reactors can compete in this regard, and considerable work on nuclear thermal propulsion was carried out in the 1960s, but environmental concerns and rising costs led to the ending of most of these programs.\nFurther improvement can be made by removing the energy created by the spacecraft. If the nuclear reactor is left on the ground and its energy is transmitted to the spacecraft, its weight is also removed. The issue then is getting the energy into the spacecraft. This is the idea behind beamed power.\nWith beamed propulsion, one can leave the power source stationary on the ground and directly (or via a heat exchanger) heat propellant on the spacecraft with a maser or a laser beam from a fixed installation. This permits the spacecraft to leave its power source at home, saving significant amounts of mass and greatly improving performance.\nLaser propulsion.\nSince a laser can heat propellant to extremely high temperatures, this potentially greatly improves the efficiency of a rocket, as exhaust velocity is proportional to the square root of the temperature. Normal chemical rockets have an exhaust speed limited by the fixed amount of energy in the propellants, but beamed propulsion systems have no particular theoretical limit (although, in practice, there are temperature limits).\nMicrowave propulsion.\nIn microwave thermal propulsion, an external microwave beam is used to heat a refractory heat exchanger to &gt;1,500 K, heating a propellant such as hydrogen, methane, or ammonia. This improves the propulsion system's specific impulse and thrust/weight ratio relative to conventional rocket propulsion. For example, hydrogen can provide a specific impulse of 700\u2013900 seconds and a thrust/weight ratio of 50-150.\nA variation, developed by brothers James Benford and Gregory Benford, is to use thermal desorption of propellant trapped in the material of a massive microwave sail. This produces a very high acceleration compared to microwave-pushed sails alone.\nElectric propulsion.\nSome proposed spacecraft propulsion mechanisms use electrically powered spacecraft propulsion, in which electrical energy is used by an electrically powered rocket engine, such as an ion thruster or plasma propulsion engine. Usually, these schemes assume either solar panels or an onboard reactor. However, both power sources are heavy.\nBeamed propulsion in the form of a laser can send power to a photovoltaic panel for \"Laser electric propulsion.\" In this system, if a high intensity is incident on the solar array, careful design of the panels is necessary to avoid a fall-off in conversion efficiency due to heating effects. John Brophy has analyzed the transmission of laser power to a photovoltaic array powering a high-efficiency electric propulsion system as a means of accomplishing high delta-V missions such as an interstellar precursor mission in a NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts project.\nA microwave beam could be used to send power to a rectenna for \"microwave electric propulsion\". Microwave broadcast power has been practically demonstrated several times (e.g., in Goldstone, California, in 1974). Rectennas are potentially lightweight and can handle high power at high conversion efficiency. However, rectennas must be huge for a significant amount of power to be captured.\nDirect impulse.\nA beam could also provide impulse by directly \"pushing\" on the sail.\nOne example is using a solar sail to reflect a laser beam. This concept, called a \"laser-pushed lightsail\" or \"laser sail,\" was initially proposed by G. Marx but first analyzed in detail, and elaborated on, by physicist Robert L. Forward in 1989 as a method of interstellar travel that would avoid extremely high mass ratios by not carrying fuel. Further analysis of the concept was done by Landis, Mallove and Matloff, Andrews Lubin, and others.\nForward proposed pushing a sail with a microwave beam in a later paper. This has the advantage that the sail need not be a continuous surface. Forward tagged his proposal for an ultralight sail \"Starwisp\". A later analysis by Landis suggested that the Starwisp concept as initially proposed by Forward would not work, but variations on the proposal might be implemented.\nThe beam has to have a large diameter so that only a small portion of the beam misses the sail due to diffraction, and the laser or microwave antenna has to have good pointing stability so that the craft can tilt its sails fast enough to follow the center of the beam. This gets more important when going from interplanetary travel to interstellar travel and when going from a fly-by mission to a landing mission to a return mission. The laser or the microwave sender would probably be a large phased array of small devices that get their energy directly from solar radiation. The size of the array negates the need for a lens or mirror.\nAnother beam-pushed concept would be to use a magnetic sail or MMPP sail to divert a beam of charged particles from a particle accelerator or plasma jet. Landis proposed a particle beam pushed sail in 1989, and analyzed in more detail in a 2004 paper. Jordin Kare has proposed a variant to this whereby a \"beam\" of small laser accelerated light sails would transfer momentum to a magsail vehicle.\nMass beam systems.\nAnother beam-pushed concept uses pellets or projectiles of ordinary matter. A stream of pellets from a stationary mass-driver is \"reflected\" by the spacecraft, cf. mass driver. The spacecraft neither needs energy nor reaction mass for propulsion of its own. For craft at sub-relativistic velocities, mass beams would be more efficient than photon beams. Nordley and Crowl point out, \"A photon must travel at the speed of light and until relativistic velocities are reached, a reflected photon carries away almost as much energy as it started with. A massive particle\u2019s velocity, however, can be tuned so that the reflected mass is left almost dead in space relative to the beam generators, having surrendered almost all of its kinetic energy to the starship.\"\nProposed systems.\nLightcraft.\nA lightcraft is a vehicle currently under development that uses an external pulsed source of laser or maser energy to provide power for producing thrust.\nThe laser shines on a parabolic reflector on the vehicle's underside, concentrating the light to produce a region of extremely high temperature. The air in this region is heated and expands violently, producing thrust with each pulse of laser light. A lightcraft must provide this gas from onboard tanks or an ablative solid in space. By leaving the vehicle's power source on the ground and using the ambient atmosphere as reaction mass for much of its ascent, a lightcraft could deliver a substantial percentage of its launch mass to orbit. It could also potentially be very cheap to manufacture.\nTesting.\nEarly in the morning of 2 October 2000 at the High Energy Laser Systems Test Facility (HELSTF), Lightcraft Technologies, Inc. (LTI) with the help of Franklin B. Mead of the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory and Leik Myrabo set a new world's altitude record of 233 feet (71 m) for its 4.8\u00a0inch (12.2\u00a0cm) diameter, , laser-boosted rocket in a flight lasting 12.7 seconds. Although much of the 8:35 am flight was spent hovering at 230+ feet, the Lightcraft earned a world record for the longest ever laser-powered free flight and the greatest \"air time\" (i.e., launch-to-landing/recovery) from a light-propelled object. This is comparable to Robert Goddard's first test flight of his rocket design. Increasing the laser power to 100 kilowatts will enable flights up to a 30-kilometer altitude. They aim to accelerate a one-kilogram microsatellite into low Earth orbit using a custom-built, one-megawatt ground-based laser. Such a system would use just about 20 dollars' worth of electricity, placing launch costs per kilogram to many times less than current launch costs (which are measured in thousands of dollars).\nMyrabo's \"lightcraft\" design is a reflective funnel-shaped craft that channels heat from the laser toward the center, using a reflective parabolic surface, causing the laser to explode the air underneath it, generating lift. Reflective surfaces in the craft focus the beam into a ring, where it heats air to a temperature nearly five times hotter than the surface of the Sun, causing the air to expand explosively for thrust.\nLaser thermal rocket.\nA laser thermal rocket is a thermal rocket in which the propellant is heated by energy provided by an external laser beam. \nIn 1992, the late Jordin Kare proposed a simpler, nearer-term concept with a rocket containing liquid hydrogen. The propellant is heated in a heat exchanger that the laser beam shines on before leaving the vehicle via a conventional nozzle. This concept can use continuous beam lasers, and the semiconductor lasers are now cost-effective for this application.\nMicrowave thermal rocket.\nIn 2002, Kevin L.G. Parkin proposed a similar system using microwaves. In May 2012, the DARPA/NASA Millimeter-wave Thermal Launch System (MTLS) Project began the first steps toward implementing this idea. The MTLS Project was the first to demonstrate a millimeter-wave absorbent refractory heat exchanger, subsequently integrating it into the propulsion system of a small rocket to produce the first millimeter-wave thermal rocket. Simultaneously, it developed the first high-power cooperative target millimeter-wave beam director and used it to attempt the first millimeter-wave thermal rocket launch. Several launches were attempted, but problems with the beam director could not be resolved before funding ran out in March 2014.\nMass Beam Systems.\nAerospace and mechanical engineer https:// has been https:// to study a pellet-beam system that would propel one ton payloads to 500 AU in under 20 years.\nNordley and Crowl propose vast solar arrays built by self-replicating robots placed at the Sun-Venus equilateral Lagrange points, capable of generating beams in the hundreds of petawatt range. With such technologies, craft could be driven to relativistic speeds, capable of reaching nearby stars in decades.\nEconomics.\nThe motivation to develop beam-powered propulsion systems comes from the economic advantages gained due to improved propulsion performance. In the case of beam-powered launch vehicles, better propulsion performance enables some combination of increased payload fraction, increased structural margins, and fewer stages. JASON's 1977 study of laser propulsion, authored by Freeman Dyson, succinctly articulates the promise of beam-powered launch: \"Laser propulsion as an idea that may produce a revolution in space technology. A single laser facility on the ground can in theory launch single-stage vehicles into low or high earth orbit. The payload can be 20% or 30% of the vehicle take-off weight. It is far more economical in the use of mass and energy than chemical propulsion, and it is far more flexible in putting identical vehicles into a variety of orbits.\"This promise was quantified in a 1978 Lockheed Study conducted for NASA:\"The results of the study showed that, with advanced technology, laser rocket system with either a space- or ground-based laser transmitter could reduce the national budget allocated to space transportation by 10 to 345 billion dollars over a 10-year life cycle when compared to advanced chemical propulsion systems (LO2-LH2) of equal capability.\"\nBeam director cost.\nThe 1970s-era studies and others since have cited beam director cost as a possible impediment to beam-powered launch systems. A recent cost-benefit analysis estimates that microwave (or laser) thermal rockets would be economical once beam director cost falls below 20 $/Watt. The current cost of suitable lasers is &lt;100 $/Watt and the cost of suitable microwave sources is &lt;$5/Watt. Mass production has lowered the production cost of microwave oven magnetrons to &lt;0.01 $/Watt and some medical lasers to &lt;10 $/Watt, though these are considered unsuitable for beam directors.\nNon-spacecraft applications.\nIn 1964 William C. Brown demonstrated a miniature helicopter equipped with a combination antenna and rectifier device called a rectenna. The rectenna converted microwave power into electricity, allowing the helicopter to fly.\nIn 2002 a Japanese group propelled a tiny aluminium airplane by using a laser to vaporize a water droplet clinging to it, and in 2003 NASA researchers flew an 11-ounce (312 g) model airplane with a propeller powered with solar panels illuminated by a laser. It is possible that such beam-powered propulsion could be useful for long-duration high altitude uncrewed aircraft or balloons, perhaps designed to serve \u2013 like satellites do today \u2013 as communication relays, science platforms, or surveillance platforms.\nA \"laser broom\" has been proposed to sweep space debris from Earth orbit. This is another proposed use of beam-powered propulsion, used on objects not designed to be propelled by it, for example, small pieces of scrap knocked off (\"spalled\") satellites. The technique works since the laser power ablates one side of the object, giving an impulse that changes the eccentricity of the object's orbit. The orbit would then intersect the atmosphere and burn up.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37851", "revid": "44487672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37851", "title": "Nuclear photonic rocket", "text": "Rocket engine that uses photons to propel a spacecraft\nIn a traditional nuclear photonic rocket, an onboard nuclear reactor would generate such high temperatures that the blackbody radiation from the reactor would provide significant thrust. The disadvantage is that it takes much power to generate a small amount of thrust this way, so acceleration is very low. The photon radiators would most likely be constructed using graphite or tungsten. Photonic rockets are technologically feasible, but rather impractical with current technology based on an onboard nuclear power source.\nEnergy requirements and comparisons.\nThe power per thrust required for a perfectly collimated output beam is 300 MW/N (half this if it can be reflected off the craft); very high energy density power sources would be required to provide reasonable thrust without unreasonable weight. The specific impulse of a photonic rocket is harder to define, since the output has no (rest) mass and is not expended fuel; if we take the momentum per inertia of the photons, the specific impulse is just \"c\", which is impressive. However, considering the mass of the source of the photons, e.g., atoms undergoing nuclear fission, brings the specific impulse down to 300\u00a0km/s (\"c\"/1000) or less; considering the infrastructure for a reactor (some of which also scales with the amount of fuel) reduces the value further. Finally, any energy loss not through radiation that is redirected precisely to aft but is instead conducted away by engine supports, radiated in some other direction, or lost via neutrinos or so will further degrade the efficiency. If we were to set 80% of the mass of the photon rocket = fissionable fuel, and recognizing that nuclear fission converts about 0.10% of the mass into energy: then if the photon rocket masses 300,000\u00a0kg then 240,000\u00a0kg of that is atomic fuel. Therefore, the fissioning of all of the fuel will result in the loss of just 240\u00a0kg of mass. Then 300,000/299,760\u00a0kg = an \"m\"i/\"m\"f of 1.0008. Using the rocket equation, we find \"v\"f = ln 1.0008 \u00d7 \"c\" where \"c\" = 299,792,458\u00a0m/s.\n\"v\"f then may be 239,930\u00a0m/s which is about 240\u00a0km/s. The nuclear fission powered photon rocket may accelerate at a maximum of perhaps 1/10,000\u00a0m/s\u00b2 (0.1\u00a0mm/s\u00b2) which is 10\u22125\"g\". The velocity change would be at the rate of 3,000\u00a0m/s per year of thrusting by the photon rocket.\nIf a photon rocket begins its journey in low Earth orbit, then one year of thrusting may be required to achieve an Earth escape velocity of 11.2\u00a0km/s if the vehicle is already in orbit at a velocity of 9,100\u00a0m/s. Upon escaping the Earth's gravitational field the rocket will have a heliocentric velocity of 30\u00a0km/s in interplanetary space. Eighty years of steady photonic thrusting would be then required to obtain a final velocity of 240\u00a0km/s in this hypothetical case.\nIt is possible to obtain even higher specific impulse; that of some other photonic propulsion devices (e.g., solar sails) is effectively infinite because no carried fuel is required. Alternatively, such devices as ion thrusters, while having a notably lower specific impulse, give a much better thrust-to-power ratio; for photons, that ratio is formula_1, whereas for slow particles (that is, nonrelativistic; even the output from typical ion thrusters counts) the ratio is formula_2, which is much larger (since formula_3). (This is in a sense an unfair comparison, since the photons must be \"created\" and other particles are merely \"accelerated\", but nonetheless the impulses per carried mass and per applied energy\u2014the practical quantities\u2014are as given.) The photonic rocket is thus wasteful when power and not mass is at a premium, or when enough mass can be saved through the use of a weaker power source that reaction mass can be included without penalty.\nA laser could be used as a photon rocket engine, and would solve the reflection/collimation problem, but lasers are absolutely less efficient at converting energy into light than blackbody radiation is\u2014though one should also note the benefits of lasers vs blackbody source, including unidirectional controllable beam and the mass and durability of the radiation source. The limitations posed by the rocket equation can be overcome, as long as the reaction mass is not carried by the spacecraft. In the Beamed Laser Propulsion (BLP) concept, the photons are beamed from the photon source to the spacecraft as coherent light. Robert L. Forward pioneered interstellar propulsion concepts including photon propulsion and antimatter rocket propulsion. However, BLP is limited because of the extremely low thrust generation efficiency of photon reflection. One of the best ways to overcome the inherent inefficiency in producing thrust of the photon thruster by amplifying the momentum transfer of photons by recycling photons between two high reflectance mirrors.\nPower sources.\nFeasible current, or near-term fission reactor designs can generate up to 2.2\u00a0kW per kilogram of reactor mass. Without any payload, such a reactor could drive a photon rocket at nearly 10\u22125 m/s\u00b2 (10\u22126\"g\"; see \"g\"-force). This could perhaps provide interplanetary spaceflight capability from Earth orbit. Nuclear fusion reactors could also be used, perhaps providing somewhat higher power.\nA design proposed in the 1950s by Eugen S\u00e4nger used positron-electron annihilation to produce gamma rays. S\u00e4nger was unable to solve the problem of how to reflect, and collimate the gamma rays created by positron-electron annihilation; however, by shielding the reactions (or other annihilations) and absorbing their energy, a similar blackbody propulsion system could be created. An antimatter-matter powered photon rocket would (disregarding the shielding) obtain the maximum \"c\" specific impulse; for this reason, an antimatter-matter annihilation powered photon rocket could potentially be used for interstellar spaceflight.\nTheoretically, other designs such as spacecraft using a Kugelblitz micro black hole could also be used for interstellar travel given the efficiency of black holes in converting matter into energy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37852", "revid": "37017796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37852", "title": "Fusion rocket", "text": "Rocket driven by nuclear fusion power\nA fusion rocket is a theoretical design for a rocket driven by fusion propulsion that could provide efficient and sustained acceleration in space without the need to carry a large fuel supply. The design requires fusion power technology beyond current capabilities, and much larger and more complex rockets.\nFusion nuclear pulse propulsion is one approach to using nuclear fusion energy to provide propulsion.\nFusion's main advantage is its very high specific impulse, while its main disadvantage is the (likely) large mass of the reactor. A fusion rocket may produce less radiation than a fission rocket, reducing the shielding mass needed. The simplest way of building a fusion rocket is to use hydrogen bombs as proposed in Project Orion, but such a spacecraft would be massive and the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty prohibits the use of such bombs. For that reason bomb-based rockets would likely be limited to operating only in space. An alternate approach uses electrical (e.g. ion) propulsion with electric power generated by fusion instead of direct thrust.\nElectricity generation vs. direct thrust.\nSpacecraft propulsion methods such as ion thrusters require electric power to run, but are highly efficient. In some cases their thrust is limited by the amount of power that can be generated (for example, a mass driver). An electric generator running on fusion power could drive such a ship. One disadvantage is that conventional electricity production requires a low-temperature energy sink, which is difficult (i.e. heavy) in a spacecraft. Direct conversion of the kinetic energy of fusion products into electricity mitigates this problem.\nOne attractive possibility is to direct the fusion exhaust out the back of the rocket to provide thrust without the intermediate production of electricity. This would be easier with some confinement schemes (e.g. magnetic mirrors) than with others (e.g. tokamaks). It is also more attractive for \"advanced fuels\" (see aneutronic fusion). Helium-3 propulsion would use the fusion of helium-3 atoms as a power source. Helium-3, an isotope of helium with two protons and one neutron, could be fused with deuterium in a reactor. The resulting energy release could expel propellant out the back of the spacecraft. Helium-3 is proposed as a power source for spacecraft mainly because of its lunar abundance. Scientists estimate that 1 million tons of accessible helium-3 are present on the moon. Only 20% of the power produced by the D-T reaction could be used this way; while the other 80% is released as neutrons which, because they cannot be directed by magnetic fields or solid walls, would be difficult to direct towards thrust, and may in turn require shielding. Helium-3 is produced via beta decay of tritium, which can be produced from deuterium, lithium, or boron.\nEven if a self-sustaining fusion reaction cannot be produced, it might be possible to use fusion to boost the efficiency of another propulsion system, such as a VASIMR engine.\nConfinement alternatives.\nMagnetic.\nTo sustain a fusion reaction, the plasma must be confined. The most widely studied configuration for terrestrial fusion is the tokamak, a form of magnetic confinement fusion. Currently tokamaks weigh a great deal, so the thrust to weight ratio would seem unacceptable. NASA's Glenn Research Center proposed in 2001 a small aspect ratio spherical torus reactor for its \"Discovery II\" conceptual vehicle design. \"Discovery II\" could deliver a crewed 172 metric tons payload to Jupiter in 118 days (or 212 days to Saturn) using 861 metric tons of hydrogen propellant, plus 11 metric tons of Helium-3-Deuterium (D-He3) fusion fuel. The hydrogen is heated by the fusion plasma debris to increase thrust, at a cost of reduced exhaust velocity (348\u2013463\u00a0km/s) and hence increased propellant mass.\nInertial.\nThe main alternative to magnetic confinement is inertial confinement fusion (ICF), such as that proposed by Project Daedalus. A small pellet of fusion fuel (with a diameter of a couple of millimeters) would be ignited by an electron beam or a laser. To produce direct thrust, a magnetic field forms the pusher plate. In principle, the Helium-3-Deuterium reaction or an aneutronic fusion reaction could be used to maximize the energy in charged particles and to minimize radiation, but it is highly questionable whether using these reactions is technically feasible. Both the detailed design studies in the 1970s, the Orion drive and Project Daedalus, used inertial confinement. In the 1980s, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and NASA studied an ICF-powered \"Vehicle for Interplanetary Transport Applications\" (VISTA). The conical VISTA spacecraft could deliver a 100-tonne payload to Mars orbit and return to Earth in 130 days, or to Jupiter orbit and back in 403 days. 41 tonnes of deuterium/tritium (D-T) fusion fuel would be required, plus 4,124 tonnes of hydrogen expellant. The exhaust velocity would be 157\u00a0km/s.\nThe very large necessary mass and the challenge of managing the heat produced in space may make an ICF reactor unworkable in space travel.\nMagnetized target.\nMagnetized target fusion (MTF) is a relatively new approach that combines the best features of the more widely studied magnetic confinement fusion (i.e. good energy confinement) and inertial confinement fusion (i.e. efficient compression heating and wall free containment of the fusing plasma) approaches. Like the magnetic approach, the fusion fuel is confined at low density by magnetic fields while it is heated into a plasma, but like the inertial confinement approach, fusion is initiated by rapidly squeezing the target to dramatically increase fuel density, and thus temperature. MTF uses \"plasma guns\" (i.e. electromagnetic acceleration techniques) instead of powerful lasers, leading to low cost and low weight compact reactors. The NASA/MSFC Human Outer Planets Exploration (HOPE) group has investigated a crewed MTF propulsion spacecraft capable of delivering a 164-tonne payload to Jupiter's moon Callisto using 106-165 metric tons of propellant (hydrogen plus either D-T or D-He3 fusion fuel) in 249\u2013330 days. This design would thus be considerably smaller and more fuel efficient due to its higher exhaust velocity (700\u00a0km/s) than the previously mentioned \"Discovery II\", \"VISTA\" concepts.\nInertial electrostatic.\nAnother popular confinement concept for fusion rockets is inertial electrostatic confinement (IEC), such as in the Farnsworth-Hirsch Fusor or the Polywell variation under development by Energy-Matter Conversion Corporation (EMC2). The University of Illinois has defined a 500-tonne \"Fusion Ship II\" concept capable of delivering a 100,000\u00a0kg crewed payload to Jupiter's moon Europa in 210 days. Fusion Ship II utilizes ion rocket thrusters (343\u00a0km/s exhaust velocity) powered by ten D-He3 IEC fusion reactors. The concept would need 300 tonnes of argon propellant for a 1-year round trip to the Jupiter system. Robert Bussard published a series of technical articles discussing its application to spaceflight throughout the 1990s. His work was popularised by an article in the Analog Science Fiction and Fact publication, where Tom Ligon described how the fusor would make for a highly effective fusion rocket.\nAntimatter.\nA still more speculative concept is antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion, which would use antimatter to catalyze a fission and fusion reaction, allowing much smaller fusion explosions to be created. During the 1990s an abortive design effort was conducted at Penn State University under the name AIMStar. The project would require more antimatter than can currently be produced. In addition, some technical hurdles need to be surpassed before it would be feasible.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37853", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37853", "title": "Bussard ramjet", "text": "Proposed spacecraft propulsion method\nThe Bussard ramjet is a theoretical method of spacecraft propulsion for interstellar travel. A fast moving spacecraft scoops up hydrogen from the interstellar medium using an enormous funnel-shaped magnetic field (ranging from kilometers to many thousands of kilometers in diameter); the hydrogen is compressed until thermonuclear fusion occurs, which provides thrust to counter the drag created by the funnel and energy to power the magnetic field. The Bussard ramjet can thus be seen as a ramjet variant of a fusion rocket.\nThe Bussard ramjet was proposed in 1960 by the physicist Robert W. Bussard.\nThe concept was popularized by Poul Anderson in his novel \"Tau Zero\", Larry Niven in his \"Known Space\" series of books, Vernor Vinge in his \"Zones of Thought\" series, and Carl Sagan, as referenced in and book \"Cosmos\".\nFeasibility.\nSince the time of Bussard's original proposal, it has been discovered that the region surrounding the Solar System has a much lower density of hydrogen than was believed at that time (see Local Interstellar Cloud). In 1969, John Ford Fishback made an important contribution, describing the details of the required magnetic field. \nIn 1978, T. A. Heppenheimer analyzed Bussard's original suggestion of fusing protons, but found the Bremsstrahlung losses from compressing protons to fusion densities was greater than the power that could be produced by a factor of about 1 billion, thus indicating that the proposed version of the Bussard ramjet was infeasible. However, Daniel P. Whitmire's 1975 analysis indicates that a ramjet may achieve net power via the CNO cycle, which produces fusion at a much higher rate (~1016 times higher) than the proton\u2013proton chain.\nRobert Zubrin and Dana Andrews analyzed one hypothetical version of the Bussard ramjet design in 1988. They determined that their version of the ramjet would be unable to accelerate into the solar wind.\nA 2021 study found that, while feasible in principle, the practical construction of a useful Bussard ramjet would be beyond even a civilization of Kardashev type II.\nRelated inventions.\nRam Augmented Interstellar Rocket (RAIR).\nThe problem of using the interstellar medium as the sole fuel source led to study of the Ram Augmented Interstellar Rocket (RAIR). The RAIR carries its nuclear fuel supply and exhausts the reaction products to produce some of its thrust. However it greatly enhances its performance by scooping the interstellar medium and using this as extra reaction mass to augment the rocket. The propulsion system of the RAIR consists of three subsystems: a fusion reactor, a scoop field, and a plasma accelerator. Fuel is launched ahead of the ship with the accelerator. The scoop field funnels the fuel into another accelerator (this could for example be a heat exchange system transferring thermal energy from the reactor directly to the interstellar gas) which is supplied power from a reactor. One of the best ways to understand this concept is to consider that the hydrogen nuclear fuel carried on board acts as a fuel (energy source) whereas the interstellar gas collected by the scoop and then exhausted at great speed from the back acts as a propellant (the reaction mass), the vehicle therefore has a limited fuel supply but an unlimited propellant supply. A normal Bussard ramjet would have an infinite supply of both. However, theory suggests that where a Bussard ramjet would suffer drag from having to pre-accelerate interstellar gas to its own speed before intake, a RAIR system would be able to transfer energy via the \"accelerator\" mechanism to the interstellar medium despite velocity differences, and so would suffer far less drag.\nLaser Powered Interstellar Ramjet.\nBeamed energy coupled with a vehicle scooping hydrogen from the interstellar medium is another variant. A laser array in the solar system beams to a collector on a vehicle which uses something like a linear accelerator to produce thrust. This solves the fusion reactor problem for the ramjet. There are limitations because of the attenuation of beamed energy with distance.\nMagnetic sail.\nThe calculations (by Robert Zubrin and Dana Andrews) inspired the idea of a magnetic parachute or sail. This could be important for interstellar travel because it means that deceleration at the destination can be performed with a magnetic parachute rather than a rocket.\nDyson swarm-based stellar engine (Caplan thruster).\nAstrophysicist Matthew E. Caplan of Illinois State University has proposed a type of stellar engine that uses a Dyson swarm of mirrors to concentrate stellar energy onto certain regions of a Sun-like star, producing beams of solar wind to be collected by a multi-ramjet assembly which in turn produces directed jets of plasma to stabilize its orbit and oxygen-14 to push the star. Using rudimentary calculations that assume maximum efficiency, Caplan estimates the Bussard engine would use 1015 grams per second of solar material to produce a maximum acceleration of 10\u22129 m/s2, yielding a velocity of 200\u00a0km/s after 5 million years, and a distance of 10 parsecs over 1 million years. The Bussard engine would theoretically work for 100 million years given the mass loss rate of the Sun, but Caplan deems 10 million years to be sufficient for a stellar collision avoidance.\nPre-seeded trajectory.\nSeveral of the obvious technical difficulties with the Bussard ramjet can be overcome by setting out solid pellets of fuel along the spacecraft's trajectory in advance. This could be done using a different \"tanker\" spacecraft dropping fuel pellets or using laser propulsion. The method has been referred to as the \"fusion runway\", ramjet runway or \"forward resupply runway\".\nWhile most proposals use fusion power, as with conventional Bussard ramjets, fission has also been suggested.\nThe advantages of this system include:\nThe major disadvantages of this system include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37854", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37854", "title": "Antimatter rocket", "text": "Rockets using antimatter as their power source\nAn antimatter rocket is a proposed class of rockets that use antimatter as their power source. There are several designs that attempt to accomplish this goal. The advantage to this class of rocket is that a large fraction of the rest mass of a matter/antimatter mixture may be converted to energy, allowing antimatter rockets to have a far higher energy density and specific impulse than any other proposed class of rocket.\nMethods.\nAntimatter rockets can be divided into three types of application: those that directly use the products of antimatter annihilation for propulsion, those that heat a working fluid or an intermediate material which is then used for propulsion, and those that heat a working fluid or an intermediate material to generate electricity for some form of electric spacecraft propulsion system.\nThe propulsion concepts that employ these mechanisms generally fall into four categories: solid core, gaseous core, plasma core, and beamed core configurations. The alternatives to direct antimatter annihilation propulsion offer the possibility of feasible vehicles with, in some cases, vastly smaller amounts of antimatter but require a lot more matter propellant.\nThen there are hybrid solutions using antimatter to catalyze fission/fusion reactions for propulsion.\nPure antimatter rocket: direct use of reaction products.\nAntiproton annihilation reactions produce charged and uncharged pions, in addition to neutrinos and gamma rays. The charged pions can be channelled by a magnetic nozzle, producing thrust. This type of antimatter rocket is a pion rocket or beamed core configuration. It is not perfectly efficient; energy is lost as the rest mass of the charged (22.3%) and uncharged pions (14.38%), lost as the kinetic energy of the uncharged pions (which can't be deflected for thrust); and lost as neutrinos and gamma rays (see antimatter as fuel).\nPositron annihilation has also been proposed for rocketry. Annihilation of positrons produces only gamma rays. Early proposals for this type of rocket, such as those developed by Eugen S\u00e4nger, assumed the use of some material that could reflect gamma rays, used as a light sail or parabolic shield to derive thrust from the annihilation reaction, but no known form of matter (consisting of atoms or ions) interacts with gamma rays in a manner that would enable specular reflection. The momentum of gamma rays can, however, be partially transferred to matter by Compton scattering.\nOne method to reach relativistic velocities uses a matter-antimatter GeV gamma ray laser photon rocket made possible by a relativistic proton-antiproton pinch discharge, where the recoil from the laser beam is transmitted by the M\u00f6ssbauer effect to the spacecraft.\nA new annihilation process has purportedly been developed by researchers from the University of Gothenburg, Sweden. Several annihilation reactors have been constructed in the past years which attempted to convert hydrogen or deuterium into relativistic particles through laser annihilation. The technology was explored by research groups led by Prof. Leif Holmlid and Sindre Zeiner-Gundersen, and a third relativistic particle reactor is currently being built at the University of Iceland. In theory, emitted particles from hydrogen annihilation processes could reach 0.94c and can be used in space propulsion. However the veracity of Holmlid's research is under dispute and no successful implementations have been peer reviewed or replicated.\nThermal antimatter rocket: heating of a propellant.\nThis type of antimatter rocket is termed a thermal antimatter rocket as the energy or heat from the annihilation is harnessed to create an exhaust from non-exotic material or propellant.\nThe solid core concept uses antiprotons to heat a solid, high-atomic weight (Z), refractory metal core. Propellant is pumped into the hot core and expanded through a nozzle to generate thrust. The performance of this concept is roughly equivalent to that of the nuclear thermal rocket (formula_1 ~ 103 sec) due to temperature limitations of the solid. However, the antimatter energy conversion and heating efficiencies are typically high due to the short mean path between collisions with core atoms (efficiency formula_2 ~ 85%).\nSeveral methods for the liquid-propellant thermal antimatter engine using the gamma rays produced by antiproton or positron annihilation have been proposed. These methods resemble those proposed for nuclear thermal rockets. One proposed method is to use positron annihilation gamma rays to heat a solid engine core. Hydrogen gas is ducted through this core, heated, and expelled from a rocket nozzle. A second proposed engine type uses positron annihilation within a solid lead pellet or within compressed xenon gas to produce a cloud of hot gas, which heats a surrounding layer of gaseous hydrogen. Direct heating of the hydrogen by gamma rays was considered impractical, due to the difficulty of compressing enough of it within an engine of reasonable size to absorb the gamma rays. A third proposed engine type uses annihilation gamma rays to heat an ablative sail, with the ablated material providing thrust. As with nuclear thermal rockets, the specific impulse achievable by these methods is limited by materials considerations, typically being in the range of 1000\u20132000 seconds.\nThe gaseous core system substitutes the low-melting point solid with a high temperature gas (i.e. tungsten gas/plasma), thus permitting higher operational temperatures and performance (formula_1 ~ 2 \u00d7 103 sec). However, the longer mean free path for thermalization and absorption results in much lower energy conversion efficiencies (formula_2 ~ 35%).\nThe plasma core allows the gas to ionize and operate at even higher effective temperatures. Heat loss is suppressed by magnetic confinement in the reaction chamber and nozzle. Although performance is extremely high (formula_1 ~ 104-105 sec), the long mean free path results in very low energy utilization (formula_2 ~ 10%)\nAntimatter power generation.\nThe idea of using antimatter to power an electric space drive has also been proposed. These proposed designs are typically similar to those suggested for nuclear electric rockets. Antimatter annihilations are used to directly or indirectly heat a working fluid, as in a nuclear thermal rocket, but the fluid is used to generate electricity, which is then used to power some form of electric space propulsion system. The resulting system shares many of the characteristics of other charged particle/electric propulsion proposals, that typically being high specific impulse and low thrust (see also http://).\nCatalyzed fission/fusion or spiked fusion.\nThis is a hybrid approach in which antiprotons are used to catalyze a fission/fusion reaction or to \"spike\" the propulsion of a fusion rocket or any similar applications.\nThe antiproton-driven Inertial confinement fusion (ICF) Rocket concept uses pellets for the D-T reaction. The pellet consists of a hemisphere of fissionable material such as U235 with a hole through which a pulse of antiprotons and positrons is injected. It is surrounded by a hemisphere of fusion fuel, for example deuterium-tritium, or lithium deuteride. Antiproton annihilation occurs at the surface of the hemisphere, which ionizes the fuel. These ions heat the core of the pellet to fusion temperatures.\nThe antiproton-driven Magnetically Insulated Inertial Confinement Fusion Propulsion (MICF) concept relies on self-generated magnetic field which insulates the plasma from the metallic shell that contains it during the burn. The lifetime of the plasma was estimated to be two orders of magnitude greater than implosion inertial fusion, which corresponds to a longer burn time, and hence, greater gain.\nThe antimatter-driven P-B11 concept uses antiprotons to ignite the P-B11 reactions in an MICF scheme. Excessive radiation losses are a major obstacle to ignition and require modifying the particle density, and plasma temperature to increase the gain. It was concluded that it is entirely feasible that this system could achieve Isp~105s.\nA different approach was envisioned for AIMStar in which small fusion fuel droplets would be injected into a cloud of antiprotons confined in a very small volume within a reaction Penning trap. Annihilation takes place on the surface of the antiproton cloud, peeling back 0.5% of the cloud. The power density released is roughly comparable to a 1 kJ, 1 ns laser depositing its energy over a 200\u00a0\u03bcm ICF target.\nThe ICAN-II project employs the antiproton catalyzed microfission (ACMF) concept which uses pellets with a molar ratio of 9:1 of D-T:U235 for nuclear pulse propulsion.\nDifficulties with antimatter rockets.\nThe chief practical difficulties with antimatter rockets are the problems of creating antimatter and storing it. Creating antimatter requires input of vast amounts of energy, at least equivalent to the rest energy of the created particle/antiparticle pairs, and typically (for antiproton production) tens of thousands to millions of times more. Most storage schemes proposed for interstellar craft require the production of frozen pellets of antihydrogen. This requires cooling of antiprotons, binding to positrons, and capture of the resulting antihydrogen atoms - tasks which have, as of 2010[ [update]], been performed only for small numbers of individual atoms. Storage of antimatter is typically done by trapping electrically charged frozen antihydrogen pellets in Penning or Paul traps. There is no theoretical barrier to these tasks being performed on the scale required to fuel an antimatter rocket. However, they are expected to be extremely (and perhaps prohibitively) expensive due to current production abilities being only able to produce small numbers of atoms, a scale approximately 1023 times smaller than needed for a 10-gram trip to Mars.\nGenerally, the energy from antiproton annihilation is deposited over such a large region that it cannot efficiently drive nuclear capsules. Antiproton-induced fission and self-generated magnetic fields may greatly enhance energy localization and efficient use of annihilation energy.\nA secondary problem is the extraction of useful energy or momentum from the products of antimatter annihilation, which are primarily in the form of extremely energetic ionizing radiation. The antimatter mechanisms proposed to date have for the most part provided plausible mechanisms for harnessing energy from these annihilation products. The classic rocket equation with its \"wet\" mass (formula_7)(with propellant mass fraction) to \"dry\" mass (formula_8)(with payload) fraction (formula_9), the velocity change (formula_10) and specific impulse (formula_1) no longer holds due to the mass losses occurring in antimatter annihilation.\nAnother general problem with high powered propulsion is excess heat or waste heat, and as with antimatter-matter annihilation also includes extreme radiation. A proton-antiproton annihilation propulsion system transforms 39% of the propellant mass into an intense high-energy flux of gamma radiation. The gamma rays and the high-energy charged pions will cause heating and radiation damage if they are not shielded against. Unlike neutrons, they will not cause the exposed material to become radioactive by transmutation of the nuclei. The components needing shielding are the crew, the electronics, the cryogenic tankage, and the magnetic coils for magnetically assisted rockets. Two types of shielding are needed: radiation protection and thermal protection (different from Heat shield or thermal insulation).\nFinally, relativistic considerations have to be taken into account. As the by products of annihilation move at relativistic velocities the rest mass changes according to relativistic mass\u2013energy. For example, the total mass\u2013energy content of the neutral pion is converted into gammas, not just its rest mass. It is necessary to use a relativistic rocket equation that takes into account the relativistic effects of both the vehicle and propellant exhaust (charged pions) moving near the speed of light. These two modifications to the two rocket equations result in a mass ratio (formula_9) for a given (formula_10) and (formula_1) that is much higher for a relativistic antimatter rocket than for either a classical or relativistic \"conventional\" rocket.\nModified relativistic rocket equation.\nThe loss of mass specific to antimatter annihilation requires a modification of the relativistic rocket equation given as\nwhere formula_15 is the speed of light, and formula_1 is the specific impulse (i.e. formula_1=0.69formula_15).\nThe derivative form of the equation is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;}{M_{\\text{ship}}}=\nwhere formula_19 is the non-relativistic (rest) mass of the rocket ship, and formula_20 is the fraction of the original (on board) propellant mass (non-relativistic) remaining after annihilation (i.e., formula_20=0.22 for the charged pions).\nEq.II is difficult to integrate analytically. If it is assumed that formula_22, such that formula_23 then the resulting equation is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;}{M_{\\text{ship}}}=\nEq.III can be integrated and the integral evaluated for formula_7 and formula_8, and initial and final velocities (formula_26 and formula_27).\nThe resulting relativistic rocket equation with loss of propellant is\nOther general issues.\nThe cosmic background hard radiation will ionize the rocket's hull over time and poses a health threat. Also, gas plasma interactions may cause space charge. The major interaction of concern is differential charging of various parts of a spacecraft, leading to high electric fields and arcing between spacecraft components. This can be resolved with well placed plasma contactor. However, there is no solution yet for when plasma contactors are turned off to allow maintenance work on the hull. Long term space flight at interstellar velocities causes erosion of the rocket's hull due to collision with particles, gas, dust and micrometeorites. At 0.2formula_15 for a 6 light year distance, erosion is estimated to be in the order of about 30\u00a0kg/m2 or about 1\u00a0cm of aluminum shielding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37856", "revid": "42959298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37856", "title": "Alcubierre drive", "text": "Hypothetical FTL transportation by warping space\nThe Alcubierre drive () is a speculative warp drive idea according to which a spacecraft could achieve apparent faster-than-light travel by contracting space in front of it and expanding space behind it, under the assumption that a configurable energy-density field lower than that of a vacuum (that is, negative mass) could be created. Proposed by theoretical physicist Miguel Alcubierre in 1994, the Alcubierre drive is based on a solution of Einstein's field equations. Since those solutions are metric tensors, the Alcubierre drive is also referred to as Alcubierre metric.\nObjects cannot accelerate to the speed of light within normal spacetime; instead, the Alcubierre drive shifts space around an object so that the object would arrive at its destination more quickly than light would in normal space without breaking any physical laws.\nAlthough the metric proposed by Alcubierre is consistent with the Einstein field equations, construction of such a drive is not necessarily possible. The proposed mechanism of the Alcubierre drive implies a negative energy density and therefore requires exotic matter or manipulation of dark energy. If exotic matter with the correct properties does not exist, then the drive cannot be constructed. At the close of his original article, however, Alcubierre argued (following an argument developed by physicists analyzing traversable wormholes) that the Casimir vacuum between parallel plates could fulfill the negative-energy requirement for the Alcubierre drive.\nAnother possible issue is that, although the Alcubierre metric is consistent with Einstein's equations, general relativity does not incorporate quantum mechanics. Some physicists have presented arguments to suggest that a theory of quantum gravity (which would incorporate both theories) would eliminate those solutions in general relativity that allow for backward time travel (see the chronology protection conjecture) and thus make the Alcubierre drive invalid.\nHistory.\nIn 1994, Miguel Alcubierre proposed a method for changing the geometry of space by creating a wave that would cause the fabric of space ahead of a spacecraft to contract and the space behind it to expand. The ship would then ride this wave inside a region of flat space, known as a \"warp bubble\", and would not move within this bubble but instead be carried along as the region itself moves due to the actions of the drive. The local velocity relative to the deformed spacetime would be subluminal, but the speed at which a spacecraft could move would be superluminal, thereby rendering possible interstellar flight, such as a visit to \"Proxima Centauri\" within a few days.\nAlcubierre metric.\nThe Alcubierre metric defines the warp-drive spacetime. It is a Lorentzian manifold that, if interpreted in the context of general relativity, allows a warp bubble to appear in previously flat spacetime and move away at effectively faster-than-light speed. The interior of the bubble is an inertial reference frame and inhabitants experience no proper acceleration. This method of transport does not involve objects in motion at faster-than-light speeds with respect to the contents of the warp bubble; that is, a light beam within the warp bubble would still always move more quickly than the ship. Because objects within the bubble are not moving (locally) more quickly than light, the mathematical formulation of the Alcubierre metric is consistent with the conventional claims of the laws of relativity (namely, that an object with mass cannot attain or exceed the speed of light) and conventional relativistic effects such as time dilation would not apply as they would with conventional motion at near-light speeds.\nAn extension of the Alcubierre metric that eliminates the expansion of the volume elements and instead relies on the change in distances along the direction of travel is that of mathematician Jos\u00e9 Nat\u00e1rio. In his metric, spacetime contracts towards the prow of the ship and expands in the direction perpendicular to the motion, meaning that the bubble actually \"slides\" through space, roughly speaking by \"pushing space aside\".\nThe Alcubierre drive remains a hypothetical concept with seemingly difficult problems, although the amount of energy required is no longer thought to be unobtainably large. However, Alexey Bobrick and Gianni Martire claim that, in principle, a class of subluminal, spherically symmetric warp drive spacetimes can be constructed based on physical principles presently known to humanity, such as positive energy. Furthermore, a study by Remo Garattini and Kirill Zatrimaylov shows that the amount of negative energy density required to sustain a warp bubble can in principle be reduced if the bubble is moving in an external gravitational field, such as that of a black hole.\nMathematics.\nUsing the ADM formalism of general relativity, the spacetime is described by a foliation of space-like hypersurfaces of constant coordinate time t, with the metric taking the following general form:\nformula_1\nwhere\nThe particular form that Alcubierre studied is defined by:\nformula_2\nwhere\nformula_3\nwith arbitrary parameters \"R\" &gt; 0 and \"\u03c3\" &gt; 0. Alcubierre's specific form of the metric can thus be written:\nformula_4\nWith this particular form of the metric, it can be shown that the energy density measured by observers whose 4-velocity is normal to the hypersurfaces is given by:\nformula_5\nwhere g is the determinant of the metric tensor.\nThus, because the energy density is negative, one needs exotic matter to travel more quickly than the speed of light. The existence of exotic matter is not theoretically ruled out; however, generating and sustaining enough exotic matter to perform feats such as faster-than-light travel (and to keep open the \"throat\" of a wormhole) is thought to be impractical. According to writer Robert Low, within the context of general relativity it is impossible to construct a warp drive in the absence of exotic matter.\nConnection to dark energy and dark matter.\nAstrophysicist Jamie Farnes from the University of Oxford has proposed a theory, published in the peer-reviewed scientific journal \"Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics\", that unifies dark energy and dark matter into a single dark fluid, and which is expected to be testable by the Square Kilometre Array around 2030. Farnes found that Albert Einstein had explored the idea of gravitationally repulsive negative masses while developing the equations of general relativity, an idea which leads to a \"beautiful\" hypothesis where the cosmos has equal amounts of positive and negative qualities. Farnes' theory relies on negative masses that behave identically to the physics of the Alcubierre drive, providing a natural solution for the current \"crisis in cosmology\" due to a time-variable Hubble parameter.\nAs Farnes' theory allows a positive mass (i.e. a ship) to reach a speed equal to the speed of light, it has been dubbed \"controversial\". If the theory is correct, which has been highly debated in the scientific literature, it would explain dark energy, dark matter, allow closed timelike curves (see time travel), and suggest that an Alcubierre drive is physically possible with exotic matter.\nPhysics.\nWith regard to certain specific effects of special relativity, such as Lorentz contraction and time dilation, the Alcubierre metric has some apparently peculiar aspects. In particular, Alcubierre has shown that a ship using an Alcubierre drive travels on a free-fall geodesic even while the warp bubble is accelerating: its crew would be in free fall while accelerating without experiencing accelerational g-forces. Enormous tidal forces, however, would be present near the edges of the flat-space volume because of the large space curvature there, but a suitable specification of the metric would keep the tidal forces very small within the volume occupied by the ship.\nThe original warp-drive metric and simple variants of it happen to have the ADM form, which is often used in discussing the initial-value formulation of general relativity. This might explain the widespread misconception that this spacetime is a \"solution\" of the field equation of general relativity. Metrics in ADM form are \"adapted\" to a certain family of inertial observers, but these observers are not really physically distinguished from other such families. Alcubierre interpreted his \"warp bubble\" in terms of a contraction of space ahead of the bubble and an expansion behind, but this interpretation could be misleading, since the contraction and expansion actually refer to the relative motion of nearby members of the family of ADM observers.\nIn general relativity, one often first specifies a plausible distribution of matter and energy, and then finds the geometry of the spacetime associated with it; but it is also possible to run the Einstein field equations in the other direction, first specifying a metric and then finding the energy\u2013momentum tensor associated with it, and this is what Alcubierre did in building his metric. This practice means that the solution can violate various energy conditions and require exotic matter. The need for exotic matter raises questions about whether one can distribute the matter in an initial spacetime that lacks a warp bubble in such a way that the bubble is created at a later time, although some physicists have proposed models of dynamical warp-drive spacetimes in which a warp bubble is formed in a previously flat space. Moreover, according to Serguei Krasnikov, generating a bubble in a previously flat space for a \"one-way\" faster-than-light trip requires forcing the exotic matter to move at local faster-than-light speeds, something that would require the existence of tachyons, although Krasnikov also notes that when the spacetime is not flat from the outset, a similar result could be achieved without tachyons by placing in advance some devices along the travel path and programming them to come into operation at preassigned moments and to operate in a preassigned manner. Some suggested methods avoid the problem of tachyonic motion, but would probably generate a naked singularity at the front of the bubble. Allen Everett and Thomas Roman comment on Krasnikov's finding (Krasnikov tube):\n[The finding] does not mean that Alcubierre bubbles, if it were possible to create them, could not be used as a means of superluminal travel. It only means that the actions required to change the metric and create the bubble must be taken beforehand by some observer whose forward light cone contains the entire trajectory of the bubble.\nFor example, if one wanted to travel to Deneb (2,600 light-years away) and arrive less than 2,600 years in the future according to external clocks, it would be required that someone had already begun work on warping the space from Earth to Deneb at least 2,600 years ago:\nA spaceship appropriately located with respect to the bubble trajectory could then choose to enter the bubble, rather like a passenger catching a passing trolley car, and thus make the superluminal journey\u00a0... as Krasnikov points out, causality considerations do not prevent the crew of a spaceship from arranging, by their own actions, to complete a \"round trip\" from Earth to a distant star and back in an arbitrarily short time, as measured by clocks on Earth, by altering the metric along the path of their outbound trip.\nDifficulties.\nMass\u2013energy requirement.\nThe metric of this form has significant difficulties because all known warp-drive spacetime theories violate various energy conditions. Nevertheless, an Alcubierre-type warp drive might be realized by exploiting certain experimentally verified quantum phenomena, such as the Casimir effect, that lead to stress\u2013energy tensors that also violate the energy conditions, such as negative mass\u2013energy, when described in the context of the quantum field theories.\nIf certain quantum inequalities conjectured by Ford and Roman hold, the energy requirements for some warp drives may be unfeasibly large as well as negative. For example, the energy equivalent of \u22121064 kg might be required to transport a small spaceship across the Milky Way\u2014an amount orders of magnitude greater than the estimated mass of the observable universe. Counterarguments to these apparent problems have also been offered, although the energy requirements still generally require a Type III civilization on the Kardashev scale.\nChris Van Den Broeck of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in Belgium, in 1999, tried to address the potential issues. By contracting the 3+1-dimensional surface area of the bubble being transported by the drive, while at the same time expanding the three-dimensional volume contained inside, Van Den Broeck was able to reduce the total energy needed to transport small atoms to less than three solar masses. Later in 2003, by slightly modifying the Van den Broeck metric, Serguei Krasnikov reduced the necessary total amount of negative mass to a few milligrams. Van Den Broeck detailed this by saying that the total energy can be reduced dramatically by keeping the surface area of the warp bubble itself microscopically small, while at the same time expanding the spatial volume inside the bubble. However, Van Den Broeck concludes that the energy densities required are still unachievable, as are the small size (a few orders of magnitude above the Planck scale) of the spacetime structures needed.\nIn 2012, physicist Harold White and collaborators announced that modifying the geometry of exotic matter could reduce the mass\u2013energy requirements for a macroscopic space ship from the equivalent of the planet Jupiter to that of the Voyager 1 spacecraft (c. 700\u00a0kg) or less, and stated their intent to perform small-scale experiments in constructing warp fields. White proposed to thicken the extremely thin wall of the warp bubble, so the energy is focused in a larger volume, but the overall peak energy density is actually smaller. In a flat 2D representation, the ring of positive and negative energy, initially very thin, becomes a larger, fuzzy torus (donut shape). However, as this less energetic warp bubble also thickens toward the interior region, it leaves less flat space to house the spacecraft, which has to be smaller. Furthermore, if the intensity of the space warp can be oscillated over time, the energy required is reduced even more. According to White, a modified Michelson\u2013Morley interferometer could test the idea: one of the legs of the interferometer would appear to have a slightly different length when the test devices were energised. Alcubierre has expressed skepticism about the experiment, saying: \"from my understanding there is no way it can be done, probably not for centuries if at all\".\nIn 2021, physicist Erik Lentz described a way warp drives sourced from known and familiar purely positive energy could exist\u2014warp bubbles based on superluminal self-reinforcing \"soliton\" waves. The claim is controversial, with other physicists arguing that all physically reasonable warp drives violate the weak energy condition, as well as both the strong and dominant energy conditions.\nPlacement of matter.\nKrasnikov proposed that if tachyonic matter cannot be found or used, then a solution might be to arrange for masses along the path of the vessel to be set in motion in such a way that the required field was produced. But in this case, the Alcubierre drive vessel can only travel routes that, like a railroad, have first been equipped with the necessary infrastructure. The pilot inside the bubble is causally disconnected from its walls and cannot carry out any action outside the bubble: the bubble cannot be used for the first trip to a distant star because the pilot cannot place infrastructure ahead of the bubble while \"in transit\". For example, traveling to Vega (which is 25 light-years from Earth) requires arranging everything so that the bubble moving toward Vega with a superluminal velocity would appear; such arrangements will always take more than 25 years.\nCoule has argued that schemes, such as the one proposed by Alcubierre, are infeasible because matter placed \"en route\" of the intended path of a craft must be placed at superluminal speed\u2014that constructing an Alcubierre drive requires an Alcubierre drive even if the metric that allows it is physically meaningful. Coule further argues that an analogous objection will apply to \"any\" proposed method of constructing an Alcubierre drive.\nSurvivability inside the bubble.\nAn article by Jos\u00e9 Nat\u00e1rio (2002) argues that crew members could not control, steer or stop the ship in its warp bubble because the ship could not send signals to the front of the bubble.\nA 2009 article by Carlos Barcel\u00f3, Stefano Finazzi, and Stefano Liberati uses quantum theory to argue that the Alcubierre drive at faster-than-light velocities is impossible mostly because extremely high temperatures caused by Hawking radiation would destroy anything inside the bubble at superluminal velocities and destabilize the bubble itself; the article also argues that these problems are absent if the bubble velocity is subluminal, although the drive still requires exotic matter.\nDamaging effect on destination.\nBrendan McMonigal, Geraint F. Lewis, and Philip O'Byrne have argued that were an Alcubierre-driven ship to decelerate from superluminal speed, the particles that its bubble had gathered in transit would be released in energetic outbursts akin to the infinitely-blueshifted radiation hypothesized to occur at the inner event horizon of a Kerr black hole; forward-facing particles would thereby be energetic enough to destroy anything at the destination directly in front of the ship.\nWall thickness.\nThe amount of negative energy required for such a propulsion is not yet known. Pfenning and Allen Everett of Tufts hold that a warp bubble traveling at 10-times the speed of light must have a wall thickness of no more than 10\u221232 meters\u2014close to the limiting Planck length, 1.6 \u00d7 10\u221235 meters. In Alcubierre's original calculations, a bubble macroscopically large enough to enclose a ship of 200 meters would require a total amount of exotic matter greater than the mass of the observable universe, and straining the exotic matter to an extremely thin band of 10\u221232 meters is considered impractical. Similar constraints apply to Krasnikov's superluminal subway. Chris Van den Broeck constructed a modification of Alcubierre's model that requires much less exotic matter but places the ship in a curved spacetime \"bottle\" whose neck is about 10\u221232 meters.\nCausality violation and semiclassical instability.\nCalculations by physicist Allen Everett show that warp bubbles could be used to create closed timelike curves in general relativity, meaning that the theory predicts that they could be used for backwards time travel. While it is possible that the fundamental laws of physics might allow closed timelike curves, the chronology protection conjecture hypothesizes that in all cases where the classical theory of general relativity allows them, quantum effects would intervene to eliminate the possibility, making these spacetimes impossible to realize. A possible type of effect that would accomplish this is a buildup of vacuum fluctuations on the border of the region of spacetime where time travel would first become possible, causing the energy density to become high enough to destroy the system that would otherwise become a time machine. Some results in semiclassical gravity appear to support the conjecture, including a calculation dealing specifically with quantum effects in warp-drive spacetimes that suggested that warp bubbles would be semiclassically unstable, but ultimately the conjecture can only be decided by a full theory of quantum gravity.\nAlcubierre briefly discusses some of these issues in a series of lecture slides posted online, where he writes: \"beware: in relativity, any method to travel faster than light can in principle be used to travel back in time (a time machine)\". In the next slide, he brings up the chronology protection conjecture and writes: \"The conjecture has not been proven (it wouldn't be a conjecture if it had), but there are good arguments in its favor based on quantum field theory. The conjecture does not prohibit faster-than-light travel. It just states that if a method to travel faster than light exists, and one tries to use it to build a time machine, something will go wrong: the energy accumulated will explode, or it will create a black hole.\"\nRelation to \"Star Trek\" warp drive.\nThe \"Star Trek\" television series and films use the term \"warp drive\" to describe their method of faster-than-light travel. Neither the Alcubierre theory, nor anything similar, existed when the series was conceived\u2014the term \"warp drive\" and general concept originated with John W. Campbell's 1931 science fiction novel \"Islands of Space\". Alcubierre stated in an email to William Shatner that his theory was directly inspired by the term used in the show and cites the \"'warp drive' of science fiction\" in his 1994 article. A USS \"Alcubierre\" appears in the \"Star Trek\" tabletop RPG \"Star Trek Adventures\". Since the release of \"\", more recent \"Star Trek\" spin-off series have made closer use of the theory behind the Alcubierre Drive incorporating warp bubbles/fields into the in-universe science.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37857", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37857", "title": "Reformation", "text": "16th-century movement in Western Christianity\nThe Reformation, also known as the Protestant Reformation or the European Reformation, was a time of major theological movement in Western Christianity in 16th-century Europe that posed a religious and political challenge to the papacy and the authority of the Catholic Church hierarchy. Towards the end of the Renaissance, the Reformation marked the beginning of Protestantism. It is considered one of the events that signified the end of the Middle Ages and the beginning of the early modern period in Europe. \nThe Reformation is usually dated from Martin Luther's publication of the \"Ninety-five Theses\" in 1517, which gave birth to Lutheranism. Prior to Martin Luther and other Protestant Reformers, there were earlier reform movements within Western Christianity. The end of the Reformation era is disputed among modern scholars. \nIn general, the Reformers argued that justification was based on faith in Jesus alone and not both faith and arising charitable acts, as in the Catholic view. In the Lutheran, Anglican and Reformed view, good works were seen as fruits of living faith and part of the process of sanctification which was distinct from justification. Protestantism also introduced new ecclesiology. The general points of theological agreement by the different Protestant groups have been more recently summarized as the three \"solae\", though various Protestant denominations disagree on doctrines such as the nature of the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, with Lutherans accepting a corporeal presence and the Reformed accepting a spiritual presence.\nThe spread of Gutenberg's printing press provided the means for the rapid dissemination of religious materials in the vernacular. The initial movement in Saxony, Germany, diversified, and nearby other reformers such as the Swiss Huldrych Zwingli and the French John Calvin developed the Continental Reformed tradition. Within a Reformed framework, Thomas Cranmer and John Knox led the Reformation in England and the Reformation in Scotland, respectively, giving rise to Anglicanism and Presbyterianism. The period also saw the rise of non-Catholic denominations with quite different theologies and politics to the Magisterial Reformers (Lutherans, Reformed, and Anglicans): so-called Radical Reformers such as the various Anabaptists, who sought to return to the practices of early Christianity. The Counter-Reformation comprised the Catholic response to the Reformation, with the Council of Trent clarifying ambiguous or disputed Catholic positions and abuses that had been subject to critique by reformers. The consequent European wars of religion saw the deaths of between seven and seventeen million people.\nTerminology.\nIn the 16th-century context, the term mainly covers four major movements: Lutheranism, Calvinism, the Radical Reformation, and the Catholic Reformation or Counter-Reformation. Since the late 20th century, historians often use the plural of the term to emphasize that the Reformation was not a uniform and coherent historical phenomenon but the result of parallel movements. \nAnglican theologian Alister McGrath explains the term \"Reformation\" as \"an interpretative category\u2014a way of mapping out a slice of history in which certain ideas, attitudes, and values were developed, explored, and applied\". Historian John Bossy criticized the term Reformation for \"wrongly implying that bad religion was giving way to good,\" but also because it has \"little application to actual social behaviour and little or no sensitivity to thought, feeling or culture.\" A French scholar has noted \"no Reformation term is indisputable\" and that \"Reformation studies has revealed that 'Protestants' and 'Catholics' were not as homogenous as once thought.\" \nSpecific terminology includes:\nSeveral aspects of the Reformation, such as changes in the arts, music, rituals, and communities are frequently presented in specialised studies.\nThe historian Peter Marshall emphasizes that the \"call for 'reform' within Christianity is about as old as the religion itself, and in every age there have been urgent attempts to bring it about\". Charlemagne employed a \"rhetoric of reform\". Medieval examples include the Cluniac Reform in the 10th\u201311th centuries, and the 11th-century Gregorian Reform, both striving against lay influence over church affairs. When demanding a church reform, medieval authors mainly adopted a conservative and utopian approach, expressing their admiration for a previous \"golden age\" or \"apostolic age\" when the Church had allegedly been perfect and free of abuses.\nWhen considered as a historical time period, both the starting and ending date of the Reformation have always been debated. The most commonly used starting date is 31 October 1517\u2014the day when the German theologian Martin Luther (d. 1546) allegedly nailed up a copy of his disputation paper on indulgences and papal power known as the \"Ninety-five Theses\" to the door of the castle church in Wittenberg in Electoral Saxony. Calvinist historians often propose that the Reformation started when the Swiss priest Huldrych Zwingli (d. 1531) first preached against abuses in the Church in 1516. The end date of the Reformation is even more disputed: considered as political/martial strife, 25 September 1555 (when the Peace of Augsburg was accepted), 23 May 1618 and 24 October 1648 (when the Thirty Years' War began and ended, respectively) are the most commonly mentioned terminuses. The Reformation has always been presented as one of the most crucial episodes of the early modern period, or even regarded as the event separating the modern era from the Middle Ages.\nThe term Protestant, though initially purely political in nature, later acquired a broader sense, referring to a member of any Western church that subscribed to the main Reformation (or anti-Catholic) principles. Six princes of the Holy Roman Empire and rulers of fourteen Imperial Free Cities, who issued a protest (or dissent) against the edict of the Diet of Speyer (1529), were the first individuals to be called Protestants. The edict reversed concessions made to the Lutherans with the approval of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V three years earlier.\nBackground.\nCalamities.\nEurope experienced a period of dreadful calamities from the early 14th century. These culminated in a devastating pandemic known as the Black Death, which killed about one-third of Europe's population. Around 1500, the population of Europe was about 60\u201385 million people\u2014no more than 75 percent of the mid-14th-century demographic maximum. Due to a shortage of workforce, the landlords began to restrict the rights of their tenants which led to rural revolts that often ended with a compromise.\nThe constant fear of unexpected death was mirrored by popular artistic motifs, such as the allegory of ('dance of death'). The fear also contributed to the growing popularity of Masses for the dead. Already detectable among early Christians, these ceremonies indicated a widespread belief in purgatory\u2014a transitory state for souls that needed purification before entering heaven. Fear of malevolent magical practice was also growing, and witch hunts intensified.\nAt the end of the 15th century, the sexually transmitted infection known as syphilis spread throughout Europe for the first time. Syphilis destroyed its victims' looks with ulcers and scabs before killing them. Along with the French invasion of Italy, syphilis contributed to the success of the charismatic preacher Girolamo Savonarola (d. 1498) who called for a moral renewal in Florence. He was arrested and executed for heresy, but his meditations remained a popular reading.\nLate Medieval Christianity.\nLay community.\nHistorian John Bossy (as summarized by Eamon Duffy) emphasized that \"medieval Christianity had been fundamentally concerned with the creation and maintenance of peace in a violent world. 'Christianity' in medieval Europe denoted neither an ideology nor an institution, but a community of believers whose religious ideal\u2014constantly aspired to if seldom attained\u2014was peace and mutual love.\"\nThe Catholic Church taught that entry into heaven required dying in a state of grace. Based on Christ's parable on the Last Judgement, the Church emphasized the performance of charitable acts by the baptized faithful, such as feeding the hungry and visiting the sick, as an important co-condition of salvation. \nVillagers and urban laypeople were frequently members of confraternities (such as the Archconfraternity of the Gonfalone), mutual-support guilds associated with a saint, or religious fraternities (such as the Third Order of Saint Francis). The faithful made pilgrimages to saints' shrines, but the proliferation in the saints' number undermined their reputation. There was a strong non-theological Biblical awareness, especially of the Gospels and Psalms.\nNew religious movements promoted the deeper involvement of laity in religious practices. The communal fraternities of the Brethren of the Common Life did not encourage lay brothers to become priests and often placed their houses under the protection of urban authorities. They were closely associated with the , a new method of Catholic spirituality with a special emphasis on the education of laypeople. A leader of the movement the Dutch Wessel Gansfort (d. 1489) attacked abuses of indulgences.\nChurch buildings were richly decorated with paintings, sculptures, and stained glass windows. While Romanesque and Gothic art made a clear distinction between the supernatural and the human, Renaissance artists depicted God and the saints in a more human way. Historian Caroline Walker Bynum has written of 'a sort of religious materialism' in the period: 'a frenzied conviction that the divine tended to erupt into matter'.\nSources of authority.\nThe sources of religious authority included the Bible and its authoritative commentaries, apostolic tradition, decisions by ecumenical councils, scholastic theology, and papal authority. Catholics regarded the Vulgate as the Bible's authentic Latin translation. Commentators applied several methods of interpretations to resolve contradictions within the Bible. Apostolic tradition verified religious practices with unclear Biblical foundations or which required deduction, such as infant baptism. The ecumenical councils' decisions were binding to all Catholics. The crucial elements of mainstream Christianity had been first summarised in the Nicene Creed in 325. Its western text contained a unilateral addition which contributed to the schism between Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy. The Creed contained the dogma of Trinity about one God uniting three equal persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Church authorities acknowledged that an individual might exceptionally receive direct revelations from God but maintained that a genuine revelation could not challenge traditional religious principles. Preaching was an important part of bishops' and priests' responsibilities.\nClergy.\nWestern Christianity displayed a remarkable unity. This was the outcome of the Gregorian Reform that established papal supremacy over the Catholic Church, and achieved the legal separation of the Catholic clergy from laity. Clerical celibacy was reinforced through the prohibition of clerical marriage; ecclesiastical courts were granted exclusive jurisdiction over clerics, and also over matrimonial causes. Priests were ordained by bishops in accordance with the principle of apostolic succession\u2014a claim to the uninterrupted transmission of their consecrating power from Christ's Apostles through generations of bishops. Bishops, abbots, abbesses, and other prelates might possess remarkable wealth. Some of the ecclesiastic leaders also functioned as local secular princes, such as the prince-bishops in Kingdom of Germany and the English County Palatine of Durham, and the Grand Masters of the Teutonic Knights in their Baltic . Other prelates might be regents or the power behind the throne. Believers were expected to pay the tithe (one tenth of their income) to the Church. Pluralism\u2014the practice of holding multiple Church offices (or benefices)\u2014was not unusual. This led to non-residence, and the absent priests' deputies were often poorly educated and underpaid.\nThe clergy consisted of two major groups, the regular clergy and the secular clergy. Regular clerics lived under a monastic rule within the framework of a religious order; secular clerics were responsible for pastoral care. The Church was a hierarchical organisation. The pope was elected by high-ranking clergymen, the cardinals, and assisted by the professional staff of the Roman Curia. Secular clerics were organised into territorial units known as dioceses, each ruled by a bishop or archbishop. Each diocese was divided into parishes headed by parish priests who administered most sacraments to the faithful. These were sacred rites thought to transfer divine grace to humankind. The Council of Florence declared baptism, confirmation, marriage, extreme unction, penance, the Eucharist, and priestly ordination as the seven sacraments of the Catholic Church. Women were not ordained priests but could live as nuns in convents after taking the three monastic vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience.\nPapacy.\nThe authority of the papacy was based on a well-organised system of communication and bureaucracy. The popes claimed the power of binding and loosing that Christ granted to Peter the Apostle (d. c. 66), and offered indulgence\u2014the reduction of the penalty in both this world (penance) and in Purgatory to contrite and pardoned sinners who e.g. gave alms or went on pilgrimages. The popes also granted dispensations to institutions or individuals, exempting them from certain provisions of canon law (or ecclesiastic law). \nFrom 1309 to 1417, the papacy was in turmoil: various election controversies resulted in the Western Schism (1378\u20131417) leading to, at the end, three rival claimant Popes. At the Council of Constance, one of the three popes resigned, his two rivals were deposed, and the newly elected Martin V (r.\u20091417\u00a0\u2013\u00a01431) was acknowledged as the legitimate pope throughout Catholic Europe. The relative authority of popes and ecumenical councils was in contest.\nThe Renaissance popes were also secular rulers: as princes of the Papal States in Italy, the popes were deeply involved in the power struggles of the peninsula, and the Italian noble houses vied for election. These popes frequently caused scandal: Pope Alexander VI (r.\u20091492\u00a0\u2013\u00a01503) appointed his relatives, among them his own illegitimate sons to high offices; Pope Julius II (r.\u20091503\u00a0\u2013\u00a01513) took up arms to recover papal territories lost during his predecessors' reign, prompting the underground satire \"Julius Excluded from Heaven\".\nIn the early Age of Exploration, a succession of popes (Nicholas V, Sixtus IV, Alexander VI) successfully arbitrated territorial disputes between Spain and Portugal outside Europe, notably with the papal bull Inter caetera (1493) drawing a line through South America to separate their trade and colonial regions. The Spanish and Portuguese conquests and developing trade networks contributed to the global expansion of Catholicism. \nThe popes were generous patrons of art and architecture. Julius II ordered the demolition of the ruined 4th-century St. Peter's Basilica in preparation for the building of a new Renaissance basilica, creating a financial problem.\nPartial and failed institutional reforms.\nThe necessity of a church reform ('in head and limbs') was frequently discussed at the ecumenical councils from the late 13th century. However, many high stakeholders\u2014popes, prelates, abbots and kings\u2014preferred the because they did not want to lose privileges or revenues. The system of papal dispensations proved a continual obstacle to the implementation of each revived reform attempt, as the Holy See had regularly granted privileges or immunities.\nWithin regular clergy, the so-called \"congregations of strict observance\" spread. These were monastic communities that returned to the strict interpretation of their order's rule. Reformist bishops tried to discipline their clergy through regular canonical visitations but their attempts mainly failed due to the resistance of autonomous institutions such as cathedral chapters. Neither could they exercise authority over non-resident clerics who had received their benefice from the papacy. On the eve of the Reformation, the Fifth Council of the Lateran was the last occasion when efforts to introduce a far-reaching reform from above could have achieved but it was dissolved in 1517 without making decisions on the issues that would soon come to the fore.\nHumanism.\nA new intellectual movement known as Humanism emerged in the Late Middle Ages. The Humanists' slogan ('back to the sources!') demonstrated their enthusiasm for Classical texts and textual criticism. The rise of the Ottoman Empire led to the mass immigration of Byzantine scholars to Western Europe, and many of them brought manuscripts previously unknown to western scholarship. This led to the rediscovery of the Ancient Greek philosopher Plato (347/348 BC). Plato's ideas about an ultimate reality lying beyond visible reality posed a serious challenge to scholastic theologians' rigorous definitions. Textual criticism called into question the reliability of some of the fundamental texts of papal privilege: humanist scholars, like Nicholas of Cusa (d. 1464) proved that one of the basic documents of papal authority, the allegedly 4th-century \"Donation of Constantine\" was a medieval forgery.\nAs the manufacturing of paper from rags and the printing machine with movable type were spreading in Europe, books could be bought at a reasonable price from the 15th century. Demand for religious literature was especially high. The German inventor Johannes Gutenberg (d. 1468) first published a two-volume printed version of the Vulgata in the early 1450s. High and Low German, Italian, Dutch, Spanish, Czech and Catalan translations of the Bible were published between 1466 and 1492; in France, the Bible's abridged French versions gained popularity. Laypeople who read the Bible could challenge their priests' sermons, as it happened already in 1515.\nCompleted by Jerome (d. 420), the Vulgate contained the Septuagint version of the Old Testament. The systematic study of Biblical manuscripts revealed that Jerome had sometimes misinterpreted his sources of translation. A series of Latin-Greek editions of the New Testament was completed by the Dutch humanist Erasmus (d. 1536). These new Latin translations challenged some scriptural proof texts for some Catholic dogmas.\nDissidents.\nAfter Arianism\u2014a Christological doctrine condemned as heresy at ecumenical councils\u2014disappeared in the late 7th century, no major disputes menaced the theological unity of the Western Church. Religious enthusiasts could organise their followers into nonconformist groups but they disbanded after their founder died. The Waldensians were a notable exception. Due to their efficient organisation, they survived not only the death of their founder Peter Waldo (d. c. 1205), but also a series of anti-heretic crusades. They rejected the clerics' monopoly of public ministry, and allowed all trained members of their community, men and women alike, to preach.\nThe Western Schism reinforced a general desire for church reform. The Oxford theologian John Wycliffe (d. 1384) was one of the most radical critics. He attacked pilgrimages, the veneration of saints, and the doctrine of transubstantiation. He regarded the Church as an exclusive community of those chosen by God to salvation, and argued that the state could seize the corrupt clerics' endowments. Known as Lollards, Wycliffe's followers rejected images, clerical celibacy and the by crusading lords. The Parliament of England passed a law against heretics, but Lollard communities survived the purges.\nWycliffe's theology had a marked impact on the Prague academic Jan Hus (d. 1415). He delivered popular sermons against the clerics' wealth and temporal powers, for which he was summoned to the Council of Constance. Although the German king Sigismund of Luxemburg (r.\u20091410\u00a0\u2013\u00a01437) had granted him safe conduct, Hus was sentenced to death for heresy and burned at the stake on 6 July 1415. His execution led to a nationwide religious movement in Bohemia, and the papacy called for a series of crusades against Hus's followers. The moderate Hussites, mainly Czech aristocrats and academics, were known as Utraquists for they taught that the Eucharist was to be administered ('in both kinds') to the laity. The most radical Hussites, called Taborites after their new town of T\u00e1bor, held their property in common. Their millenarianism shocked the Utraquists who destroyed them in the Battle of Lipany in 1434. By this time, the remaining Catholic communities in Bohemia were almost exclusively German-speaking. The lack of a Hussite church hierarchy enabled the Czech aristocrats and urban magistrates to assume control of the Hussite clergy from the 1470s. The radical Hussites set up their own Church known as the Union of Bohemian Brethren. They rejected the separation of clergy and laity, and condemned all forms of violence and oath taking.\nMarshall writes that the Lollards, Hussites and conciliarist theologians \"collectively give the lie to any suggestion that torpor and complacency were the hallmarks of religious life in the century before Martin Luther.\" Historians customarily refer to Wycliffe and Hus as \"Forerunners of the Reformation\". The two reformers' emphasis on the Bible is often regarded as an early example of one of the basic principles of the Reformation\u2014the idea ('by the Scriptures alone'), although prominent scholastic theologians were also convinced that Scripture, interpreted reasonably and in accord with the Church and the Church Fathers, contained all knowledge necessary for salvation.\nBeginnings.\nThe Reformation in Germanic countries was instigated by Martin Luther, however historians note that many of his ideas were pre-dated by Wycliff, Huss, Erasmus, Zwingli and others, both heretic and orthodox. Historian Peter Marshall has noted \"In recent decades, scholars have become increasingly acclimatized to the idea that the Reformation was in important respects a continuation and intensification of trends within later medieval Catholicism, rather than simply a wholesale rejection of it.\"\nLuther and the \"Ninety-five Theses\".\nPope Leo X (r.\u20091513\u00a0\u2013\u00a01521) decided to complete the construction of the new St. Peter's Basilica in Rome, which had already started in 1506 under Pope Julius II. As the sale of certificates of indulgences had been a well-established method of papal fund raising, he announced a new plenary indulgence in the papal bull in 1515, intending to finance the construction. On the advice of the banker Jakob Fugger (d. 1525), he appointed the pluralist prelate Albert of Brandenburg (d. 1545) to supervise the sale campaign in Germany. The Dominican friar Johann Tetzel (d. 1519), the commissioner of indulgences in the dioceses of Magdeburg and Halberstadt since January 1517, applied unusually aggressive marketing methods. A slogan attributed to him famously claimed that \"As soon as the coin into the box rings, a soul from purgatory to heaven springs\". Frederick the Wise, Prince-elector of Saxony (r.\u20091486\u00a0\u2013\u00a01525) forbade the campaign because the suspended the sale of previous indulgences, depriving him of revenues that he had spent on his collection of relics.\nThe campaign's vulgarity shocked many serious-minded believers, among them Martin Luther, a theology professor at the University of Wittenberg in Saxony. Born into a middle-class family, Luther entered an Augustinian monastery after a heavy thunderstorm dreadfully reminded him the risk of sudden death and eternal damnation, but his anxiety about his sinfulness did not abate. His studies on the works of the Late Roman theologian Augustine of Hippo (d. 430) convinced him that those whom God chose as his elect received a gift of faith independently of their acts. He first denounced the idea of justification through human efforts in his ('Disputation against Scholastic Theology') in September 1517.\nOn 31 October 1517, Luther addressed a letter to Albert of Brandenburg, stating that the clerics preaching the St. Peter's indulgences were deceiving the faithful, and attached his \"Ninety-five Theses\" to it. He questioned the efficacy of indulgences for the dead, although also stated \"If ... indulgences were preached according to the spirit and intention of the pope, all ... doubts would be readily resolved\". Archbishop Albert ordered the theologians at the University of Mainz to examine the document. Tetzel, and the theologians Konrad Wimpina (d. 1531) and Johann Eck (d. 1543) were the first to associate some of Luther's propositions with Hussitism. The case was soon forwarded to the Roman Curia for judgement. Pope Leo remained uninterested, and mentioned the case as \"a quarrel among friars\".\nNew theology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLuther on the Christian struggles toward God\nChristians should be exhorted to seek earnestly to follow Christ, their Head, through penalties, deaths, hells. And let them thus be more confident of entering heaven through many tribulations rather than through a false assurance of peace.\nMartin Luther, \"Ninety-five Theses\"\nAs the historian Lyndal Roper notes, the \"Reformation proceeded by a set of debates and arguments\". Luther presented his views in public at the observant Augustinians' assembly in Heidelberg on 26 April 1518. Here he explained his \"theology of the Cross\" about a loving God who had become frail to save fallen humanity, contrasting it with what he saw as the scholastic \"theology of glory\" that in his view celebrated erudition and human acts. It is uncertain when Luther's concept of justification by faith alone\u2014a central element of his theology\u2014crystallised. He would later attribute it to his \"tower experience\" (1519), when he comprehended that God could freely declare even sinners righteous while he was thinking about the words of Paul the Apostle (d. 64 or 65)\u2014\"\".\nUrged by Luther's opponents, Pope Leo appointed the jurist Girolamo Ghinucci (d. 1541) and the theologian Sylvester Mazzolini (d. 1527) to inspect Luther's teaching. Mazzolini argued that Luther had questioned papal authority by attacking the indulgences, while Luther concluded that only a fundamental reform could put an end to the abuse of indulgences. Pope Leo did not excommunicate Luther because Leo did not want to alienate Luther's patron Frederick the Wise. Instead, he appointed Cardinal Thomas Cajetan (d. 1534) to convince Luther to withdraw some of his theses. Cajetan met with Luther at Augsburg in October 1518. The historian Berndt Hamm says that the meeting was the \"historical point at which the opposition between the Reformation and Catholicism first emerged\", as Cajetan thought that believers accepting Luther's views of justification would no more obey clerical guidance.\nLuther first expressed his sympathy for Jan Hus at a disputation in Leipzig in June 1519. His case was reopened at the Roman Curia. Cajetan, Eck and other papal officials drafted the papal bull ('Arise, O Lord') which was published on 15 June 1520. It condemned Luther's forty-one theses, and offered a sixty-day-long grace period to him to recant. Luther's theology quickly developed. In a Latin treatise \"On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\" (October 1520), he stated that only baptism and the Eucharist could be regarded as sacraments, and priests were not members of a privileged class but servants of the community (hence they became called ministers from the Latin word for servant). His German manifesto \"To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation\" (August 1520) associated the papacy with the Antichrist, and described the Holy See as \"the worst whorehouse of all whorehouses\" in reference to the funds flowing to the Roman Curia. It also challenged the Biblical justification of clerical celibacy. Luther's study \"On the Freedom of a Christian\" (November 1520) consolidated his thoughts about the believers' inner freedom with their obligation to care for their neighbours although he rejected the traditional teaching about good works. The study is a characteristic example of Luther's enthusiasm for paradoxes.\nThe papal nuncio Girolamo Aleandro (d. 1542) ordered the burning of Luther's books. In response, Luther and his followers burned the papal bull along with a copy of the \u2014the fundamental document of medieval ecclesiastic law\u2014at Wittenberg. The papal bull excommunicating Luther was published on 3 January 1521. The newly elected Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (r.\u20091519\u00a0\u2013\u00a01556) wanted to outlaw Luther at the Diet of Worms, but could not make the decision alone. The Holy Roman Empire was a confederation of autonomous states, and authority rested with the Imperial Diets where the Imperial Estates assembled. Frederick the Wise vetoed the imperial ban against Luther, and Luther was summoned to Worms to defend his case at the Diet in April 1521. Here he refused to recant stating that only arguments from the Bible could convince him that his works contained errors.\nAfter Luther and his supporters left the Diet, those who remained sanctioned the imperial ban, threatening Luther's supporters with imprisonment and confiscation of their property. To save Luther's life but also to hide his involvement, Frederick arranged Luther's abduction on 4 May. During his ten-month-long staged captivity at Frederick's castle of Wartburg, Luther translated the New Testament to High German. The historian Diarmaid MacCulloch describes the translation as an \"extraordinary achievement that has shaped the German language ever since\", adding that \"Luther's gift was for seizing the emotion with sudden, urgent phrases\". The translation would be published at the 1522 Leipzig Book Fair along with Luther's treatise \"On Monastic Vows\" that laid the theological foundations of the dissolution of monasteries. Luther also composed religious hymns in Wartburg. They would be first published in collections in 1524. During Luther's absence, his co-workers, primarily Philip Melanchthon (d. 1560) and Andreas Karlstadt (d. 1541) assumed the leadership of Reformation in Wittenberg. Melanchthon consolidated Luther's thoughts into a coherent theological work titled ('Common Places').\nSpread.\nRoper argues that \"the most important reason why Luther did not meet with Hus's fate was technology: the new medium of print\". Luther was publishing his views in short but pungent treatises that gained unexpected popularity: he was responsible for about one-fifth of all works printed in Germany in the first third of the 16th century. German printing presses were scattered in many urban centers which prevented their control by central authorities. Statistical analysis indicates a significant correlation between the presence of a printing press in a German city and the adoption of Reformation.\nReformation spread through the activities of enthusiastic preachers such as Johannes Oecolampadius (d. 1531) and Konrad K\u00fcrsner (d. 1556) in Basel, Sebastian Hofmeister (d. 1533) in Schaffhausen, and Matth\u00e4us Zell (d. 1548) and Martin Bucer (d. 1551) in Strasbourg. They were called \"Evangelicals\" due to their insistence on teaching in accordance with the Gospels (or ). Luther and many of his followers worked with the artist Lucas Cranach the Elder (d. 1553) who had a keen sense of visualising their message. He produced Luther's idealised portrait setting a template for further popular images printed on the covers of books. Cranach's woodcuts together with itinerant preachers' explanations helped the mainly illiterate people to understand Luther's teaching. The illustrated pamphlets were carried from place to place typically by peddlers and merchants. Laypeople started to discuss various aspects of religion in both private and public all over Germany.\nThe self-governing free imperial cities were the first centers of the Reformation. The Evangelical preachers emphasized that many well-established church practices had no precedent in the Bible, which they considered necessary. They offered the Eucharist to the laity in both kinds, and denied the clerics' monopolies, which resonated with popular anti-clericalism. It was not unusual that their supporters attacked clerics and church buildings. Violent iconoclasm was common.In some cities such as Strasbourg and Ulm, the urban magistrates supported the Reformation; in the cities of the Hanseatic League the affluent middle classes enforced changes in church life. Cities located closer to the most important ideological centers of the Reformation\u2014Wittenberg and Basel\u2014adopted its ideas more likely than other towns. This indicates the significance either of student networks, or of neighbours who had rejected Catholicism.\nThe sociologist Steven Pfaff underlines that \"ecclesiastical and liturgical reform was not simply a religious question ... since the sort of reforms demanded by Evangelicals could not be accommodated within existing institutions, prevailing customs, or established law\". After their triumph, the reformers expelled their leading opponents, dissolved the monasteries and convents, secured the urban magistrates' control of the appointment of priests, and established new civic institutions. Evangelical town councils usually prohibited begging but established a common chest for poverty relief by expropriating the property of dissolved ecclesiastic institutions. The funds were used for the daily support of orphans, old people and the sick, but also for low-interest loans to the impoverished to start a business. Luther was convinced that only educated people could effectively serve both God and the community. Under his auspices, public schools and libraries were opened in many towns offering education to more children than the traditional monastic and cathedral schools.\nResistance and oppression.\nResistance to Evangelical preaching was significant in Flanders, the Rhineland, Bavaria and Austria. Here the veneration of local saints was strong, and statistical analysis indicates that cities where indigenous saints' shrines served as centers of vivid communal cults less likely adopted Reformation. Likewise, cities with an episcopal see or monasteries more likely resisted Evangelical proselytism. \nLuther's ideas were rejected by most representatives of the previous generation of Humanists. Erasmus stated that Luther's \"unrestrained enthusiasm carries him beyond what is right\". Jacob van Hoogstraaten (d. 1527) compared Luther's theology of salvation \"as if Christ takes to himself the most foul bride and is unconcerned about her cleanliness\". Luther's works were burned in most European countries. Emperor Charles initiated the execution of the first Evangelical martyrs, the Augustinian monks Jan van Essen and Hendrik Vos. They were burned in Brussels on 1 July 1523. Charles was determined to protect the Catholic Church, but the Ottoman Turks' expansion towards Central Europe often thwarted him. The Spanish Inquisition prevented the spread of Evangelical literature in that country, and suppressed the spiritual movement of the ('Illuminists') who put a special emphasis on personal faith. Some Italian men of letters, such as the Venetian nobleman Gasparo Contarini (d. 1542) and the Augustinian canon Peter Martyr Vermigli (d. 1562) expressed ideas resembling Luther's theology of salvation but did not quickly break with Catholicism. They were part of a group known as . \nThe English king Henry VIII (r.\u20091509\u00a0\u2013\u00a01547) commissioned a team of theologians to defend the Catholic dogmas against Luther's attacks. Their treatise titled \"The Assertion of the Seven Sacraments\" was published under Henry's name, and the grateful Pope awarded him with the title Defender of the Faith. In Scotland, the first Evangelical preacher Patrick Hamilton (d. 1528) was burned for heresy. In France, the theologians of the Sorbonne stated that Luther \"vomited up a doctrine of pestilence\". Guillaume Bri\u00e7onnet (d. 1534), Bishop of Meaux, also condemned Luther but employed reform-minded clerics like Jacques Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples (d. c. 1536) and William Farel (d. 1565) to renew religious life in his diocese. They enjoyed the protection of Marguerite of Angoul\u00eame (d. 1549), the well-educated sister of the French king Francis I (r.\u20091515\u00a0\u2013\u00a01547). The Parlement of Paris only took actions against them after Francis was captured in the Battle of Pavia in 1525, forcing many of them into exile.\nCorrespondence between Luke of Prague (d. 1528), leader of the Bohemian Brethren, and Luther made it clear that their theologies were incompatible even if their views about justification were similar. In Bohemia, Hungary, and Poland, Luther's theology spread in the local German communities. King Louis of Bohemia and Hungary (r.\u20091516\u00a0\u2013\u00a01526) ordered the persecution of Evangelical preachers although his wife Mary of Austria (d. 1558) favoured the reformers. Sigismund I the Old, King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania (r.\u20091506\u00a0\u2013\u00a01548) banned the import of Evangelical literature. Christian II, who ruled the Kalmar Union of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway (r.\u20091513\u00a0\u2013\u00a01523), was sympathetic towards the Reformation but his despotic methods led to revolts. He was replaced by his uncle Frederick I in Denmark and Norway (r.\u20091523\u00a0\u2013\u00a01533), and by a local aristocrat Gustav I Vasa in Sweden (r.\u20091523\u00a0\u2013\u00a01560).\nAlternatives.\nSaxon radicals and rebellious knights.\nAndreas Karlstadt accelerated the implementation of Reformation in Wittenberg. On Christmas Day 1521, he administered the Eucharist in common garment; the next day he announced his engagement to a fifteen-year-old noble girl Anna von Mochau. He proclaimed that images were examples of \"devilish deceit\" which led to the mass destruction of religious art. Enthusiasts began swarming to Wittenberg. The Zwickau prophets, who had been incited by the radical preacher Thomas M\u00fcntzer (d. 1525), claimed that they had received revelations from God. They rejected transubstantiation and attacked infant baptism. Luther defended art as a proof of the beauty of the Creation, maintained that Christ's Body and Blood were physically present in the Eucharist, and regarded infant baptism as a sign of membership in the Christian community. To put an end to the anarchy, Frederick the Wise released Luther in March 1522. Luther achieved the Zwickau prophets' removal from Wittenberg, calling them fanatics. Karlstadt voluntarily left Wittenberg for Orlam\u00fcnde where the local congregation elected him its minister. Luther visited most parishes in the region to prevent radical reforms, but he was often received by verbal or physical abuses. When he wanted to dismiss Karlstadt, the parishioners referred to his own words about the congregations' right to freely elect their ministers, and Karlstadt called him a \"perverter of the Scriptures\". Karlstadt was expelled from Electoral Saxony without a trial on Luther's initiative.\nLuther condemned violence but some of his followers took up arms. Franz von Sickingen (d. 1523), an imperial knight from the Rhineland, formed an alliance with his peers against Richard von Greiffenklau, Archbishop-elector of Trier (r.\u20091511\u00a0\u2013\u00a01531), allegedly to lead the Archbishop's subjects \"to evangelical, light laws and Christian freedom\". Sickingen had demanded the restitution of monastic property to the grantors' descendants, stating that the secularisation of church property would also improve the poor peasants' situation. Sickingen and his associates attacked the archbishopric but failed at the siege of Trier. Sickingen was mortally wounded while defending his Nanstein Castle against the Archbishop's troops. Luther denounced Sickingen's violent acts. According to his \"theory of two kingdoms\", true Christians had to submit themselves to princely authority.\nZwingli.\nThe Swiss Humanist priest Huldrych Zwingli would claim that he \"began to preach the Gospel of Christ in 1516 long before anyone in our region had ever heard of Luther\". He came to prominence when attended a meal of sausages in Z\u00fcrich during Lent 1522, breaching the rules of fasting. He held disputations with the urban magistrates' authorization to discuss changes in church life, and always introduced them with the magistrates' support. In 1524, all images were removed from the churches, and fasting and clerical celibacy were abolished. Two years later, a German communion service replaced the Latin liturgy of the Mass, and the Eucharist (or Lord's Supper) was administered on a plain wooden table instead of an embellished altar. Two new institutions were organised in Z\u00fcrich: the (a public school for Biblical studies), and the Marriage and Morals Court (a legal court and moral police consisting of two laymen and two clerics). Both would be copied in other towns. Zwingli's interpretation of the Eucharist differed from both Catholic theology and Luther's teaching. He denied Christ's presence in the sacramental bread and wine, and regarded the Eucharist as a commemorative ceremony in honor of the crucified Jesus. The disagreement caused a bitter pamphlet war between Luther and Zwingli. They both rejected intermediary Eucharistic formulas coined by Bucer.\nSwiss Brethren.\nZwingli's cautious \"Magisterial Reformation\" outraged the more radical reformers, among them Conrad Grebel (d. 1526), a Z\u00fcrich patrician's son who had fallen out with his family for marrying a low born girl. The radicals summarized their theology in a letter to M\u00fcntzer in 1524. They identified the Church as an exclusive community of the righteous, and demanded its liberation from the state. They deplored all religious practices that had no Biblical foundations, and endorsed believers' (or adult) baptism. \nIn January 1525, a former Catholic priest George Blaurock (d. 1529) asked Grebel to rebaptize him, and after his request was granted they rebaptized fifteen other people. For this practice, they were called Anabaptists ('rebaptizers'). As a featuring element of Donatism and other heretic movements, rebaptism had been a capital offence since the Late Roman period. After the magistrates had some radicals imprisoned, Blaurock called Zwingli the Antichrist. The town council enacted a law that threatened rebaptizers with capital punishment, and the Anabaptist Felix Manz (d. 1527) was condemned to death and drowned in the Limmat River. He was the first victim of religious persecution by reformist authorities. The purge convinced many Anabaptists that they were the true heirs to early Christians who had suffered martyrdom for their faith. The most radicals took inspiration from the Book of Daniel and the Book of Revelation for apocalyptic prophesies. Some of them burnt the Bible reciting St Paul's words, \"the letter kills\". In St. Gallen, Anabaptist women cut their hair short to avoid arousing sexual passion, while a housemaid Frena Bumenin proclaimed herself the New Messiah before announcing that she would give birth to the Antichrist.\nAccording to Dr Kenneth R. Davis, \"the Anabaptists can best be understood as, apart from their own creativity, a radicalization and Protestantization not of the Magisterial Reformation but of the lay-oriented, ascetic reformation of which Erasmus is the principle mediator.\"\nPeasants' War.\nMacCulloch says that the Reformation \"injected an extra element of instability\" into the relationship between the peasants and their lords, as it raised \"new excitement and bitterness against established authority\". Public demonstrations in the Black Forest area indicated a general discontent among the southern German peasantry in May 1524. The Anabaptist preacher Balthasar Hubmaier (d. 1528) was one of the peasant leaders, but most participants never went beyond traditional anti-clericalism. In early 1525, the movement spread towards Upper Swabia. The radical preacher Cristopher Schappler and the pamphleteer Sebastian Lotzer summarized the Swabian peasants' demand in a manifesto known as \"Twelve Articles\". The peasants wanted to control their ministers' election and to supervise the use of church revenues, but also demanded the abolition of the tithe on meat. They reserved the right to present further demands against non-Biblical seigneurial practices but promised to abandon any of their demands that contradicted the Bible, and appointed fourteen \"arbitrators\" to clarify divine law on the relationship between peasants and landlords. The arbitrators approached Luther, Zwingli, Melanchthon and other leaders of the Reformation for advice but none of them answered. Luther wrote a treatise, equally blaming the landlords for the oppression of the peasantry and the rebels for their arbitrary acts.\nGeorg Truchsess von Waldburg (d. 1531), commander of the army of the aristocratic Swabian League, achieved the dissolution of the peasant armies either by force or through negotiations. By this time the peasant movements reached Franconia and Th\u00fcringia. The Franconian peasants formed alliances with artisans and petty nobles such as Florian Geyer (d. 1525) against the patricians and the Prince-Bishopric of W\u00fcrzburg but Truchsess forced them into submission. In Th\u00fcringia, M\u00fcntzer convinced 300 radicals that they were invincible but they were annihilated at Frankenhausen by Philip the Magnanimous, Landgrave of Hesse (r.\u20091509\u00a0\u2013\u00a01567) and George, Duke of Saxony (r.\u20091500\u00a0\u2013\u00a01539). M\u00fcntzer who had hidden in an attic before the battle was discovered and executed. News of atrocities by peasant bands and meetings with disrespectful peasants during a preaching tour outraged Luther while he was writing his treatise \"Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants\". In it, he urged the German princes to \"smite, slay, and slab\" the rebels. Moderate observers felt aggrieved at his cruel words. They regarded as an especially tasteless act that Luther married Katharina von Bora (d. 1552), a former nun while the punitive actions against the peasantry were still in process. Further peasant movements began in other regions in Central Europe but they were pacified through concessions or suppressed by force before the end of 1525.\nConsolidation.\nPrincely Reformation in Germany.\nThe Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach (r.\u20091510\u00a0\u2013\u00a01525) was the first prince to formally abandon Catholicism. The Teutonic Order held Royal Prussia in fief of Poland. After defeats in a war against Poland and Lithuania demoralised the Knights, Albert transformed the region into the hereditary Duchy of Prussia in April 1525. As the secularisation of Prussia represented an open rebellion against Catholicism, it was followed by the establishment of the first Evangelical state church. In August, Albert's brothers, Casimir (r.\u20091515\u00a0\u2013\u00a01527) and George (r.\u20091536\u00a0\u2013\u00a01543) instructed the priests in Brandenburg-Kulmbach and Brandenburg-Ansbach to pray the doctrine of justification by faith alone. The Reformation was officially introduced in Electoral Saxony under John the Constant (r.\u20091525\u00a0\u2013\u00a01532) on Christmas Day 1525. Electoral Saxony's conversion facilitated the adoption of the Reformation in smaller German states, such as Mansfeld and Hessen. Philip of Hessen founded the first Evangelical university at his capital Marburg in 1527.\nAt the Diet of Speyer in 1526, the German princes agreed that they would \"live, govern, and act in such a way as everyone trusted to justify before God and the Imperial Majesty\". In practice, they sanctioned the principle ('whose realm, their religion'), acknowledging the princes' right to determine their subjects' religious affiliation. Fully occupied with the War of the League of Cognac against France and its Italian allies, Emperor Charles had appointed his brother Ferdinand I, Archduke of Austria (r.\u20091521\u00a0\u2013\u00a01564) to represent him in Germany. They both opposed the compromise, but Ferdinand was brought into succession struggles in Bohemia and Hungary after their brother-in-law King Louis died in the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs. In 1527, Charles's mutinous troops sacked Rome and took Pope Clement VII (r.\u20091523\u00a0\u2013\u00a01534) under custody. Luther stated that \"Christ reigns in such a way that the emperor who persecutes Luther for the pope is forced to destroy the pope for Luther\".\nAfter his experiences with radical communities, Luther no more wrote of the congregations' right to elect their ministers (or pastors). Instead, he expected that princes acting as \"emergency bishops\" would prevent the disintegration of the Church. Close cooperation between clerics and princely officials at church visitations paved the way for the establishment of the new church system. In Electoral Saxony, princely decrees enacted the Evangelical ideas. Liturgy was simplified, the church courts' jurisdiction over secular cases was abolished, and state authorities took control of church property. The Evangelical equivalent to bishop was created with the appointment of a former Catholic priest Johannes Bugenhagen (d. 1558) as superintendent in 1533. The church visitations convinced Luther that the villagers' knowledge of the Christian faith was imperfect. To deal with the situation, he completed two cathecisms\u2014the \"Large Catechism\" for the education of priests, and the \"Small Catechism\" for children. Records from Brandenburg-Ansbach indicates that Evangelical pastors often attacked traditional communal activities such as church fairs and spinning bees for debauchery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvangelical Imperial Estates on their protestation at the Diet of Speyer\n\"In matters concerning God's honor and our soul's salvation everyone must stand before God and answer by himself, nobody can excuse himself in that place by the actions of decisions of others whether they be a minority or majority.\"\nFive imperial princes and representatives of fourteen imperial cities, \"Protestation at Speyer\" (1529)\nTaking advantage of Emperor Charles' victories in Italy, Ferdinand I achieved the reinforcement of the imperial ban against Luther at the Diet of Speyer in 1529. In response, five imperial princes and fourteen imperial cities presented a formal . They were mocked as \"Protestants\", and this appellation would be quickly applied to all followers of the new theologies. To promote Protestant unity, Philip the Magnanimous organised a colloquy (or theological debate) between Luther, Melanchton, Zwingli and Oecolampadius at Marburg early in October 1529, but they could not coin a common formula on the Eucharist. During the discussion, Luther remarked that \"Our spirit has nothing in common with your spirit\", expressing the rift between the two mainstream versions of the Reformation. Zwingli's followers started to call themselves the \"Reformed\", as they regarded themselves as the true reformers.\nStalemate in Switzerland.\nIn 1526, the villagers of the autonomous Graub\u00fcnden region in Switzerland agreed that each village could freely choose between Protestantism and Catholicism, setting a precedent for the coexistence of the two denominations in the same jurisdiction. Religious affiliation in the Mandated Territories (lands jointly administered by the Swiss cantons) became the subject of much controversy between Protestant and Catholic cantons. The Protestant cantons concluded a military alliance early in 1529, the Catholic cantons in April. After a bloodless armed conflict, the Mandated communities were granted the right to choose between the two religions by a majority vote of the male citizens. Zwingli began an intensive proselityzing campaign which led to the conversion of most Mandated communities to Protestantism. He set up a council of clergymen and lay delegates for church administration, thus creating the forerunners of presbyteries. Z\u00fcrich imposed an economic blockade on the Catholic cantons but the Catholics routed Z\u00fcrich's army in 1531. The Catholics' victory stopped the Protestant expansion in Switzerland. \nZwingli was killed in the battlefield, and succeeded by a former monk Heinrich Bullinger (d. 1575) in Z\u00fcrich. Bullinger developed Zwingli's Eucharistic formula in an attempt to reach a compromise with Luther, saying that the faithful made spiritual contact with God during the commemorative ceremony.\n\"Schleitheim Articles\".\nThe historian Carter Lindberg states that the \"Peasants' War was a formative experience for many leaders of Anabaptism\". Hans Hut (d. 1527) continued M\u00fcntzer's apocalypticism but others rejected all forms of violence. \nThe pacifist Michael Sattler (d. 1527) took the chair at an Anabaptist assembly at Schleitheim in February 1527. Here the participants adopted an anti-militarist program now known as the \"Schleitheim Articles\". The document ordered the believers' separation from the evil world, and prohibited oath-taking, bearing of arms and holding of civic offices. Facing Ottoman expansionism, the Austrian authorities considered this pacifism as a direct threat to their country's defense. Sattler was quickly captured and executed. During his trial, he stated that \"If the Turks should come, we ought not to resist them. For Thou shalt not kill.\"\nTotal segregation was alien to H\u00fcbmaier who tried to achieve a peaceful coexistence with non-Anabaptists. Expelled from Z\u00fcrich, he settled in the Moravian domains of Count Leonhard von Liechtenstein at Nikolsburg (now Mikulov, Czech Republic). He baptised infants on the parents' request for which hard-line Anabaptists regarded him as an evil compromiser. He was sentenced to death and burned at the stake for heresy on Ferdinand I's orders. His execution inaugurated a period of intensive purge against rebaptisers. His followers relocated to Austerlitz (now Slavkov u Brna, Czech Republic) where refugees from Tyrol joined them. After the Tyrolian Jakob Hutter (d. 1536) assumed the leadership of the community, they began to held their goods in common. The Bohemian Brethren symphatised with the Hutterites which facilitated their survival in Moravia.\nConfessions.\nBack in Germany in January 1530, Charles V asked the Protestants to summarize their theology at the following Diet in Augsburg. As the imperial ban prevented Luther from attending the Diet, Melanchthon completed the task. Melanchthon sharply condemned Anabaptist ideas and adopted a reconciliatory tone towards Catholicism but did not fail to emphasize the most featuring elements of Evangelical theology, such as justification by faith alone. The twenty-eight articles of the \"Augsburg Confession\" were presented at the Diet on 25 June. Four south German Protestant cities\u2014Strasbourg, Constance, Lindau, and Memmingen\u2014adopted a separate confessional document, the \"Tetrapolitan Confession\" because they were influenced by Zwingli's Eucharistic theology. On Charles's request, Eck and other Catholic theologians completed a response to the \"Augsburg Confession\", called ('refutation'). Charles ordered the Evangelical theologians to admit that their argumentation had been completely refuted. Instead, Melanchthon wrote a detailed explanation for the Evangelical articles of faith, known as the \"Apology of the Augsburg Confession\".\nCharles wanted to attack the Protestant princes and cities but the Catholic princes did not support him fearing that his victory would strengthen his power. The Diet passed a law prohibiting further religious innovations and ordering the Protestants to return to Catholicism until 15 April 1531. Luther had previously questioned the princes' right to resist imperial power, but by then he had concluded that a defensive war for religious purposes could be regarded as a just war. The Schmalkaldic League\u2014the Protestant Imperial Estates' defensive alliance\u2014was signed by five princes and fourteen cities on 27 February 1531. As a new Ottoman invasion prevented the Habsburgs from waging war against the Protestants, a peace treaty was signed at Nuremberg in July 1532.\nRoyal Reformation in Scandinavia.\nRelationship between the papacy and the Scandinavian kingdoms was tense, as both Frederick I of Denmark and Norway, and Gustav I of Sweden appointed their own candidates to vacant episcopal sees. In 1526, the Danish Parliament prohibited the bishops to seek confirmation from the Holy See, and declared all fees payable for their confirmation as royal revenue. The former Hospitaller knight Hans Tausen (d. 1561) delivered Evangelical sermons in Viborg under royal protection from 1526. Four years later, the Parliament rejected the Catholic prelates' demand to condemn Evangelical preaching. After Frederick's death the bishops and conservative aristocrats prevented the election of his openly Protestant son Christian as his successor. Christopher, Count of Oldenburg (r.\u20091526\u00a0\u2013\u00a01566) took up arms on the deposed Christian II's behalf, but the war known as Count's Feud ended with the victory of Frederick's son who ordered the arrest of the Catholic bishops. Christian III (r.\u20091534\u00a0\u2013\u00a01559) was crowned king by Bugenhagen. Bugenhagen also ordained seven superintendents to lead the Church of Denmark. Christian declared the \"Augsburg Confession\" as the authoritative articles of faith in 1538, but pilgrimages to the most popular shrines continued, and the Eucharistic liturgy kept Catholic elements, such as kneeling.\nIn the Danish dependencies of Norway and Iceland, the Reformation required vigorous governmental interventions. The last Catholic Archbishop of Nidaros in Norway Olav Engelbrektsson (d. 1538) was a staunch opponent of the changes, but was succeeded by the Evangelical Gjeble Pederss\u00f8n (d. 1557) as superintendent. In Iceland, J\u00f3n Arason, Bishop of H\u00f3lar (d. 1550)\u2014the last Nordic Catholic bishop\u2014took up arms to prevent the Reformation, but he was captured and executed by representatives of royal authority.\nGustav I of Sweden appointed the Evangelical preacher Laurentius Andreae (d. 1552) as his chancellor, and the Evangelical scholar Olaus Petri (d. 1552) as a minister at Stockholm. Petri translated the Gospels to Swedish. On his advice, Gustav dissolved a Catholic printing house that published popular anti-Protestant literature under the auspices of Hans Brask (d. 1538), Bishop of Link\u00f6ping. Gustav also expelled the radical German pastor Melchior Hoffman (d. c. 1543) from Sweden for iconoclastic propaganda. The royal treasury needed extra funds to repay the loans borrowed from the Hanseatic League to finance the war against Christian II. Gustav persuaded the legislative assembly to secularise church property by threatening the delegates with his abdication. The peasantry remained very cautious about changes in church life. This together with heavy taxation led to uprisings. To appease the rebels, Gustav declared that he had not sanctioned the changes, and dismissed Andreae in 1531, Petri in 1533. He continued the transformation of church life in Sweden and Finland after the Reformation was fully introduced in Denmark. He was assisted by two Evangelical theologians Georg Norman (d. 1552/1553) and Mikael Agricola (d. 1557). In 1539, Norman was appointed as supertindent of the Church of Sweden, and Gustav took the title of \"Supreme Defender of the Church\".\nCatholic reform.\nBeginnings.\nThe religious upheaval in Germany and the sack of Rome (1527) further convinced many Catholics that the Church was in need of a profound reform. Pope Paul III (r.\u20091534\u00a0\u2013\u00a01549) appointed prominent representatives of the Catholic reform movement as cardinals, among them Contarini, Reginald Pole (d. 1558), and Giovanni Pietro Caraffa (d. 1559). They completed a report condemning the corruption of church administration and the waste of church revenues. Contarini, Pole and other were ready to make concessions to the Protestants but their liberalism shocked Caraffa and other conservative prelates.\nNegotiations between moderate Catholic and Protestant theologians were not unusual. In 1541, Bucer and the Catholic theologian Johann Gropper (d. 1559) drafted a compromise formula on justification. The draft was discussed along with other issues at a colloquy during the Diet of Regensburg but no compromise was reached, not least due to opposition by both Luther and the Holy See. Contarini, who represented the papacy at the Diet, died in 1541; many such as Vermigli fled from Italy to avoid persecution. Hermann of Wied, Archbishop-elector of Cologne (r.\u20091515\u00a0\u2013\u00a01546) completed a reform program with Bucer's assistance, criticising prayers to the saints and traditional Eucharistic theology, and proposing sermons about justification by faith. The canons of the Cologne Cathedral requested Gropper to write a critical response to it, and achieved Hermann's deposal by the Roman Curia.\nNew Orders.\nThe spread of new monastic orders was an important element of the Catholic reform movement. Most new orders placed great value on pastoral care. Among them, the Society of Jesus (or Jesuits) became the most influential. Its founder Ignatius of Loyola (d. 1556) was born to a Basque noble family. He chose a military career but abandoned it after being wounded during a siege. He started to write a devotional guide, the \"Spiritual Exercises\", during his ascetic retreat at a cave. His mysticism aroused the Spanish Inquisition's suspicion but the supported him. Paul III sanctioned the establishment of the Jesuits on Contarini's influence in 1540. The new order quickly developed: when Loyola died, the Society had about 1,000 members; in less than a decade, it numbered around 3,500. The maintenance of a well organised schooling system was the Jesuits' most prominent feature. Their Roman collegium prepared future priests to discuss and reject Protestant theologies primarily in Germany, Bohemia, Poland, and Hungary.\nCouncil of Trent.\nPaul III decided to convoke the nineteenth ecumenical council to handle the crisis caused by the Reformation. The Council of Trent met in a series of sessions from December 1545 to 1548, 1521 to 1522, and 1562 to 1563. The topics dealt with included the Creed, the Sacraments including transubstantiation and ordination, justification, and improvement in the quality of priests by diocesan seminaries and annual canonical visitations. The council reaffirmed that apostolic tradition was as authentic a source of faith as the Bible, and emphasized the importance of good works in salvation, rejecting two important elements of Luther's theology. Before being closed in December 1563, the Council mandate the papacy to revise liturgical books and complete a new catechism. Carlo Borromeo, Archbishop of Milan (d. 1582) adopted a more practical approach. He completed a handbook covering everyday details of church life, including the delivery of sermons, arrangement of church interiors, and hearing confessions. After the council, papal authority was reinforced through the establishment of central offices known as congregations. One of them became responsible for the list of forbidden literature. All church officials and university teachers were required to take a Tridentine confessional oath that included an oath of \"true obedience\" to the papacy.\nLindberg suggests that (following Trent) the \"spirituality of Catholic reform was the ascetic, subjective, and personal piety\", as expressed in public processions, the \"perpetual\" adoration of the Eucharist, and the reaffirmed veneration of Mary the Virgin and the saints.\nNew waves.\nEnglish reformation under Henry VIII.\nIn England, reformist clerics such as Thomas Bilney (d. 1531) and Robert Barnes (d. 1540) spread Luther's theology among Cambridge and Oxford scholars and students. The young priest William Tyndale (d. 1536) translated the New Testament to English using Erasmus's Latin-Greek edition. By around 1535, more than 15,000 copies of his translation had been distributed in secret. Tyndale's biographer David Daniell (d. 2016) writes that the translation \"gave the English language a plain prose style of the very greatest importance\", and his \"influence has been greater than any other writer in English\".\nThe Lord Chancellor Cardinal Thomas Wolsey (d. 1530) had strong links to the Roman Curia, he was unable to achieve the annulment of the marriage of Henry VIII and the middle-aged Catherine of Aragon (d. 1536). They had needed a papal dispensation to marry because Catherine was the widow of Henry's brother Arthur, Prince of Wales (d. 1502). As she had not produced a male heir, Henry became convinced that their incestuous marriage drew the wrath of God.\nHenry charged a group of scholars including Thomas Cranmer (d. 1556) with collecting arguments in favour of the annulment. They concluded that the English kings had always had authority over the clergy, and the Book of Leviticus forbade marriage between a man and his brother's widow in all circumstances. In 1530, the Parliament limited the jurisdiction of church courts. Wolsey had meanwhile lost Henry's favour and died, but More tried to convince Henry to abandon his plan about the annulment of his marriage. In contrast, Cranmer and Henry's new chief advisor Thomas Cromwell (d. 1540) argued that the marriage could be annulled without papal interference. Henry who had fallen in love with Catherine's lady-in-waiting Anne Boleyn (d. 1536) decided to marry her even if the marriage could lead to a total break with the papacy. During a visit in Germany, Cranmer married but kept his marriage in secret. On his return to England, Henry appointed him as the new Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Holy See confirmed the appointment.\nThe links between the English Church and the papacy were severed by Acts of Parliament. In April 1533, the Act of Appeals decreed that only English courts had jurisdiction in cases of last wills, marriages and grants to the Church, emphasizing that \"this realm of England is an Empire\". A special church court annulled the marriage of Henry and Catherine, and declared their only daughter Mary (d. 1558) illegitimate in May 1533. Pope Clement VII did not sanction the judgement and excommunicated Henry. Ignoring the papal ban, Henry married Anne, and she gave birth to a daughter Elizabeth (d. 1603). Anne was a staunch supporter of the Reformation, and mainly her nominees were appointed to the vacant bishoprics between 1532 and 1536. In 1534, the Act of Supremacy declared the king the \"only supreme head of the Church of England\". Many of those who refused to swear a special oath of loyalty to the king\u201465 from about 400 defendants\u2014were executed. More and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester (d. 1535) were among the most prominent victims. Cromwell gradually convinced Henry that a \"purification\" of church life was needed. The number of feast days was reduced by about 75 per cent, pilgrimages were forbidden, all monasteries were dissolved and their property was seized by the Crown.\nThe Parliament of Ireland passed similar acts but they could only be fully implemented in the lands under direct English rule. Resistance against the Reformation was vigorous. In 1534, the powerful Lord Thomas FitzGerald (d. 1537) staged a revolt. Although it was crushed, thereafter Henry's government did not introduce drastic changes in the Church of Ireland. In England, the dissolution of monasteries caused a popular revolt known as the Pilgrimage of Grace. The \"pilgrims\" demanded the dismissal of \"heretic\" royal advisors but they were overcame by royalist forces. The principal articles of faith of the Church of England were summarized in the \"Six Articles\" in 1539. It reaffirmed several elements of traditional theology, such as transubstantiation and clerical celibacy.\nAs Anne Boleyn did not give birth to a son, she lost Henry's favour. She was executed for adultery, and Elizabeth was declared a bastard. Henry's only son Edward (d. 1553) was born to Henry's third wife Jane Seymour (d. 1537). In 1543, an Act of Parliament returned Mary and Elizabeth to the line of the succession behind Edward. Henry attacked Scotland to enforce the marriage of Edward and the infant Mary, Queen of Scots (r.\u20091542\u00a0\u2013\u00a01567) but her mother Mary of Guise (d. 1560) reinforced Scotland's traditional alliance with France. The priest George Wishart (d. 1546) was the first to preach Zwinglian theology in Scotland. After he was burned for heresy, his followers, among them John Knox (d. 1572), assassinated Cardinal David Beaton, Archbishop of St Andrews (d. 1546), but French troops crushed their revolt.\nM\u00fcnster.\nHaving been banished from Sweden, Hoffman was wandering in southern Germany and the Low Countries. He turned Anabaptist but suspended adult baptism to avoid persecution. He denied that Christ had become flesh, and preached that 144,000 elect were to gather in Strasbourg to witness Christ's return in 1533. His followers known as Melchiorites swarmed into the city, presenting an enormous challenge for its charity provisions. Hoffman also came to Strasbourg, but the authorities arrested him. After the deadline for Christ's return passed uneventfully, many disappointed Melchiorites accepted the leadership of a charismatic Dutch baker Jan Matthijszoon (d. 1534). He blamed Hoffman for the suspension of adult baptism, and proclaimed the city of M\u00fcnster as the New Jerusalem. Although M\u00fcnster was an episcopal see, the town council had installed a Protestant pastor Bernhard Rothmann (d. c. 1535) in clear defiance to the new prince-bishop Franz von Waldeck (r.\u20091532\u00a0\u2013\u00a01553). Those who expected a radical social transformation from the Reformation flocked to M\u00fcnster. The radicals assumed full control of the town in February 1534.\nBishop Franz and his allies, among them Philip of Hessen, attacked M\u00fcnster but could not capture it. Under Matthijszoon's rule, private property and the use of money was outlawed in the town. Believing that God would protect him, Matthijszoon made a sortie against the enemy, but he was killed. Another charismatic Dutchman, John of Leiden (d. 1536)\u2014a former tailor\u2014succeeded him. Leiden announced that he was receiving revelations from God, and proclaimed himself \"king of righteousness\" and \"the ruler of the new Zion\". Church and state were united, and all sinners were executed. Leiden legalized polygyny, and ordered all women who were twelve or older to marry. The protracted siege demoralized the defenders, and M\u00fcnster fell through treason on 25 June 1535. After the fall of M\u00fcnster, most Anabaptist groups adopted a pacifist approach under the leadership of a former priest Menno Simons (d. 1561). He associated the Anabaptist communities with the New Jerusalem. His followers would be known as Mennonites. Nearly all Anabaptist communities were destroyed in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, but moderate Anabaptist groups survived in East Frisia, and were mainly tolerated in England.\nCalvin and the \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\".\nThe future reformer John Calvin (d. 1564) was destined to a church career by his father, a lay administrator of the Bishopric of Noyon in France. He studied theology at the Sorbonne, and law at Orl\u00e9ans and Bourges. He read treatises by Lef\u00e8vre and Lef\u00e8vre's disciples at the newly established , and abandoned Catholicism under the influence of his Protestant friends, particularly the physician Nicolas Cop (d. 1540). The persecution of French Protestants intensified after the so-called Affair of the Placards. In October 1534, placards (or posters) attacking the Mass were placed at many places, including the door to the royal bedchamber in Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise. In retaliation, twenty-four Protestants were executed, and many intellectuals had to leave France.\nCalvin was one of the French religious refugees. He settled in Basel and completed the first version of his principal theological treatise, the \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\" in 1536. He would be rewriting and expanding it several times until 1559. As the historian Carlos Eire writes, \"Calvin's text was blessed with a lawyer's penchant for precision, a humanist's love for poetic expression and rhetorical flourishes, and a theologian's respect for paradox\". With Eire's words, Calvin \"revived the jealous God of the Old Testament\". He warned French King Francis I that the persecution of the faithful would incur the wrath of God upon him but sharply distanced moderate Protestants from Anabaptists. Already the first edition of the \"Institutes\" contained references to two distinguishing elements of Calvin's theology, both traceable back to Augustine: his conviction that the original sin had completely corrupted human nature, and his strong belief in \"double predestination\". In his view, only strict social and ecclesiastic control could prevent sins and crimes, and God did not only decide who were saved but also those who were destined to damnation.\nIn 1536, Farel convinced Calvin to settle in Geneva. Their attempts to implement radical reforms in discipline brought them into conflicts with those who feared that the new measures would lead to clerical despotism. After they refused to acknowledge the urban magistrates' claim to intervene in the process of excommunication, they were banished from the town. Calvin moved to Strasbourg where Bucer made a profound impact on him. Under Bucer's influence, Calvin adopted an intermediate position on the Eucharist between Luther and Zwingli, denying Christ's presence in it but acknowledging that the rite included a real spiritual communion with Christ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCalvin on the \"double pedestrination\"\nNo one who wishes to be thought religious dares simply deny predestination, by which God adopts some to hope of life, and sentences others to eternal death...For all are not created in an equal condition; rather eternal life is fore-ordained for some, eternal damnation for others.\nJohn Calvin, \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\" (1559)\nAfter Calvin and Farel left Geneva, no pastors were able to assume the leadership of the local Protestant community. Fearing of a Catholic restoration, the urban magistrates convinced Calvin to come back to Geneva in 1541. Months after his return, the town council enacted \"The Ecclesiastical Ordinances\", a detailed regulation summarizing Calvin's proposals for church administration. The \"Ordinances\" established four church offices. The pastors were responsible for pastoral care and discipline; the doctors instructed believers in the faith; the elders (or presbyters) were authorized to \"watch over the life of each person\" and to report those who lived a \"disorderly\" life to the pastors; and deacons were appointed to administer the town's charity. All townspeople were obliged to regularly attend church services. Calvin established a special court called the consistory to hear cases of moral lapse such as blasphemy, adultery, disrespect to authorities, gossiping, witchcraft and participation in rites considered superstitious by church authorities. The consistory was composed of the pastors, the elders, and an urban magistrate, and the townspeople were encouraged to report sinful acts to it. First-time offenders mainly received lenient sentences such as fines, but repeat offenders were banished from the town or executed. Resistance against the \"Ordinances\" was significant. Many continued visit shrines and pray to saints, while many patricians insisted on liberal traditional customs for which Calvin called them \"Libertines\".\nReformation in Britain.\nHenry VIII died on 27 January 1547. His nine-year-old son Edward VI (r.\u20091547\u00a0\u2013\u00a01553) succeeded him, and Edward's maternal uncle Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset (d. 1552) assumed power as Lord Protector. Somerset halted the persecution of religious dissidents, making England a safe haven for religious refugees from all over Europe. They established their own congregations, served by prominent pastors, such as the Polish Jan \u0141aski (d. 1560) and the Spanish Casiodoro de Reina (d. 1594). Most of them adhered to Reformed theology. Cranmer introduced further religious reforms: images were removed from the churches, the doctrine of purgatory was rejected, and all endowments for prayers for the dead (or chantries) were confiscated. With the introduction of Cranmer's \"Book of Common Prayer\", the Mass was replaced by a vernacular liturgy.\nMarshall notes, that it is \"safe to say that the greater part of the population disliked what was taking place\". The liturgical changes caused popular revolts in Devon and Cornwall and other places but they were quickly suppressed, just like the riot against the dissolution of chantries in East Yorkshire. Even in Norfolk, where the peasants adopted a Protestant rhetoric, they assembled under the banners of their parish saints. Somerset's opponents take advantage of the unrest to get rid of him. He was replaced by John Dudley (d. 1553) who was made Duke of Northumberland. Cranmer continued the liturgical reforms, and the new version of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" rejected the dogma of transubstantiation. He completed the \"Forty-two Articles\", a new confessional document combining elements of Reformed and Evangelical theologies.\nEdward died of tuberculosis on 6 July 1553. He had designated his Protestant relative Jane Grey (d. 1554) as his heir to prevent the succession of his Catholic sister Mary, but most English remained loyal to the Tudor dynasty. Initially, Mary I (r.\u20091553\u00a0\u2013\u00a01558) took advantage of her royal prerogatives to dismiss married clergy, appoint Catholic priests to bishoprics, and restore the Mass. She had to make concessions to landowners who had seized church property to achieve the restoration of papal supremacy by the Parliament in November 1554. Cranmer was forced to sign six documents condemning his own acts but withdrew his recantations while being burned for heresy in public in March 1556. Reginald Pole was appointed as the new archbishop of Canterbury, but he was accused of heresy after his old enemy Carafa had been elected pope as Paul IV (r.\u20091555\u00a0\u2013\u00a01559). The restoration of the altars and images gained popular support in many places, but recatholisation faced significant resistance\u2014around 300 Protestants were burned, and about 1,000 were forced into exile during Mary's reign. Her marriage with Philip II of Spain was unpopular, and she died childless on 17 November 1558.\nMary's sister and successor Elizabeth I (r.\u20091558\u00a0\u2013\u00a01603) sought a ('middle way') between religious extremists. Her first Parliament restored the royal leadership of the Church of England, and introduced a modified version of the \"Book of Common Prayer\". The Anglican liturgy retained elements of Catholic ceremonies, such as priestly vestments, and contained ambiguous sentences about the Eucharist, suggesting the real presence of Jesus's Blood and Body for conservatives, and a memorial service for reformers. Elizabeth supervised the revision of the Anglican articles of faith in person. The subsequent \"Thirty-nine Articles\" were formulated in a way that adherents to the major mainstream Protestant theologies could accept them. However, the most resolute Protestants were determined to purify the Church of England from the remnants of Catholic ceremonies, hence they were called Puritans. They were especially influential at the universities. Many of them rejected the authority of bishops, the Presbyterians emphasized the equal status of all priests, whereas the Congregationalists wanted to strengthen the position of local communities in church administration.\nEngland's recatholisation contributed to the triumph of Reformation in Scotland. James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran (d. 1575), heir presumptive to Queen Mary of the Scots, assumed the leadership of the Protestant lords. Incited by Knox's passionate sermons, anti-Catholic sentiments led to a popular revolt of elementary force in 1559, causing the destruction of monasteries and friaries.\nServetus and the \"Restoration of Christianity\".\nThe first radicals who rejected the dogma of Trinity were put on trial in Augsburg in 1527. A scholar from Navarre Michael Servetus (d. 1553) adopted antitrinitarian theology in the 1530s. MacCulloch proposes that Servetus rejected the Trinity, a dogma extremely offensive to Jews and Muslims, because he wanted to present Christianity as a universal religion. After studying medicine and anatomy in Paris, Servetus became the court physician of the elderly Catholic archbishop of Vienne in southern France. While in Vienne, he sent the first (unpublished) versions of his theological work, the \"Restoration of Christianity\" to Calvin. He disrespectfully described the Trinity as a three-headed Cerberus, attacked infant baptism, and denied original sin. He also wrote insulting comments on Calvin's \"Institutes\". The \"Restoration\" was published anonymously in Lyon in 1553, but the Catholic Inquisition identified Servetus as its author by using documents from Calvin's personal files. Servetus fled from France but attended a church service delivered by Calvin in Geneva. He was recognised and arrested, and the urban authorities sentenced him to death with Calvin's consent. He was burned at the stake on 27 October 1553.\nBucer, Melanchthon and other leading Protestant theologians agreed with Servetus's execution. Only the Basel-based schoolmaster and Bible translator Sebastian Castellio (d. 1563) condemned it in a manifesto for religious toleration. He also addressed a letter to Calvin, echoing Erasmus his posthumous benefactor, stating \"To burn a heretic is not to defend a doctrine, but to kill a man\". Erasmus was a Trinitarian himself, but had noted that the theological formulation had developed from the time of the Apostles, which fueled many subsequent antitrinitarians who took this to mean it that the idea was unbiblical.\nAntitrinitarian theology survived among Italian exiles in Basel. Lelio Sozzini (d. 1562), a scholar from Siena, argued that Biblical texts calling Jesus \"Son of God\" did not refer to his divinity but to his faultless humanity. His nephew, Fausto Sozzini (d. 1604) rejected original sin and the theory of satisfaction (the concept that Christ's sufferings brought about atonement to God the Father for the original sin). Their followers became known as Socinians.\nAfter Servetus's execution Calvin strengthened his position as the leading figure of Reformed Protestantism. In Geneva, the Libertines rose up but they were quickly overcame, and forced into exile or executed. The confiscation of the property of the wealthy Ami Perrin (d. 1561) and his family provided the city with funds to create an academy. It served both as a preparatory school for local youths and as a seminary for Reformed ministers. Calvin's chief assistant Theodore Beza (d. 1605) was appointed as its first rector. The academy quickly developed into a principal center of theologian training for students from all over Europe, earning Geneva the nickname \"the Protestant Rome\". It was especially popular among French Protestants.\nWars of religion and tolerance.\nSchmalkaldic Wars.\nScandals and internal conflicts weakened the Protestants' position in Germany in the early 1540s. Philip the Magnanimous committed bigamy by secretly marrying a lady-in-waiting of his court although his wife was still alive. Bucer, Luther, and Melanchthon had discretely sanctioned the bigamious marriage allegedly to prevent adultery. In 1542, Philip and John the Constant's successor, John Frederick I (r.\u20091532\u00a0\u2013\u00a01547) invaded the Duchy of Braunschweig-Wolfenb\u00fcttel which brought disapproval from other princes. Disputes over lands renewed the old rivalry between the Ernestine and Albertine branches of the Wettin dynasty of Saxony. Taking advantage of the situation, Emperor Charles built a broad coalition of Catholic and Evangelical princes against Hesse and Electoral Saxony. The coalition included the Albertine duke Maurice of Saxony (r.\u20091541\u00a0\u2013\u00a01553). During the ensuing Schmalkaldic War, Charles and his allies won a decisive victory, and Maurice was rewarded with John Frederick's title of elector.\nThe triumphant Charles V regulated religious issues with an imperial edict known as the \"Augsburg Interim\". The \"Interim\" sanctioned clerical marriage and the communion in both kinds in Protestant territories, but denied further concessions. Maurice issued an alternative regulation called the \"Leipzig Interim\" for Saxony which ordered the clergy to wear surplices. Melanchthon supported the \"Leipzig Interim\", stating that such issues were \"matters indifferent\" but uncompromising Lutheran theologians such as Nicolaus von Amsdorf (d. 1565) and Matthias Flacius (d. 1575) rejected all concessions to imperial demands. Different views on justification and the Eucharist caused further heated debates between Melanchton's followers, known as Philippists, and their opponents, called Gnesio-Lutherans ('authentic Lutherans') in the 1550s. The \"Augsburg Interim\" was only implemented in the southern German Protestant cities. This led to the expulsion of recalcitrant clerics, including Bucer from Strasbourg. Alarmed by Charles's triumph, Calvin and Bullinger agreed on a consensual Eucharistic formula, now known as ('Consensus of Z\u00fcrich'), emphasising that Christ \"makes us participants of himself\" in the Lord's Supper, but also stating that God \"uses the ministry of the sacraments\" without infusing divine power into them. Luther had died in 1546 but his followers rejected the \"Consensus\". The rift between Evangelical and Reformed Protestants widened to the extent that Reformed refugees faced an unfriendly reception at Evangelical countries. In Bohemia, Hussite and Evangelical aristocrats and townspeople rose up against King Ferdinand I. Although Ferdinand crushed the revolt, he had to sanction religious plurality in Moravia as a reward for the Moravian Estates' loyalty during the Bohemian revolt.\nDistrusting Emperor Charles, Maurice brokered a coalition of Evangelical princes, and promised four prince-bishoprics to King Henry II of France (r.\u20091547\u00a0\u2013\u00a01559) for financial support. Maurice and his allies invaded the Habsburgs' domains, forcing Charles to flee. Signed on 10 August 1552, the Peace of Passau prescribed that the religious issues were to be discussed at the following Imperial Diet. The Diet was opened at Augsburg on 5 February 1555. Already exhausted, Charles appointed Ferdinand to represent him. Ferdinand's negotiations with the Evangelical princes ended with the Peace of Augsburg on 25 September. The document reaffirmed the principle , but the Imperial Estates could only choose between Catholicism and the \"Augsburg Confession\". Evangelical imperial free cities had to tolerate the existence of Catholic communities within their walls, and prince-bishoprics could not be secularised in case the bishop abandoned the Catholic faith. Charles, who did not sign the peace treaty, abdicated, ceding his imperial title to Ferdinand, and his vast empire to his son Philip II of Spain (r.\u20091556\u00a0\u2013\u00a01598).\nFrench Wars of Religion.\nMany French Protestants did not risk to profess their faith in public. They were known as Nicodemites after Nicodemus, a Pharisee who visited Jesus in secret. Calvin condemned this practice describing those who attended the Mass as soldiers \"in the army of Antichrist\". Under his influence, the French Protestants started to stay away from Catholic church services. They were called Huguenots for uncertain reason. The poet Cl\u00e9ment Marot (d. 1544) provided them with popular stirring songs by translating forty-nine Psalms to French. Francis I promised to exterminate heresy in France in a peace treaty with Charles V in 1544. Next year, Waldensians were massacred in the Luberon region. In 1547, Henry II established a special court for heresy cases, named ('the burning chamber'). The lawyer Jean Crespin (d. 1572) completed a catalogue of martyrs to commemorate the victims of the purges, and it gained immense popularity in the Protestant communities all over Europe. After around 1555, prominent French aristocrats converted to Protestantism, including Marguerite of Angoul\u00eame's daughter, Jeanne d'Albret, (d. 1572), Jeanne's husband Antoine de Bourbon (d. 1562), and Gaspard II de Coligny (d. 1572), admiral of France. Their patronage encouraged less distinguished Huguenots to express their faith in public. In 1559, delegates from seventy-two congregations attended the first synod of the Reformed Church of France, representing about 1.5\u20132 million believers. The synod adopted the \"Gallican Confession\", a confessional document drafted by Calvin.\nFully preoccupied with a new war against Emperor Charles, Henry II did not take severe measures against the Huguenot nobility. After his sudden death after an accident, his eldest son Francis II (r.\u20091559\u00a0\u2013\u00a01560) ascended the throne. His wife, Mary, Queen of Scots was the niece of Francis, Duke of Guise (d. 1563) and Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine (d. 1574), two leaders of the most resolute Catholic faction of the nobility. The queen mother Catherine de' Medici (d. 1589) distrusted them but the persecution of Huguenots intensified under their influence. When Francis died by an ear infection, Calvin considered his fate as divine deliverance. Francis was succeeded by his brother Charles IX (r.\u20091560\u00a0\u2013\u00a01574) under Catherine's regency. She enacted the Huguenots' right to freely attend church services and hold public assemblies because she wanted to avoid a civil war along religious lines.\nUncompromising Catholics and Huguenots considered their confrontation inevitable. The first of the French Wars of Religion\u2014a series of armed conflicts between Catholics and Huguenots\u2014began after Guise's retainers massacred more than fifty Huguenots at Vassy on 1 March 1562. As Antoine de Bourbon had returned to Catholicism, his brother Louis I, Prince of Cond\u00e9 (d. 1569) assumed the leadership of a Huguenot revolt. They concluded a treaty with England in September 1562. To achieve a reconciliation, Catherine de'Medici married off her daughter Margaret of Valois (d. 1615) to the Protestant son of Jeanne d'Albret and Antoine de Bourbon, Henry de Bourbon, King of Navarre (r.\u20091572\u00a0\u2013\u00a01610). Mutual mistrust between Catholics and Huguenots, and the Parisians' determination to cleanse their city of heresy led to the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre after the wedding. On 24 August 1572, a fanatic mob slaughtered 2,000\u20133,000 Protestants in Paris, and by early October further 6,000\u20137,000 Huguenots fell victim to pogroms in other cities and towns. Many Huguenots returned to the Catholic Church or fled from France, and those who remained gathered in southern and southern-west France and continued the armed resistance. Known as \"Malcontents\", moderate Catholics concluded that only concessions to the Huguenots could restore peace.\nCharles IX died in May 1574 leaving an almost empty treasury to his brother Henry III (r.\u20091574\u00a0\u2013\u00a01567). Henry adopted a moderate religious policy but the uncompromising Catholics established the Catholic League in 1576. They entered into a secret alliance with Philip II of Spain to prevent the spread of Protestantism. In 1589, the monk Jacques Cl\u00e9ment mortally wounded King Henry. He named Henry de Bourbon as his heir, but the League and many cities refused to obey to a Huguenot king. Henry IV secured the support of moderate Catholics by converting to Catholicism. He defeated his French opponents and their Spanish allies, and put an end to the civil war early in 1598. He enacted many of the demands of the Huguenots, about fifteen per cent of the population, in the Edict of Nantes. Among others, they were allowed to attend religious services in many places, and their right to hold public offices was confirmed.\nRevolt in the Netherlands.\nMore Protestants fell victim to persecution in the seventeen provinces of Habsburg Netherlands than in any other country between 1523 and 1555. The ruthless persecution prevented the establishment of Evangelical congregations although Luther's ideas were widely discussed in Flemish communities. Reformed theology spread among the Walloons through individuals' correspondence with Calvin and the Genevan academy from the 1540s. Nicodemism was not unusual but uncompromising Protestants disturbed Catholic ceremonies. The preacher Guido de Bres (d. 1567) established the first permanent Reformed congregations. He was a main contributor to the \"Belgic Confession\", a confessional document based on the \"Gallican Confession\", first published in Walloon in 1561, and in Dutch in 1562. The \"Confession\" sharply criticised the Anapabtists, and emphasized the importance of church discipline.\nIn 1566, 300 nobles requested Philip II's governor Margaret of Parma (d. 1586) to moderate anti-heretic legislation. Although the petitioners were mocked as \"beggars\", Margaret was open to a compromise. Protestant refugees returned from abroad, and religious enthusiasts stirred up public demonstrations. On the night of 20\u201321 August 1566, a Protestant mob sacked the Antwerp Cathedral, introducing a popular iconoclastic movement that spread all over the Netherlands. In 1567, Philip appointed Fernando \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba (d. 1582) to crush the riots. Alba arrived at the head of a 20,000-strong army, and introduced a reign of terror, leading to the execution of thousands of people. A prominent aristocrat William the Silent, Prince of Orange (d. 1584) assumed the leadership of the resistance. His \"Sea Beggars\"\u2014a squadron of privateers\u2014seized the provinces of Holland and Zeeland by 1572, although the Reformed communities were in the minority in most towns.\nPhilip II's government faced bankruptcy and his unpaid Spanish troops sacked Antwerp in 1576. This led to a general revolt against Spanish rule. The Catholic aristocrat Philippe III de Cro\u00ff, Duke of Aarschot (d. 1595), made an alliance with William the Silent but rivalry between Catholics and Protestants did not abate. In 1581, the northern provinces united under William's leadership, and renounced allegiance to Philip. In the south, Margaret of Parma's son Alessandro Farnese crushed the revolts, forcing about 100,000 Protestants to seek refugee in the north. Developed from the union of seven northern provinces, the Dutch Republic remained under the loose leadership of the House of Orange. The Reformed pastors were eager to transform the whole society along their ideas. They failed because William preferred a more tolerant approach, and significant Protestant groups associated church discipline with Catholicism. As a consequence, Evangelical, Annabaptist and Catholic communities survived in the Dutch Republic. Heterodox theologies could also spread, such as the views of Jacobus Arminius (d. 1609) who argued that an individual could resist divine grace. Although Arminianism was rejected at the international Synod of Dort in 1619, it continued to influence Protestant theologians.\nEdict of Torda.\nAfter King Louis's death at Moh\u00e1cs, two claimants John Z\u00e1polya (r.\u20091526\u00a0\u2013\u00a01540) and Ferdinand I of Habsburg (r.\u20091526\u00a0\u2013\u00a01564) competed for the Hungarian throne. They were Catholic but neither of them risked to alienate potential supporters by anti-Protestant purges. The Transylvanian Saxon leader Markus Pemfflinger (d. 1537) promoted Evangelical preaching in the Saxon metropolis Hermanstadt (Sibiu, Romania) from around 1530. Evangelical teaching spread among ethnic Hungarians, Slovaks, and Croats after Protestant aristocrats started to appoint Evangelical preachers to the churches under their patronage in the 1530s. After Z\u00e1polya's death, the Ottomans conquered central Hungary, his widow Isabella Jagiellon (d. 1559) assumed the regency for their infant son John Sigismund Z\u00e1polya (r.\u20091540\u00a0\u2013\u00a01571) in eastern Hungary under Ottoman suzerainty, and Ferdinand ruled Royal Hungary in the north and west. Often in need of funds, Ferdinand seized church revenues, while Isabella and her treasurer the Catholic bishop George Martinuzzi (d. 1551) secularised the estates of the Transylvanian bishopric. The Transylvanian Saxons adopted the \"Augsburg Confession\" in 1544; five years later, five free royal boroughs accepted an Evangelical confession in Royal Hungary.\nTwo former Catholic priests M\u00e1ty\u00e1s D\u00e9vai B\u00edr\u00f3 (d. 1547) and Mih\u00e1ly Szt\u00e1rai (d. 1575) were among the first Hungarian pastors to teach Zwinglian Eucharistic theology. \"Sacramentarianism\" (the denial of Christ's presence in the Eucharist) and rebaptism were outlawed by the Diet in Royal Hungary in 1548. John Sigismund was open to religious innovations. Under the influence of his court chaplain Ferenc D\u00e1vid (d. 1579), he adhered to Reformed theology from 1562, and accepted antitrinitarian views during the last years of his life. The Edict of Torda legalised three Protestant denominations\u2014Evangelical, Reformed and Unitarian\u2014in eastern Hungary in 1568. Eastern Hungary transformed into the autonomous Principality of Transylvania under Ottoman suzerainty in 1570. The coexistence of four officially recognised churches\u2014Catholicism and the three legalised Protestant denominations\u2014remained a lasting feature of religious politics in Transylvania. The most radical antitrinitarians rejected the New Testament and held Saturday (or Sabbath) as weekly holiday; hence they were called Sabbatarians.\nWarsaw Confederation.\nAs the Bohemian Brethren were famed for their diligence, many Polish aristocrats eagerly settled them on their estates. Ethnic Poles became receptive to Protestant ideas, especially to Calvin's theology from the 1540s. The Jan Tarnowski (d. 1561) entered into correspondence with Calvin in 1540; in 1542, Jan \u0141aski (d. 1560) converted although his uncle (and namesake) had been the Primate of Poland. In 1548, Sigismund the Old's tolerant son Sigismund II Augustus (r.\u20091548\u00a0\u2013\u00a01572) ascended the throne. Two years later, the first synod of the Polish Reformed Church assembled at Pi\u0144cz\u00f3w. Proposals for the introduction of vernacular liturgy and communion in both kinds, and the abolition of clerical celibacy were forwarded by Sigismund Augustus to the Holy See but Pope Paul IV (r.\u20091555\u00a0\u2013\u00a01559) rejected them. The Catholic prelates tried to put Protestant nobles and married priests on trial for heresy but the legislative assembly, or Sejm suspended such persecutions on the initiative of the Protestant Marshal of the Sejm Rafa\u0142 Leszczy\u0144ski and Tarnowski in 1552. In 1556, \u0141aski organised a synod in the hope of reuniting all non-Lutheran Protestants but failed. At the meeting, Piotr of Goni\u0105dz (d. 1573) openly attacked infant baptism and the doctrine of Trinity. The antitrinitarian Polish Brethren established their own church, known as Minor Church in contrast with the Reformed Major Church. From 1565, Polish nobles could no more be persecuted on religious grounds which allowed them to freely choose between competing theologies. By this time, around one-fifth of the nobility had converted to the Reformed faith, and most secular members of the Senate were Protestant. Relationship between Poland and Lithuania was redefined by the 1569 Union of Lublin which created the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. After Sigismund Augustus died, the Sejm passed the Warsaw Confederation prescribing that only candidates who promised to protect religious freedom could be elected king.\nCounter-Reformation and regional conflicts.\nThe continuous expansion of Protestantism stopped in Germany after the Peace of Augsburg. The Bavarian duke Albert V (r.\u20091550\u00a0\u2013\u00a01579) took the lead of recatholicisation. He overcame the opposition of Evangelical nobles, and exiled all clerics who refused to take the Tridentine oath. With Albert's support, the Jesuits opened a college in Ingolstadt that accepted Evangelical and Hussite students. Emperor Ferdinand I's eldest son and successor, Maximilian II (r.\u20091564\u00a0\u2013\u00a01576) pursued a tolerant religious policy but his brothers, Ferdinand II of the Tyrol (r.\u20091564\u00a0\u2013\u00a01595) and Charles II of Inner Austria (r.\u20091564\u00a0\u2013\u00a01590) were determined to subdue their Protestant subjects. After the predominantly Evangelical Estates of Inner Austria who controlled taxation extracted concessions from Charles II, he promoted Catholicism by appointing Catholics to state offices even if he needed to hire Bavarian and Tyrolian nobles.\nInterreligious conflicts led to wars in many regions of Central Europe. The Cologne War broke out after Gebhard Truchsess von Waldburg, Archbishop-elector of Cologne (r.\u20091577\u00a0\u2013\u00a01583), abandoned Catholicism and married his Protestant lover Agnes von Mansfeld-Eisleben (d. 1637) in 1582. The war ended with the victory of his Catholic opponent Ernest (r.\u20091583\u00a0\u2013\u00a01612), a younger son of Albert V. The Strasbourg Bishops' War began when both the Catholic and Protestant canons of the Strasbourg Cathedral elected their own candidate to the see of Strasbourg in 1592. At the end, the Protestant candidate Johann Georg von Brandenburg (d. 1624) renounced in favor of his opponent Charles of Lorraine (r.\u20091592\u00a0\u2013\u00a01607).\nCharles II's son and successor Ferdinand II (r.\u20091590\u00a0\u2013\u00a01637) set up \"reformation commissions\"\u2014a group of clerics and state officials led by a senior clergyman\u2014to visit the Inner Austrian parishes between 1598 and 1601. The commissioners seized and destroyed Evangelical churches, burned Protestant books and expelled Evangelical priests, often with the support of the local (mainly Slovenian) peasantry. His cousin Emperor Rudolf II (r.\u20091576\u00a0\u2013\u00a01612) introduced anti-Protestant measures in Royal Hungary and Transylvania, provoking a rebellion. The Ottomans supported the rebels whose leader, the Reformed aristocrat Stephen Bocskai was proclaimed prince of Transylvania (r.\u20091605\u00a0\u2013\u00a01606). Rudolph appointed his brother Matthias to conduct negotiations with Bocskai, and the peace treaty sanctioned the freedom of the Evangelical and Reformed Churches in Royal Hungary in 1606. Rudolph was forced to cede Hungary, Austria and Moravia to Matthias in 1608, and to confirm religious freedom in Bohemia in 1609.\nReformation outside Germany.\nThe Reformation also spread widely throughout Europe, starting with Bohemia, in the Czech lands, and, over the next few decades, to other countries.\nNordic countries.\nAll of Scandinavia ultimately adopted Lutheranism over the course of the 16th century, as the monarchs of Denmark (who also ruled Norway and Iceland) and Sweden (who also ruled Finland) converted to that faith.\nIceland.\nLuther's influence had already reached Iceland before King Christian's decree. The Germans fished near Iceland's coast, and the Hanseatic League engaged in commerce with the Icelanders. These Germans raised a Lutheran church in Hafnarfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur as early as 1533. Through German trade connections, many young Icelanders studied in Hamburg. In 1538, when the kingly decree of the new Church ordinance reached Iceland, bishop \u00d6gmundur and his clergy denounced it, threatening excommunication for anyone subscribing to the German \"heresy\". In 1539, the King sent a new governor to Iceland, Klaus von Mervitz, with a mandate to introduce reform and take possession of church property. Von Mervitz seized a monastery in Vi\u00f0ey with the help of his sheriff, Dietrich of Minden, and his soldiers. They drove the monks out and seized all their possessions, for which they were promptly excommunicated by \u00d6gmundur.\nGreat Britain.\nEngland.\nThe English Reformation is a complex historical series of events and reversals, whose nature and effect has been debated by historians. The results of the reformation included an established church with a \"Prayer Book consciously aligned with Swiss theology...(but) the most elaborate liturgy of any Protestant Church in Europe\" practiced in Cathedrals, with plain, sermon-centred services in parish churches, politically imposed by a \"literate Protestant elite\".\nAccording to political historian Gregory Slysz \"The dissolution of the monasteries [...] brought social catastrophe to England\" for the next 50 or so years, due to the closure of the numerous associated urban almshouses for poor relief and hospitals, worsened by spiraling inflation and a doubling of the population. Popular revolts by grassroots Catholics against the changes, such as the Prayer Book Rebellion in the South and the Pilgrimage of Grace and Bigod's rebellion in the North, were ruthlessly put down by government forces with the loss of thousands of lives.\nEnglish North America.\nThe most famous emigration to America was the migration of Puritan separatists from the Anglican Church of England. They fled first to Holland, and then later to America to establish the English colony of Massachusetts in New England, which later became one of the original United States. These Puritan separatists were also known as \"the Pilgrims\". After establishing a colony at Plymouth (which became part of the colony of Massachusetts) in 1620, the Puritan pilgrims received a charter from the King of England that legitimised their colony, allowing them to do trade and commerce with merchants in England, in accordance with the principles of mercantilism. \nThe Pilgrims held radical Protestant disapproval of Christmas, and its celebration was outlawed in Boston from 1659 to 1681. The ban was revoked in 1681 by the English-appointed governor Edmund Andros, who also revoked a Puritan ban on festivities on Saturday nights. Nevertheless, it was not until the mid-19th century that celebrating Christmas became fashionable in the Boston region.\nWales.\nBishop Richard Davies and dissident Protestant cleric John Penry introduced Calvinist theology to Wales. In 1588, the Bishop of Llandaff published the entire Bible in the Welsh language. The translation had a significant impact upon the Welsh population and helped to firmly establish Protestantism among the Welsh people. The Welsh Protestants used the model of the Synod of Dort of 1618\u20131619. Calvinism developed through the Puritan period, following the restoration of the monarchy under Charles II, and within Wales' Calvinistic Methodist movement. However few copies of Calvin's writings were available before the mid-19th century.\nScotland.\nThe Reformation in Scotland's case culminated ecclesiastically in the establishment of a church along reformed lines, and politically in the triumph of English influence over that of France. John Knox is regarded as the leader of the Scottish reformation.\nThe Reformation Parliament of 1560 repudiated the pope's authority by the \"Papal Jurisdiction Act 1560\", forbade the celebration of the Mass and approved a Protestant Confession of Faith. It was made possible by a revolution against French hegemony under the regime of the regent Mary of Guise, who had governed Scotland in the name of her absent daughter Mary, Queen of Scots (then also Queen of France).\nAlthough Protestantism triumphed relatively easily in Scotland, the exact form of Protestantism remained to be determined. The 17th century saw a complex struggle between Presbyterianism (particularly the Covenanters) and Episcopalianism. The Presbyterians eventually won control of the Church of Scotland, which went on to have an important influence on Presbyterian churches worldwide, but Scotland retained a relatively large Episcopalian minority.\nFrance.\nCatholicism remained the official state religion, and the fortunes of French Protestants gradually declined over the next century, culminating in Louis XIV's Edict of Fontainebleau (1685), which revoked the Edict of Nantes and made Catholicism the sole legal religion of France, leading some Huguenots to live as Nicodemites. In response to the Edict of Fontainebleau, Frederick William I, Elector of Brandenburg declared the Edict of Potsdam (October 1685), giving free passage to Huguenot refugees and tax-free status to them for ten years.\nIn the late 17th century, 150,000\u2013200,000 Huguenots fled to England, the Netherlands, Prussia, Switzerland, and the English and Dutch overseas colonies. A significant community in France remained in the C\u00e9vennes region. A separate Protestant community, of the Lutheran faith, existed in the newly conquered province of Alsace, its status not affected by the Edict of Fontainebleau.\nSpain.\nIn the early 16th century, Spain had a different political and cultural milieu from its Western and Central European neighbours in several respects, which affected the mentality and the reaction of the nation towards the Reformation. Spain, which had only recently managed to complete the reconquest of the Peninsula from the Moors in 1492, had been preoccupied with converting the Muslim and Jewish populations of the newly conquered regions through the establishment of the Spanish Inquisition in 1478. The rulers of the nation stressed political, cultural, and religious unity, and by the time of the Lutheran Reformation, the Spanish Inquisition was already 40 years old and had the capability of quickly persecuting any new movement that the leaders of the Catholic Church perceived or interpreted to be religious heterodoxy. Charles V did not wish to see Spain or the rest of Habsburg Europe divided, and in light of continual threat from the Ottomans, preferred to see the Catholic Church reform itself from within. This led to a Counter-Reformation in Spain in the 1530s. During the 1520s, the Spanish Inquisition had created an atmosphere of suspicion and sought to root out any religious thought seen as suspicious. As early as 1521, the Pope had written a letter to the Spanish monarchy warning against allowing the unrest in Northern Europe to be replicated in Spain. Between 1520 and 1550, printing presses in Spain were tightly controlled and any books of Protestant teaching were prohibited.\nBetween 1530 and 1540, Protestantism in Spain was still able to gain followers clandestinely, and in cities such as Seville and Valladolid adherents would secretly meet at private houses to pray and study the Bible. Protestants in Spain were estimated at between 1000 and 3000, mainly among intellectuals who had seen writings such as those of Erasmus. Notable reformers included Juan Gil and Juan P\u00e9rez de Pineda who subsequently fled and worked alongside others such as Francisco de Enzinas to translate the Greek New Testament into the Spanish language, a task completed by 1556. Protestant teachings were smuggled into Spain by Spaniards such as Juli\u00e1n Hern\u00e1ndez, who in 1557 was condemned by the Inquisition and burnt at the stake. Under Philip II, conservatives in the Spanish church tightened their grip, and those who refused to recant such as Rodrigo de Valer were condemned to life imprisonment. On May 21, 1559, sixteen Spanish Lutherans were burnt at the stake; 14 were strangled before being burnt, while two were burnt alive. In October another 30 were executed. Spanish Protestants who were able to flee the country were to be found in at least a dozen cities in Europe, such as Geneva, where some of them embraced Calvinist teachings. Those who fled to England were given support by the Church of England.\nThe Kingdom of Navarre, although by the time of the Protestant Reformation a minor principality territoriality restricted to southern France, had French Huguenot monarchs, including Henry IV of France and his mother, Jeanne III of Navarre, a devout Calvinist.\nUpon the arrival of the Protestant Reformation, Calvinism reached some Basques through the translation of the Bible into the Basque language by Joanes Leizarraga. As Queen of Navarre, Jeanne III commissioned the translation of the New Testament into Basque and B\u00e9arnese for the benefit of her subjects.\nItaly.\nWord of the Protestant reformers reached Italy in the 1520s but never caught on. Its development was stopped by the Counter-Reformation, the Inquisition and popular disinterest. Not only was the Church highly aggressive in seeking out and suppressing heresy, but there was a shortage of Protestant leadership. No-one made a new Protestant translation of the Bible into Italian to compete with the existing Catholic vernacular translations; few tracts were written. No core of Protestantism emerged. The few preachers who did take an interest in \"Lutheranism\", as it was called in Italy, were suppressed, or went into exile to northern countries where their message was well received. As a result, the Reformation exerted almost no lasting influence in Italy, except for strengthening the Catholic Church and pushing for an end to ongoing abuses during the Counter-Reformation.\nSome Protestants left Italy and became notable activists of the Eastern European Reformation, mainly in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (e.g. Giorgio Biandrata, Bernardino Ochino, Giovanni Alciato, Giovanni Battista Cetis, Fausto Sozzini, Francesco Stancaro and Giovanni Valentino Gentile some of whom propagated Nontrinitarianism there and were chief instigators of the movement of Polish Brethren.) Some also fled to England and Switzerland, including Peter Vermigli.\nIn 1532, the Waldensians, who had been already present centuries before the Reformation, aligned themselves and adopted the Calvinist theology. The Waldensian Church survived in the Western Alps through many persecutions and remains a Protestant church in Italy.\nSlovenia.\nPrimo\u017e Trubar is notable for consolidating the Slovene language and is considered to be the key figure of Slovenian cultural history, in many aspects a major Slovene historical personality. He was the key figure of the Protestant Church of the Slovene Lands, as he was its founder and its first superintendent. The first books in Slovene, \"Catechismus\" and \"Abecedarium\", were written by Trubar.\nGreece.\nThe Protestant teachings of the Western Church were also briefly adopted within the Eastern Orthodox Church through the Greek Patriarch Cyril Lucaris in 1629 with the publishing of the \"Confessio\" (Calvinistic doctrine) in Geneva. Motivating factors in their decision to adopt aspects of the Reformation included the historical rivalry and mistrust between the Greek Orthodox and the Catholic Churches along with their concerns of Jesuit priests entering Greek lands in their attempts to propagate the teachings of the Counter-Reformation to the Greek populace. He subsequently sponsored Maximos of Gallipoli's translation of the New Testament into the Modern Greek language and it was published in Geneva in 1638. Upon Lucaris's death in 1638, the conservative factions within the Eastern Orthodox Church held two synods: the Synod of Constantinople (1638) and Synod of Ia\u0219i (1642) criticising the reforms and, in the 1672 convocation led by Dositheos, they officially condemned the Calvinistic doctrines.\nSpread.\nThe Reformation spread throughout Europe beginning in 1517, reaching its peak between 1545 and 1620. The greatest geographical extent of Protestantism occurred at some point between 1545 and 1620. In 1620, the Battle of White Mountain defeated Protestants in Bohemia (now the Czech Republic) who sought to have the 1609 Letter of Majesty upheld.\nThe Thirty Years' War began in 1618 and brought a drastic territorial and demographic decline when the House of Habsburg introduced counter-reformational measures throughout their vast possessions in Central Europe. Although the Thirty Years' War concluded with the Peace of Westphalia, the French Wars of the Counter-Reformation continued, as well as the expulsion of Protestants in Austria.\nAccording to a 2020 study in the \"American Sociological Review\", the Reformation spread earliest to areas where Luther had pre-existing social relations, such as mail correspondents, and former students, as well as where he had visited. The study argues that these social ties contributed more to the Reformation's early breakthroughs than the printing press.\nConclusion and legacy.\nThere is no universal agreement on the exact or even the approximate date the Reformation ended. Various interpretations emphasise different dates, entire periods, or argue that the Reformation never really ended. However, there are a few popular interpretations. The Peace of Augsburg in 1555 officially ended the religious struggle between the two groups and made the legal division of Christianity permanent within the Holy Roman Empire, allowing rulers to choose either Lutheranism or Catholicism as the official confession of their state. It could be considered to end with the enactment of the confessions of faith. Other suggested ending years relate to the Counter-Reformation or the 1648 Peace of Westphalia. From one Catholic perspective, the Second Vatican Council ended the Counter-Reformation.\nThirty Years' War: 1618\u20131648.\nThe Reformation and Counter-Reformation era conflicts are termed the European wars of religion. In particular, the Thirty Years' War (1618\u201348) devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40% of its population. The Catholic House of Habsburg and its allies fought against the Protestant princes of Germany, supported at various times by Denmark, Sweden and France. The Habsburgs, who ruled Spain, Austria, the Crown of Bohemia, Hungary, Slovene Lands, the Spanish Netherlands and much of Germany and Italy, were staunch defenders of the Catholic Church.\nTwo main tenets of the Peace of Westphalia, which ended the Thirty Years' War, were:\nThe treaty also effectively ended the Papacy's pan-European political power. Pope Innocent X declared the treaty \"null, void, invalid, iniquitous, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, empty of meaning and effect for all times\" in his apostolic brief \"Zelo Domus Dei\". European sovereigns, Catholic and Protestant alike, ignored his verdict.\nConsequences of the Reformation.\nIn nations that remained Catholic, or reverted to it, remaining Protestants sometimes lived as crypto-Protestants, also called Nicodemites, contrary to the urging of John Calvin, who wanted them to live their faith openly. Some crypto-Protestants have been identified as late as the 19th century after immigrating to Latin America. \nIn Britain from the Elizabethan period, dissenters called Recusants included both Catholic families and English Dissenters (Quakers, Ranters, Diggers, Grindletonians, etc.): almost the entire Irish population were recusants from the imposed Protestant Church of Ireland.\nTravel and migration between countries became more difficult. \"In 1500, a Christian could travel from one end of Europe to another without fear of persecution; by 1600, every form of Christianity was illegal somewhere in Europe.\" Two prolonged series of conflicts, the French Wars of Religion (1562\u20131598) and the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) resulted in between six and sixteen million deaths.\nAs well as wars, most countries and colonies of Europe enacted discriminatory legislation, these only winding down in the late 18th century Age of Enlightenment. For example, the Popery Acts (1699 and 1704) disallowed Irish Catholic schooling and purchase of land, and changed inheritance law; it was repealed by the 1778 and 1791 Catholic Relief Acts. The Quebec Act (1774) re-allowed Catholics to worship and hold public office, but was one of the Intolerable Acts that precipitated the American Revolutionary War. In the countries of the Holy Roman Empire, the Patent of Toleration (1781, 1782) allowed religious toleration for non-Catholic Christians and Jews. In France, the Edict of Toleration (1787) proposed the non-persecution of non-Catholics and Jews. However vestiges of Reformation-period legal discrimination continued: for example, currently, a Roman Catholic, or someone married to a Roman Catholic, may not be crowned the British Monarch.\nRadical Reformation.\nIn parts of Germany, Switzerland, and Austria, a majority sympathised with the Radical Reformation despite intense persecution. Although the surviving proportion of the European population that rebelled against Catholic, Lutheran and Zwinglian churches was small, Radical Reformers wrote profusely and the literature on the Radical Reformation is disproportionately large, partly as a result of the proliferation of the Radical Reformation teachings in the United States.\nDespite significant diversity among the early Radical Reformers, some \"repeating patterns\" emerged among many Anabaptist groups. Many of these patterns were enshrined in the \"Schleitheim Confession\" (1527) and include believers' (or adult) baptism, memorial view of the Lord's Supper, belief that Scripture is the final authority on matters of faith and practice, emphasis on the New Testament and the Sermon on the Mount, interpretation of Scripture in community, separation from the world and a two-kingdom theology, pacifism and nonresistance, communal ownership and economic sharing, belief in the freedom of the will, non-swearing of oaths, \"yieldedness\" (\"Gelassenheit\") to one's community and to God, the ban (i.e., shunning), salvation through divinization (\"Verg\u00f6ttung\") and ethical living, and discipleship (\"Nachfolge Christi\").\nLiteracy.\nThe Protestant Reformation was a triumph of literacy and the new printing press. Luther's translation of the Bible into High German (the New Testament was published in 1522; the Old Testament was published in parts and completed in 1534) was also decisive for the German language and its evolution from Early New High German to Modern Standard German. Luther's translation of the Bible promoted the development of non-local forms of language and exposed all speakers to forms of German from outside their own area. The publication of Luther's Bible was a decisive moment in the spread of literacy in early modern Germany, and stimulated as well the printing and distribution of religious books and pamphlets. From 1517 onward, religious pamphlets flooded Germany and much of Europe.\nBy 1530, over 10,000 publications are known, with a total of ten million copies. The Reformation was thus a media revolution. Luther strengthened his attacks on Rome by depicting a \"good\" against \"bad\" church. From there, it became clear that print could be used for propaganda in the Reformation for particular agendas, although the term propaganda derives from the Catholic \"Congregatio de Propaganda Fide\" (\"Congregation for Propagating the Faith\") from the Counter-Reformation. Reform writers used existing styles, cliches and stereotypes which they adapted as needed. Especially effective were writings in German, including Luther's translation of the Bible, his Smaller Catechism for parents teaching their children, and his Larger Catechism, for pastors.\nIllustrations in the German Bible and in many tracts popularised Luther's ideas. Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472\u20131553), the great painter patronised by the electors of Wittenberg, was a close friend of Luther, and he illustrated Luther's theology for a popular audience. He dramatised Luther's views on the relationship between the Old and New Testaments, while remaining mindful of Luther's careful distinctions about proper and improper uses of visual imagery.\nOutcomes.\nProtestants have to some extent developed their own culture, with major contributions in education, the humanities and sciences, the political and social order, the economy and the arts and many other fields. Various outcomes of the Reformation have been suggested by scholars: improved human capital formation, the disputed Protestant work ethic, improved economic development, the modern state, and \"dark\" outcomes:\nHuman capital formation.\nClaims include:\nProtestant ethic.\nClaims include:\nEconomic development.\nClaims include:\nModern states.\nClaims include:\nWorld demographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nToday, classical Protestantism (including Anglicans) has between 300 and 625 million worldwide adherents, up to one quarter of all Christians.\nAnd general Protestantism\u2014broadly defined to also include Evangelical, Pentecostal, non-conformist and non-denominationalists\u2014constitutes the second-largest form of Christianity (after Catholicism), with between 850,000 and 1.17 billion adherents worldwide (between 40% and 45% of all Christians) divided into an estimated 45,000 denominations.\nOther outcomes.\nOther claims include:\nHistoriography.\nMargaret C. Jacob argues that there has been a dramatic shift in the historiography of the Reformation. Until the 1960s, historians focused their attention largely on the great leaders and theologians of the 16th century, especially Luther, Calvin, and Zwingli. Their ideas were studied in depth. However, the rise of the new social history in the 1960s led to looking at history from the bottom up, not from the top down. Historians began to concentrate on the values, beliefs and behavior of the people at large. She finds, \"in contemporary scholarship, the Reformation is now seen as a vast cultural upheaval, a social and popular movement, textured and rich because of its diversity.\"\nFor example, historian John Bossy characterized the Reformation as a period where Christianity was re-cast not as \"a community sustained by ritual acts, but as a teaching enforced by institutional structures,\" for Catholics as well as Protestants; and sin was re-cast from the seven deadly sins \u2014wrong because antisocial\u2014 to transgressions of the Ten Commandments \u2014wrong as affronts to God.\nMusic and art.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPainting and sculpture\nBuilding\nLiterature\nMusical forms\nLiturgies\nHymnals\nSecular music\nPartly due to Martin Luther's love for music, music became important in Lutheranism. The study and practice of music was encouraged in Protestant majority countries. Songs such as the Lutheran hymns or the Calvinist Psalter became tools for the spread of Protestant ideas and beliefs, as well as identity flags. Similar attitudes developed among Catholics, who in turn encouraged the creation and use of music for religious purposes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSurveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources in translation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37858", "revid": "50877957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37858", "title": "Butler Act", "text": "1925 Tennessee state law prohibiting the teaching of evolution in schools\nThe Butler Act was a 1925 Tennessee law prohibiting public school teachers from denying the book of Genesis account of humankind's origin. The law also prevented the teaching of the evolution of humans from what it referred to as lower orders of animals in place of the Biblical account. The law was introduced by Tennessee House of Representatives member John Washington Butler, for whom the law was named. It was enacted as Tennessee Code Annotated Title 49 (Education) Section 1922, having been signed into law by Tennessee governor Austin Peay.\nThe law was challenged and upheld later that year in a famous trial in Dayton, Tennessee called the Scopes Trial which involved a raucous confrontation between prosecution attorney and fundamentalist religious leader, William Jennings Bryan, and prominent defense attorney and religious agnostic, Clarence Darrow.\nIt was not repealed until 1967.\nProvisions of the law.\nThe law, \"An act prohibiting the teaching of the Evolution Theory in all the Universities, and all other public schools of Tennessee, which are supported in whole or in part by the public school funds of the State, and to provide penalties for the violations thereof\" (Tenn. HB 185, 1925) specifically provided:\nThat it shall be unlawful for any teacher in any of the Universities, Normals and all other public schools of the State which are supported in whole or in part by the public school funds of the State, to teach any theory that denies the story of the Divine Creation of man as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals.\nIt additionally outlined that an offending teacher would be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined between $100 and $500 for each offense.\nBy the terms of the statute, it could be argued, it was not illegal to teach evolution in respect to non-human creatures, such as that apes descended from protozoa or to teach the mechanisms of variation and natural selection. The bill also did not touch on, or restrict the teaching of prevailing scientific theories of geology or the age of the Earth. It did not even require that the Genesis story be taught, but prohibited solely the teaching that humans evolved, or any other theory denying that humanity was created by God as recorded in Genesis. However the author of the law, a Tennessee farmer and member of the Tennessee House of Representatives John Washington Butler, specifically intended that it would prohibit the teaching of evolution. He later was reported to have said \"No, I didn't know anything about evolution when I introduced it. I'd read in the papers that boys and girls were coming home from school and telling their fathers and mothers that the Bible was all nonsense.\" After reading copies of William Jennings Bryan's lecture \"Is the Bible True?\" as well as Charles Darwin's \"The Origin of Species\" and \"The Descent of Man\", Butler decided the teaching of evolution was dangerous.\nChallenges.\nThe law was challenged by the ACLU in the famed Scopes Trial, in which John Scopes, a high school science teacher who agreed to be paid on a charge of having taught evolution, and was nominally served a warrant on May 5, 1925. Scopes was indicted on May 25 and ultimately convicted; on appeal the Tennessee Supreme Court found the law to be constitutional under the Tennessee State Constitution, because:\nWe are not able to see how the prohibition of teaching the theory that man has descended from a lower order of animals gives preference to any religious establishment or mode of worship. So far as we know, there is no religious establishment or organized body that has in its creed or confession of faith any article denying or affirming such a theory. \u2014 Scopes v. State 289 S.W. 363, 367 (Tenn. 1927)\nDespite this decision, the Tennessee Supreme Court reversed the conviction on a technicality (that the jury should have fixed the amount of the fine), and the case was not retried. During the trial, Butler told reporters: \"I never had any idea my bill would make a fuss. I just thought it would become a law, and that everybody would abide by it and that we wouldn't hear any more of evolution in Tennessee.\"\nThe law remained on the books until 1967, when teacher Gary L. Scott of Jacksboro, Tennessee, who had been dismissed for violation of the act, sued for reinstatement, citing his First Amendment right to free speech. Although his termination was rescinded, Scott continued his fight with a class action lawsuit in the Nashville Federal District Court, seeking a permanent injunction against enforcement of that law. Within three days of his filing suit, a bill for repeal of the Butler Act had passed both houses of the Tennessee legislature and was signed into law May 18 by Governor Buford Ellington.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37861", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37861", "title": "Ante-Nicene Fathers (book)", "text": "Collection of early Christian writings\nThe Ante-Nicene Fathers: The Writings of the Fathers Down to A.D. 325 (abbreviated ANF) is a collection of books in 10 volumes (one volume is indexes) containing English translations of the majority of Early Christian writings. The period covers the beginning of Christianity until the promulgation of the Nicene Creed at the First Council of Nicaea.\nPublication.\nThe series was originally published between 1867 and 1873 by the Presbyterian publishing house T. &amp; T. Clark in Edinburgh under the title \"Ante-Nicene Christian Library\" (ANCL), as a response to the Oxford movement's \"Library of the Fathers\" which was perceived as too strongly identified with the Anglo-Catholic movement. The volumes were edited by Rev. Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. This series was available by subscription, but the editors were unable to interest enough subscribers to commission a translation of the homilies of Origen.\nIn 1885 the Christian Literature Company, first of Buffalo, then New York, began to issue the volumes in a reorganized form. This was done without permission, and was indeed a pirate edition. The new series was edited by the Episcopal bishop of New York, A. Cleveland Coxe. Coxe gave his series the title \"The Ante-Nicene Fathers\". By 1896, this American edition/revision was complete. Unable to close down the pirate, T. &amp; T. Clark were obliged to make what terms they could.\nIn 1897, a volume 9, which contained new translations, was published by T. &amp; T. Clark as an additional volume, to complete the original ANCL. Apart from volume 9, the contents entirely derived from the ANCL, but in a more chronological order. Coxe added his own introductions and notes, which were criticized by academic authorities and Roman Catholic reviewers. \nT. &amp; T. Clark then associated with the Christian Literature Company and with other American publishers for the publication of the \"Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37863", "revid": "28478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37863", "title": "Nyquist theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "37864", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37864", "title": "Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem", "text": "The Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem is an essential principle for digital signal processing linking the frequency range of a signal and the sample rate required to avoid a type of distortion called aliasing. The theorem states that the sample rate must be at least twice the bandwidth of the signal to avoid aliasing. In practice, it is used to select band-limiting filters to keep aliasing below an acceptable amount when an analog signal is sampled or when sample rates are changed within a digital signal processing function.\nThe Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem is a theorem in the field of signal processing which serves as a fundamental bridge between continuous-time signals and discrete-time signals. It establishes a sufficient condition for a sample rate that permits a discrete sequence of \"samples\" to capture all the information from a continuous-time signal of finite bandwidth.\nStrictly speaking, the theorem only applies to a class of mathematical functions having a Fourier transform that is zero outside of a finite region of frequencies. Intuitively we expect that when one reduces a continuous function to a discrete sequence and interpolates back to a continuous function, the fidelity of the result depends on the density (or sample rate) of the original samples. The sampling theorem introduces the concept of a sample rate that is sufficient for perfect fidelity for the class of functions that are band-limited to a given bandwidth, such that no actual information is lost in the sampling process. It expresses the sufficient sample rate in terms of the bandwidth for the class of functions. The theorem also leads to a formula for perfectly reconstructing the original continuous-time function from the samples.\nPerfect reconstruction may still be possible when the sample-rate criterion is not satisfied, provided other constraints on the signal are known (see below and compressed sensing). In some cases (when the sample-rate criterion is not satisfied), utilizing additional constraints allows for approximate reconstructions. The fidelity of these reconstructions can be verified and quantified utilizing Bochner's theorem.\nThe name \"Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem\" honours Harry Nyquist and Claude Shannon, but the theorem was also previously discovered by E. T. Whittaker (published in 1915), and Shannon cited Whittaker's paper in his work. The theorem is thus also known by the names \"Whittaker\u2013Shannon sampling theorem\", \"Whittaker\u2013Shannon\", and \"Whittaker\u2013Nyquist\u2013Shannon\", and may also be referred to as the \"cardinal theorem of interpolation\".\nIntroduction.\nSampling is a process of converting a signal (for example, a function of continuous time or space) into a sequence of values (a function of discrete time or space). Shannon's version of the theorem states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA sufficient sample-rate is therefore anything larger than formula_1 samples per second. Equivalently, for a given sample rate formula_2, perfect reconstruction is guaranteed possible for a bandlimit formula_3.\nWhen the bandlimit is too high (or there is no bandlimit), the reconstruction exhibits imperfections known as aliasing. Modern statements of the theorem are sometimes careful to explicitly state that formula_4 must contain no sinusoidal component at exactly frequency formula_5 or that formula_6 must be strictly less than one half the sample rate. The threshold formula_1 is called the Nyquist rate and is an attribute of the continuous-time input formula_4 to be sampled. The sample rate must exceed the Nyquist rate for the samples to suffice to represent formula_9 The threshold formula_10 is called the Nyquist frequency and is an attribute of the sampling equipment. All meaningful frequency components of the properly sampled formula_4 exist below the Nyquist frequency. The condition described by these inequalities is called the \"Nyquist criterion\", or sometimes the \"Raabe condition\". The theorem is also applicable to functions of other domains, such as space, in the case of a digitized image. The only change, in the case of other domains, is the units of measure attributed to formula_12 formula_13 and formula_14\nThe symbol formula_15 is customarily used to represent the interval between adjacent samples and is called the \"sample period\" or \"sampling interval\". The samples of function formula_4 are commonly denoted by formula_17 (alternatively formula_18 in older signal processing literature), for all integer values of formula_19 The multiplier formula_20 is a result of the transition from continuous time to discrete time (see Discrete-time Fourier transform#Relation to Fourier Transform), and it is needed to preserve the energy of the signal as formula_20 varies.\nA mathematically ideal way to interpolate the sequence involves the use of sinc functions. Each sample in the sequence is replaced by a sinc function, centered on the time axis at the original location of the sample formula_22 with the amplitude of the sinc function scaled to the sample value, formula_23 Subsequently, the sinc functions are summed into a continuous function. A mathematically equivalent method uses the Dirac comb and proceeds by convolving one sinc function with a series of Dirac delta pulses, weighted by the sample values. Neither method is numerically practical. Instead, some type of approximation of the sinc functions, finite in length, is used. The imperfections attributable to the approximation are known as \"interpolation error\".\nPractical digital-to-analog converters produce neither scaled and delayed sinc functions, nor ideal Dirac pulses. Instead they produce a piecewise-constant sequence of scaled and delayed rectangular pulses (the zero-order hold), usually followed by a lowpass filter (called an \"anti-imaging filter\") to remove spurious high-frequency replicas (images) of the original baseband signal.\nAliasing.\nWhen formula_4 is a function with a Fourier transform formula_25:\nformula_26\nThen the samples formula_27 of formula_4 are sufficient to create a periodic summation of formula_29 (see Discrete-time Fourier transform#Relation to Fourier Transform):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich is a periodic function and its equivalent representation as a Fourier series, whose coefficients are formula_27. This function is also known as the discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT) of the sample sequence.\nAs depicted, copies of formula_25 are shifted by multiples of the sampling rate formula_32 and combined by addition. For a band-limited function formula_33 and sufficiently large formula_13 it is possible for the copies to remain distinct from each other. But if the Nyquist criterion is not satisfied, adjacent copies overlap, and it is not possible in general to discern an unambiguous formula_29 Any frequency component above formula_10 is indistinguishable from a lower-frequency component, called an \"alias\", associated with one of the copies. In such cases, the customary interpolation techniques produce the alias, rather than the original component. When the sample-rate is pre-determined by other considerations (such as an industry standard), formula_4 is usually filtered to reduce its high frequencies to acceptable levels before it is sampled. The type of filter required is a lowpass filter, and in this application it is called an anti-aliasing filter.\nDerivation as a special case of Poisson summation.\nWhen there is no overlap of the copies (also known as \"images\") of formula_25, the formula_39 term of Eq.1 can be recovered by the product:\nformula_40\nwhere:\nformula_41\nThe sampling theorem is proved since formula_25 uniquely determines formula_4.\nAll that remains is to derive the formula for reconstruction. formula_44 need not be precisely defined in the region formula_45 because formula_46 is zero in that region. However, the worst case is when formula_47 the Nyquist frequency. A function that is sufficient for that and all less severe cases is:\nformula_48\nwhere formula_49 is the rectangular function. Therefore:\nformula_50\nformula_51\u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 (from \u00a0Eq.1, above).\nformula_52\u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0\nThe inverse transform of both sides produces the Whittaker\u2013Shannon interpolation formula:\nformula_53\nwhich shows how the samples, formula_54, can be combined to reconstruct formula_4.\nShannon's original proof.\nPoisson shows that the Fourier series in Eq.1 produces the periodic summation of formula_25, regardless of formula_2 and formula_6. Shannon, however, only derives the series coefficients for the case formula_64. Virtually quoting Shannon's original paper:\nLet formula_65 be the spectrum of formula_9\u00a0 Then\nformula_67\nbecause formula_65 is assumed to be zero outside the band formula_69\u00a0 If we let formula_70 where formula_71 is any positive or negative integer, we obtain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;}\\;{\\rm d}\\omega.&lt;/math&gt; \u00a0 \u00a0\nOn the left are values of formula_4 at the sampling points. The integral on the right will be recognized as essentially the formula_73 coefficient in a Fourier-series expansion of the function formula_74 taking the interval formula_75 to formula_6 as a fundamental period. This means that the values of the samples formula_77 determine the Fourier coefficients in the series expansion of formula_78\u00a0 Thus they determine formula_74 since formula_65 is zero for frequencies greater than formula_5 and for lower frequencies formula_65 is determined if its Fourier coefficients are determined. But formula_65 determines the original function formula_4 completely, since a function is determined if its spectrum is known. Therefore the original samples determine the function formula_4 completely.\nShannon's proof of the theorem is complete at that point, but he goes on to discuss reconstruction via sinc functions, what we now call the Whittaker\u2013Shannon interpolation formula as discussed above. He does not derive or prove the properties of the sinc function, as the Fourier pair relationship between the rect (the rectangular function) and sinc functions was well known by that time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs in the other proof, the existence of the Fourier transform of the original signal is assumed, so the proof does not say whether the sampling theorem extends to bandlimited stationary random processes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nApplication to multivariable signals and images.\nThe sampling theorem is usually formulated for functions of a single variable. Consequently, the theorem is directly applicable to time-dependent signals and is normally formulated in that context. However, the sampling theorem can be extended in a straightforward way to functions of arbitrarily many variables. Grayscale images, for example, are often represented as two-dimensional arrays (or matrices) of real numbers representing the relative intensities of pixels (picture elements) located at the intersections of row and column sample locations. As a result, images require two independent variables, or indices, to specify each pixel uniquely\u2014one for the row, and one for the column.\nColor images typically consist of a composite of three separate grayscale images, one to represent each of the three primary colors\u2014red, green, and blue, or \"RGB\" for short. Other colorspaces using 3-vectors for colors include HSV, CIELAB, XYZ, etc. Some colorspaces such as cyan, magenta, yellow, and black (CMYK) may represent color by four dimensions. All of these are treated as vector-valued functions over a two-dimensional sampled domain.\nSimilar to one-dimensional discrete-time signals, images can also suffer from aliasing if the sampling resolution, or pixel density, is inadequate. For example, a digital photograph of a striped shirt with high frequencies (in other words, the distance between the stripes is small), can cause aliasing of the shirt when it is sampled by the camera's image sensor. The aliasing appears as a moir\u00e9 pattern. The \"solution\" to higher sampling in the spatial domain for this case would be to move closer to the shirt, use a higher resolution sensor, or to optically blur the image before acquiring it with the sensor using an optical low-pass filter.\nAnother example is shown here in the brick patterns. The top image shows the effects when the sampling theorem's condition is not satisfied. When software rescales an image (the same process that creates the thumbnail shown in the lower image) it, in effect, runs the image through a low-pass filter first and then downsamples the image to result in a smaller image that does not exhibit the moir\u00e9 pattern. The top image is what happens when the image is downsampled without low-pass filtering: aliasing results.\nThe sampling theorem applies to camera systems, where the scene and lens constitute an analog spatial signal source, and the image sensor is a spatial sampling device. Each of these components is characterized by a modulation transfer function (MTF), representing the precise resolution (spatial bandwidth) available in that component. Effects of aliasing or blurring can occur when the lens MTF and sensor MTF are mismatched. When the optical image which is sampled by the sensor device contains higher spatial frequencies than the sensor, the under sampling acts as a low-pass filter to reduce or eliminate aliasing. When the area of the sampling spot (the size of the pixel sensor) is not large enough to provide sufficient spatial anti-aliasing, a separate anti-aliasing filter (optical low-pass filter) may be included in a camera system to reduce the MTF of the optical image. Instead of requiring an optical filter, the graphics processing unit of smartphone cameras performs digital signal processing to remove aliasing with a digital filter. Digital filters also apply sharpening to amplify the contrast from the lens at high spatial frequencies, which otherwise falls off rapidly at diffraction limits.\nThe sampling theorem also applies to post-processing digital images, such as to up or down sampling. Effects of aliasing, blurring, and sharpening may be adjusted with digital filtering implemented in software, which necessarily follows the theoretical principles.\nCritical frequency.\nTo illustrate the necessity of formula_86 consider the family of sinusoids generated by different values of formula_87 in this formula:\nformula_88\nWith formula_64 or equivalently formula_90 the samples are given by:\nformula_91\nregardless of the value of formula_92 That sort of ambiguity is the reason for the \"strict\" inequality of the sampling theorem's condition.\nSampling of non-baseband signals.\nAs discussed by Shannon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A similar result is true if the band does not start at zero frequency but at some higher value, and can be proved by a linear translation (corresponding physically to single-sideband modulation) of the zero-frequency case. In this case the elementary pulse is obtained from formula_93 by single-side-band modulation.\nThat is, a sufficient no-loss condition for sampling signals that do not have baseband components exists that involves the \"width\" of the non-zero frequency interval as opposed to its highest frequency component. See \"sampling\" for more details and examples.\nFor example, in order to sample FM radio signals in the frequency range of 100\u2013102\u00a0MHz, it is not necessary to sample at 204\u00a0MHz (twice the upper frequency), but rather it is sufficient to sample at 4\u00a0MHz (twice the width of the frequency interval). (Reconstruction is not usually the goal with sampled IF or RF signals. Rather, the sample sequence can be treated as ordinary samples of the signal frequency-shifted to near baseband, and digital demodulation can proceed on that basis.)\nUsing the bandpass condition, where formula_94 for all formula_95 outside the open band of frequencies\nformula_96\nfor some nonnegative integer formula_97 and some sampling frequency formula_98, it is possible to find an interpolation that reproduces the signal. Note that there may be several combinations of formula_97 and formula_98 that work, including the normal baseband condition as the case formula_101 The corresponding interpolation filter to be convolved with the sample is the impulse response of an ideal \"brick-wall\" bandpass filter (as opposed to the ideal brick-wall lowpass filter used above) with cutoffs at the upper and lower edges of the specified band, which is the difference between a pair of lowpass impulse responses:\nformula_102\nThis function is 1 at formula_103 and zero at any other multiple of formula_20 (as well as at other times if formula_105).\nOther generalizations, for example to signals occupying multiple non-contiguous bands, are possible as well. Even the most generalized form of the sampling theorem does not have a provably true converse. That is, one cannot conclude that information is necessarily lost just because the conditions of the sampling theorem are not satisfied; from an engineering perspective, however, it is generally safe to assume that if the sampling theorem is not satisfied then information will most likely be lost.\nNonuniform sampling.\nThe sampling theory of Shannon can be generalized for the case of nonuniform sampling, that is, samples not taken equally spaced in time. The Shannon sampling theory for non-uniform sampling states that a band-limited signal can be perfectly reconstructed from its samples if the average sampling rate satisfies the Nyquist condition. Therefore, although uniformly spaced samples may result in easier reconstruction algorithms, it is not a necessary condition for perfect reconstruction.\nThe general theory for non-baseband and nonuniform samples was developed in 1967 by Henry Landau. He proved that the average sampling rate (uniform or otherwise) must be twice the \"occupied\" bandwidth of the signal, assuming it is \"a priori\" known what portion of the spectrum was occupied.\nIn the late 1990s, this work was partially extended to cover signals for which the amount of occupied bandwidth is known but the actual occupied portion of the spectrum is unknown. In the 2000s, a complete theory was developed\n(see the section Sampling below the Nyquist rate under additional restrictions below) using compressed sensing. In particular, the theory, using signal processing language, is described in a 2009 paper by Mishali and Eldar. They show, among other things, that if the frequency locations are unknown, then it is necessary to sample at least at twice the Nyquist criteria; in other words, you must pay at least a factor of 2 for not knowing the location of the spectrum. Note that minimum sampling requirements do not necessarily guarantee stability.\nSampling below the Nyquist rate under additional restrictions.\nThe Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem provides a sufficient condition for the sampling and reconstruction of a band-limited signal. When reconstruction is done via the Whittaker\u2013Shannon interpolation formula, the Nyquist criterion is also a necessary condition to avoid aliasing, in the sense that if samples are taken at a slower rate than twice the band limit, then there are some signals that will not be correctly reconstructed. However, if further restrictions are imposed on the signal, then the Nyquist criterion may no longer be a necessary condition.\nA non-trivial example of exploiting extra assumptions about the signal is given by the recent field of compressed sensing, which allows for full reconstruction with a sub-Nyquist sampling rate. Specifically, this applies to signals that are sparse (or compressible) in some domain. As an example, compressed sensing deals with signals that may have a low overall bandwidth (say, the \"effective\" bandwidth formula_106) but the frequency locations are unknown, rather than all together in a single band, so that the passband technique does not apply. In other words, the frequency spectrum is sparse. Traditionally, the necessary sampling rate is thus formula_107 Using compressed sensing techniques, the signal could be perfectly reconstructed if it is sampled at a rate slightly lower than formula_108 With this approach, reconstruction is no longer given by a formula, but instead by the solution to a linear optimization program.\nAnother example where sub-Nyquist sampling is optimal arises under the additional constraint that the samples are quantized in an optimal manner, as in a combined system of sampling and optimal lossy compression. This setting is relevant in cases where the joint effect of sampling and quantization is to be considered, and can provide a lower bound for the minimal reconstruction error that can be attained in sampling and quantizing a random signal. For stationary Gaussian random signals, this lower bound is usually attained at a sub-Nyquist sampling rate, indicating that sub-Nyquist sampling is optimal for this signal model under optimal quantization.\nHistorical background.\nThe sampling theorem was implied by the work of Harry Nyquist in 1928, in which he showed that up to formula_1 independent pulse samples could be sent through a system of bandwidth formula_6; but he did not explicitly consider the problem of sampling and reconstruction of continuous signals. About the same time, Karl K\u00fcpfm\u00fcller showed a similar result and discussed the sinc-function impulse response of a band-limiting filter, via its integral, the step-response sine integral; this bandlimiting and reconstruction filter that is so central to the sampling theorem is sometimes referred to as a \"K\u00fcpfm\u00fcller filter\" (but seldom so in English).\nThe sampling theorem, essentially a dual of Nyquist's result, was proved by Claude E. Shannon. Edmund Taylor Whittaker published similar results in 1915, as did his son John Macnaghten Whittaker in 1935, and Dennis Gabor in 1946 (\"Theory of communication\").\nIn 1948 and 1949, Claude E. Shannon published the two revolutionary articles in which he founded information theory. In Shannon's \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\", the sampling theorem is formulated as \"Theorem 13\": Let formula_111 contain no frequencies over W. Then\nformula_112\nwhere formula_113\nIt was not until these articles were published that the theorem known as \"Shannon's sampling theorem\" became common property among communication engineers, although Shannon himself writes that this is a fact which is common knowledge in the communication art. A few lines further on, however, he adds: \"but in spite of its evident importance, [it] seems not to have appeared explicitly in the literature of communication theory\". Despite his sampling theorem being published at the end of the 1940s, Shannon had derived his sampling theorem as early as 1940.\nOther discoverers.\nOthers who have independently discovered or played roles in the development of the sampling theorem have been discussed in several historical articles, for example, by Jerri and by L\u00fcke. For example, L\u00fcke points out that Herbert Raabe, an assistant to K\u00fcpfm\u00fcller, proved the theorem in his 1939 Ph.D. dissertation; the term \"Raabe condition\" came to be associated with the criterion for unambiguous representation (sampling rate greater than twice the bandwidth). Meijering mentions several other discoverers and names in a paragraph and pair of footnotes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs pointed out by Higgins, the sampling theorem should really be considered in two parts, as done above: the first stating the fact that a bandlimited function is completely determined by its samples, the second describing how to reconstruct the function using its samples. Both parts of the sampling theorem were given in a somewhat different form by J. M. Whittaker and before him also by Ogura. They were probably not aware of the fact that the first part of the theorem had been stated as early as 1897 by Borel. As we have seen, Borel also used around that time what became known as the cardinal series. However, he appears not to have made the link. In later years it became known that the sampling theorem had been presented before Shannon to the Russian communication community by Kotel'nikov. In more implicit, verbal form, it had also been described in the German literature by Raabe. Several authors have mentioned that Someya introduced the theorem in the Japanese literature parallel to Shannon. In the English literature, Weston introduced it independently of Shannon around the same time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Russian literature it is known as the Kotelnikov's theorem, named after Vladimir Kotelnikov, who discovered it in 1933.\nWhy Nyquist?\nExactly how, when, or why Harry Nyquist had his name attached to the sampling theorem remains obscure. The term \"Nyquist Sampling Theorem\" (capitalized thus) appeared as early as 1959 in a book from his former employer, Bell Labs, and appeared again in 1963, and not capitalized in 1965. It had been called the \"Shannon Sampling Theorem\" as early as 1954, but also just \"the sampling theorem\" by several other books in the early 1950s.\nIn 1958, Blackman and Tukey cited Nyquist's 1928 article as a reference for \"the sampling theorem of information theory\", even though that article does not treat sampling and reconstruction of continuous signals as others did. Their glossary of terms includes these entries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExactly what \"Nyquist's result\" they are referring to remains mysterious.\nWhen Shannon stated and proved the sampling theorem in his 1949 article, according to Meijering, \"he referred to the critical sampling interval formula_114 as the \"Nyquist interval\" corresponding to the band formula_115 in recognition of Nyquist's discovery of the fundamental importance of this interval in connection with telegraphy\". This explains Nyquist's name on the critical interval, but not on the theorem.\nSimilarly, Nyquist's name was attached to \"Nyquist rate\" in 1953 by Harold S. Black:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the essential frequency range is limited to formula_6 cycles per second, formula_1 was given by Nyquist as the maximum number of code elements per second that could be unambiguously resolved, assuming the peak interference is less than half a quantum step. This rate is generally referred to as signaling at the Nyquist rate and formula_118 has been termed a \"Nyquist interval\".\u2014\u200a\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", this may be the origin of the term \"Nyquist rate\". In Black's usage, it is not a sampling rate, but a signaling rate.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSufficiency theorem for reconstructing signals from samples"}
{"id": "37865", "revid": "28478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37865", "title": "Shannon sampling theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "37866", "revid": "40844232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37866", "title": "Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers", "text": "1886\u20131900 English translations of early Christian works\nA Select Library of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church, usually known as the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers (NPNF), is a set of books containing translations of early Christian writings into English. It was published between 1886 and 1900.\nUnlike the \"Ante-Nicene Fathers\" which was produced by using earlier translations of the Ante-Nicene Christian Library (ANCL), the \"Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers\" was printed simultaneously in Europe and in America, by T. &amp; T. Clark, by Christian Literature Company and other American editors. The translations were in the main revised versions of those made for the Oxford Movement Library of the Fathers series. T. &amp; T. Clark was surely convinced by the commercial success of the cheaper American version/revision of the ANCL, although of lesser quality on some minor points. The Swiss-born, German-educated Philip Schaff was commissioned to supervise the first series of the NPNF. He was joined by the British Henry Wace for the second series.\nThe volumes include the following:\nNicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series I.\nList of Volumes\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nThe full text of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers is freely available at:"}
{"id": "37868", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37868", "title": "Porphyry", "text": "Porphyry (; , \"Porphyrios\" \"purple-clad\") may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37869", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37869", "title": "Pope Leo XI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 1605\nPope Leo XI (; 2 June 1535\u00a0\u2013 27 April 1605), born Alessandro di Ottaviano de' Medici, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 1 April 1605 to his death, on 27 April 1605. His pontificate is one of the briefest in history, having lasted under a month. He was from the prominent House of Medici originating from Florence. Medici's mother opposed his entering the priesthood and sought to prevent it by having him given secular honours, but after her death he eventually was ordained a priest in 1567. In his career he served as Florence's ambassador to the pope, Bishop of Pistoia, Archbishop of Florence, Papal legate to France, and as the cardinal Prefect for the Congregation of Bishops and Regulars. He was elected to the papacy in the March 1605 papal conclave when he was almost seventy. He almost immediately suffered from fever and died 27 days into his papacy.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAlessandro di Ottaviano de' Medici was born in Florence as the son of Ottaviano de' Medici and Francesca Salviati. His family belonged to Medici di Ottajano, a cadet branch of the House of Medici. Ottaviano died early in his son's life, and thereafter Alessandro was home schooled by a Dominican priest, Vincenzo Ercolano.\nAlessandro felt the call to the priesthood, but his mother opposed this since he was the only male in the family. She sent him instead to the court of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who appointed him a knight of San Stefano. In 1560 he travelled to Rome where he commenced a lifelong friendship and collaboration with Philip Neri, the future saint. It was Philip who predicted that Alessandro would ascend to the pontificate. His mother died in 1566, at which point he resumed his studies to become a priest. His ordination took place on 22 July 1567.\nPriesthood.\nAlessandro served as the Florentine ambassador to Pope Pius V from 1569 to 1584 and in 1573 was appointed by Pope Gregory XIII Bishop of Pistoia. In March 1573 he received episcopal consecration in Rome. In 1574 he was made Archbishop of Florence.\nIn 1583 he was made a cardinal by Pope Sixtus V and on 9 January 1584 received the title of Cardinal-Priest of Santi Quirico e Giulitta, after a titular church previously known as San Ciriaco alle Terme Diocleziane. In later years, according to custom he would opt for other titular churches.\nIn 1596 Pope Clement VIII sent Alessandro as a papal legate to France, where he remained until 1598, when he received word of his appointment as Prefect of the Congregation of Bishops and Regulars.\nPontificate.\nPapal election.\nOn 14 March 1605, eleven days after the death of Clement VIII, 62 cardinals entered the conclave. Prominent among the candidates for the papacy were the great historian Caesar Baronius and the famous Jesuit controversialist Robert Bellarmine, future saint.\nBut Pietro Aldobrandini, the leader of the Italian party among the cardinals, allied with the French cardinals and brought about the election of Alessandro against the express wish of King Philip III of Spain. King Henry IV of France is said to have spent 300,000 \u00e9cus in the promotion of Alessandro's candidacy.\nOn 1 April 1605, Cardinal Alessandro de' Medici was elected as pope. He chose to be called Leo XI in honor of his uncle Pope Leo X. He was crowned on 10 April 1605 by the protodeacon, Cardinal Francesco Sforza and he took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 17 April 1605.\nDeath.\nWhen he was elected, Leo XI was almost 70 years of age, and he died 27 days later. His death came as a result of fatigue and cold in the ceremony of taking possession of the Basilica of St John Lateran on 17 April; he started suffering from a fever the following day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37870", "revid": "49482012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37870", "title": "Pope Leo X", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1513 to 1521\n \nPope Leo X (; born Giovanni di Lorenzo de' Medici, 11 December 1475\u00a0\u2013 1 December 1521) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 9 March 1513 to his death in December 1521.\nBorn into the prominent political and banking Medici family of Florence, Giovanni was the second son of Lorenzo de' Medici, ruler of the Florentine Republic, and was elevated to the cardinalate in 1489. Following the death of Pope Julius II, Giovanni was elected pope after securing the backing of the younger members of the College of Cardinals. Early on in his rule he oversaw the closing sessions of the Fifth Council of the Lateran, but struggled to implement the reforms agreed. In 1517 he led a costly war that succeeded in securing his nephew Lorenzo di Piero de' Medici as Duke of Urbino, but reduced papal finances.\nIn Protestant circles, Leo is associated with granting indulgences for those who donated to reconstruct St. Peter's Basilica, a practice that was soon challenged by Martin Luther's \"95 Theses\". Leo rejected the Protestant Reformation, and his Papal bull of 1520, \"Exsurge Domine\", condemned Luther's condemnatory stance, rendering ongoing communication difficult.\nHe borrowed and spent money without circumspection and was a significant patron of the arts. Under his reign, Marco Girolamo Vida began composing at the Pope's request a Virgilian Latin epic poem about the life of Jesus called the \"Christiad\", progress was made on the rebuilding of St. Peter's Basilica, and artists such as Raphael decorated the Vatican rooms. Leo also reorganised the Roman University, and promoted Renaissance humanist study of literature, poetry, and Classics. He died in 1521 and is buried in Santa Maria sopra Minerva, Rome. He was the last pope not to have been in priestly orders at the time of his election to the papacy.\nEarly life.\nGiovanni di Lorenzo de' Medici was born on 11 December 1475 in Florence, the second son of Lorenzo the Magnificent, head of the Florentine Republic, and Clarice Orsini. From an early age Giovanni was destined for an ecclesiastical career. He received the tonsure at the age of seven and was soon granted rich benefices and preferments.\nHis father, Lorenzo de' Medici, was worried about his character early on and wrote a letter to Giovanni to warn him to avoid vice and luxury at the beginning of his ecclesiastical career. Here is a notable excerpt: \"There is one rule which I would recommend to your attention in preference to all others. Rise early in the morning. This will not only contribute to your health, but will enable you to arrange and expedite the business of the day; and as there are various duties incident to\".\nCardinal.\nHis father prevailed on his relative Pope Innocent VIII to name him cardinal of Santa Maria in Domnica on 9 March 1489 when he was age 13, although he was not allowed to wear the insignia or share in the deliberations of the college until three years later. Meanwhile, he received an education at Lorenzo's humanistic court under such men as Angelo Poliziano, Pico della Mirandola, Marsilio Ficino, and Bernardo Dovizio Bibbiena. From 1489 to 1491 he studied theology and canon law at Pisa.\nOn 23 March 1492, he was formally admitted into the Sacred College of Cardinals and took up his residence at Rome, receiving a letter of advice from his father. The death of Lorenzo on the following 8 April temporarily recalled the 16-year-old Giovanni to Florence. He returned to Rome to participate in the conclave of 1492 which followed the death of Innocent VIII, and unsuccessfully opposed the election of Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia as Pope Alexander VI.\nHe subsequently made his home with his elder brother Piero in Florence throughout the agitation of Girolamo Savonarola and the invasion of Charles VIII of France, until the uprising of the Florentines and the expulsion of the Medici in November 1494. While Piero found refuge at Venice and Urbino, Giovanni traveled in Germany, in the Netherlands, and in France.\nIn May 1500, he returned to Rome, where he was received with outward cordiality by Pope Alexander VI, and where he lived for several years immersed in art and literature. In 1503 he welcomed the accession of Pope Julius II to the pontificate; the death of Piero de' Medici in the same year made Giovanni head of his family. On 1 October 1511, he was appointed papal legate of Bologna and the Romagna, and when the Florentine republic declared in favour of the schismatic Pisans, Julius II sent Giovanni (as legate) with the Papal army venturing against the French. The French won a major battle and captured Giovanni. This and other attempts to regain political control of Florence were frustrated until a bloodless revolution permitted the return of the Medici. Giovanni's younger brother Giuliano was placed at the head of the republic, but Giovanni managed the government.\nPope.\nPapal election.\nGiovanni was elected pope on 9 March 1513, and this was proclaimed two days later. The absence of the French cardinals effectively reduced the election to a contest between Giovanni (who had the support of the younger and noble members of the college) and Raffaele Riario (who had the support of the older group). On 15 March 1513, he was ordained priest, and consecrated as bishop on 17 March. He was crowned pope on 19 March 1513 at the age of 37. He was the last non-priest to be elected pope.\nWar of Urbino.\nLeo made his younger brother Giuliano and his nephew Lorenzo Roman patricians, intending that both should have brilliant secular careers. Lorenzo was placed in charge of Florence, while Leo took Giuliano to Rome and married him to Filiberta of Savoy; the pope planned to carve out a kingdom for his brother in central Italy, encompassing Parma, Piacenza, Ferrara and Urbino.\nWhen Giuliano died in March 1516, Leo focused his ambitions on Lorenzo. When, in 1516, Leo declared the forfeiture of the Duchy of Urbino from Francesco Maria della Rovere, who he considered disloyal, the title Duke of Urbino transferred to Lorenzo. Francesco Maria fled to relatives Mantua in August of that year. In January of 1517 Francesco Maria attempted to reoccupy Urbino in a war that lasted eight months.\nThe war lasted from February to September 1517 and ended with the expulsion of the duke and the triumph of Lorenzo; but it revived the policy of Alexander VI, increased brigandage and anarchy in the Papal States, hindered the preparations for a crusade and wrecked the papal finances. Francesco Guicciardini reckoned the cost of the war to Leo at the sum of 800,000 ducats. Ultimately, however, Lorenzo was confirmed as the new duke of Urbino.\nPlans for a crusade.\nThe War of Urbino was further marked by a crisis in the relations between the pope and the cardinals. The sacred college had allegedly grown very worldly and troublesome since the time of Sixtus IV, and Leo took advantage of a plot by several of its members to poison him, not only to inflict exemplary punishments by executing one (Alfonso Petrucci) and imprisoning several others, but also to make radical changes in the college.\nOn 3 July 1517, Leo published the names of thirty-one new cardinals, a number almost unprecedented in the history of the papacy. Among the nominations were such notable men such as Lorenzo Campeggio, Giovanni Battista Pallavicino, Adrian of Utrecht, Thomas Cajetan, Cristoforo Numai and Egidio Canisio. The naming of seven members of prominent Roman families, however, reversed the policy of his predecessor which had kept the political factions of the city out of the Curia. Other promotions were for political or family considerations or to secure money for the war against Urbino. The pope was accused of having exaggerated the conspiracy of the cardinals for purposes of financial gain, but most of such accusations appear unsubstantiated.\nLeo, meanwhile, felt the need of staying the advance of the Ottoman sultan, Selim I, who was threatening eastern Europe, and made elaborate plans for a crusade. A truce was to be proclaimed throughout Christendom; the pope was to be the arbiter of disputes; the emperor and the king of France were to lead the army; England, Spain and Portugal were to furnish the fleet; and the combined forces were to be directed against Constantinople. Papal diplomacy in the interests of peace failed, however; Cardinal Thomas Wolsey made England, not the pope, the arbiter between France and the Empire; and much of the money collected for the crusade from tithes and indulgences was spent in other ways.\nIn 1519 Hungary concluded a three years' truce with Selim I, but the succeeding sultan, Suleiman the Magnificent, renewed the war in June 1521 and on 28 August captured the citadel of Belgrade. The pope was greatly alarmed, and although he was then involved in war with France he sent about 30,000 ducats to the Hungarians. Leo treated the Eastern Catholic Greeks with great loyalty, and by a bull of 18 May 1521 forbade Latin clergy to celebrate mass in Greek churches and Latin bishops to ordain Greek clergy. These provisions were later strengthened by Clement VII and Paul III and went far to settle the constant disputes between the Latins and Uniate Greeks.\nProtestant Reformation.\nLeo was disturbed throughout his pontificate by schism, especially the Reformation sparked by Martin Luther.\nIn response to concerns about misconduct from some indulgence preachers, in 1517 Martin Luther wrote his \"Ninety-five Theses\" on the topic of indulgences. The resulting pamphlet spread Luther's ideas throughout Germany and Europe. Leo failed to fully comprehend the importance of the movement, and in February 1518 he directed the vicar-general of the Augustinians to impose silence on his monks.\nOn 24 May, Luther sent an explanation of his theses to the pope; on 7 August he was summoned to appear at Rome. An arrangement was effected, however, whereby that summons was cancelled, and Luther went instead to Augsburg in October 1518 to meet the papal legate, Cardinal Cajetan; but neither the arguments of the cardinal, nor Leo's dogmatic papal bull of 9 November requiring all Christians to believe in the pope's power to grant indulgences, moved Luther to retract. A year of fruitless negotiations followed, during which the controversy took popular root across the German states.\nA further papal bull of 15 June 1520, \"Exsurge Domine\" or \"Arise, O Lord\", condemned forty-one propositions extracted from Luther's teachings, and was taken to Germany by Johann Eck in his capacity as apostolic nuncio. Leo followed by formally excommunicating Luther by the bull \"Decet Romanum Pontificem\" or \"It Befits the Roman Pontiff\", on 3 January 1521. In a brief, the Pope also directed Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor to take energetic measures against heresy.\nLeo was pope during the spread of Lutheranism into Scandinavia. The pope had repeatedly used the rich northern benefices to reward members of the Roman curia, and towards the close of the year 1516, he sent the impolitic Giovanni Angelo Arcimboldi as papal nuncio to Denmark to collect money for St Peter's. This led to the Reformation in Denmark. King Christian II took advantage of the growing dissatisfaction of the native clergy toward the papal government, and of Arcimboldi's interference in the Swedish revolt, to expel the nuncio and summon Lutheran theologians to Copenhagen in 1520. Christian approved a plan by which a formal state church should be established in Denmark, all appeals to Rome should be abolished, and the king and diet should have final jurisdiction in ecclesiastical causes. Leo sent a new nuncio to Copenhagen (1521) in the person of the Minorite Francesco de Potentia, who readily absolved the king and received the bishopric of Skara. The pope or his legate, however, took no steps to correct abuses or otherwise discipline the Scandinavian churches.\nOther activities.\nConsistories.\nThe pope created 42 new cardinals in eight consistories including two cousins (one who would become his successor Pope Clement VII) and a nephew. He also elevated Adriaan Florensz Boeyens into the cardinalate who would become his immediate successor Pope Adrian VI. Leo X's consistory of 1 July 1517 saw 31 cardinals created, and this remained the largest allocation of cardinals in one consistory until Pope John Paul II named 42 cardinals in 2001.\nCanonizations.\nPope Leo X canonized eleven individuals during his reign with seven of those being a group cause of martyrs. The most notable canonization from his papacy was that of Francis of Paola on 1 May 1519.\nFinal years.\nThat Leo did not do more to check the anti-papal rebellion in Germany and Scandinavia is to be partially explained by the political complications of the time, and by his own preoccupation with papal and Medicean politics in Italy. The death of the Emperor Maximilian in 1519 had seriously affected the situation. Leo vacillated between the powerful candidates for the succession, allowing it to appear at first that he favoured Francis or a minor German prince. He finally accepted Charles of Spain as inevitable.\nLeo was now eager to unite Ferrara, Parma and Piacenza to the Papal States. An attempt late in 1519 to seize Ferrara failed, and the pope recognized the need for foreign aid. In May 1521 a treaty of alliance was signed at Rome between him and the emperor. Milan and Genoa were to be taken from France and restored to the Empire, and Parma and Piacenza were to be given to the Church on the expulsion of the French. The expense of enlisting 10,000 Swiss was to be borne equally by Pope and emperor. Charles V took Florence and the Medici family under his protection and promised to punish all enemies of the Catholic faith. Leo agreed to invest Charles V with the Kingdom of Naples, to crown him Holy Roman Emperor, and to aid in a war against Venice. It was provided that England and the Swiss might also join the league. Henry VIII announced his adherence in August 1521. Francis I of France had already begun war with Charles V in Navarre, and in Italy, too, the French made the first hostile movement on 23 June 1521. Leo at once announced that he would excommunicate the king of France and release his subjects from their allegiance unless Francis I laid down his arms and surrendered Parma and Piacenza to the Church. The pope lived to hear the joyful news of the capture of Milan from the French and of the occupation by papal troops of the long-coveted provinces (November 1521).\nHaving fallen ill with bronchopneumonia, Pope Leo X died on 1 December 1521, so suddenly that the last sacraments could not be administered; but the contemporary suspicions of poison were unfounded. He was buried in Santa Maria sopra Minerva.\nCharacter, interests and talents.\nGeneral assessment.\nLeo has been criticized for his handling of the events of the papacy. He had a musical and pleasant voice and a cheerful temper. He was eloquent in speech and elegant in his manners and epistolary style. He enjoyed music and the theatre, art and poetry, the masterpieces of the ancients and the creations of his contemporaries, especially those seasoned with wit and learning. He especially delighted in ex tempore Latin verse-making (at which he excelled) and cultivated \"improvisatori\". He is said to have stated, \"Let us enjoy the papacy since God has given it to us\", Ludwig von Pastor says that it is by no means certain that he made the remark; and historian Klemens L\u00f6ffler says that \"the Venetian ambassador who related this of him was not unbiased, nor was he in Rome at the time.\" However, there is no doubt that he was by nature pleasure-loving and that the anecdote reflects his casual attitude to the high and solemn office to which he had been called. On the other hand, in spite of his worldliness, Leo prayed, fasted, went to confession before celebrating Mass in public, and conscientiously participated in the religious services of the Church. To the virtues of liberality, charity, and clemency he added the Machiavellian qualities of deception and shrewdness, so highly esteemed by the princes of his time.\nThe character of Leo X was formerly assailed by lurid aspersions of debauchery, murder, impiety, and atheism. In the 17th century it was estimated that 300 or 400 writers, more or less, reported (on the authority of a single polemical anti-Catholic source) a story that when someone had quoted to Leo a passage from one of the Four Evangelists, he had replied that it was common knowledge \"how profitable that fable of Christe hath ben to us and our companie\". These aspersions and more were examined by William Roscoe in the 19th century (and again by Ludwig von Pastor in the 20th) and rejected. Nevertheless, even the eminent philosopher David Hume, while claiming that Leo was too intelligent to believe in Catholic doctrine, conceded that he was \"one of the most illustrious princes that ever sat on the papal throne. Humane, beneficent, generous, affable; the patron of every art, and friend of every virtue\". Martin Luther, in a to Leo, himself testified to Leo's universal reputation for morality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Indeed, the published opinion of so many great men and the repute of your blameless life are too widely famed and too much reverenced throughout the world to be assailed by any man, of however great name, or by any arts. I am not so foolish to attack one whom everybody praises ...\nThe final report of the Venetian ambassador Marino Giorgi supports Hume's assessment of affability and testifies to the range of Leo's talents. Bearing the date of March 1517 it indicates some of his predominant characteristics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLeo is the fifth of the six popes who are unfavourably profiled by historian Barbara Tuchman in \"The March of Folly\", and who are accused by her of precipitating the Protestant Reformation. Tuchman describes Leo as a cultured \u2013 if religiously devout \u2013 hedonist.\nIntellectual interests.\nLeo X's love for all forms of art stemmed from the humanistic education he received in Florence, his studies in Pisa and his extensive travel throughout Europe when a youth. He loved the Latin poems of the humanists, the tragedies of the Greeks and the comedies of Cardinal Bibbiena and Ariosto, while relishing the accounts sent back by the explorers of the New World. Yet \"Such a humanistic interest was itself religious. ... In the Renaissance, the vines of the classical world and the Christian world, of Rome, were seen as intertwined. It was a historically minded culture where artists' representations of Cupid and the Madonna, of Hercules and St. Peter could exist side-by-side\".\nLove of music.\nPastor says that \"From his youth, Leo, who had a fine ear and a melodious voice, loved music to the pitch of fanaticism\". As pope he procured the services of professional singers, instrumentalists and composers from as far away as France, Germany and Spain. Francesco Canova da Milano, the foremost lute composer of his time, was prominent in his musical establishment. Next to goldsmiths, the highest salaries recorded in the papal accounts are those paid to musicians, who also received largesse from Leo's private purse. Their services were retained not so much for the delectation of Leo and his guests at private social functions as for the enhancement of religious services on which the pope placed great store. The standard of singing of the papal choir was a particular object of Leo's concern, with French, Dutch, Spanish and Italian singers being retained. Large sums of money were also spent on the acquisition of highly ornamented musical instruments, and he was especially assiduous in securing musical scores from Florence. He also fostered technical improvements developed for the diffusion of such scores. Ottaviano Petrucci, who had overcome practical difficulties in the way of using movable type to print musical notation, obtained from Leo X the exclusive privilege of printing organ scores (which, according to the papal brief, \"adds greatly to the dignity of divine worship\") for a period for 15 years from 22 October 1513. In addition to fostering the performance of sung Masses, he promoted the singing of the Gospel in Greek in his private chapel.\nUnpopular behavior and scandals.\nEven those who defend him against the more outlandish attacks on his character acknowledge that he partook of entertainment such as masquerades, \"jests,\" fowling, and hunting boar and other wild beasts. According to one biographer, he was \"engrossed in idle and selfish amusements\".\nLeo indulged buffoons at his Court, but also tolerated behaviour which made them the object of ridicule. One case concerned the conceited \"improvisatore\" Giacomo Baraballo, Abbot of Gaeta, who was the butt of a burlesque procession organised in the style of an ancient Roman triumph. Baraballo was dressed in festal robes of velvet and with ermine and presented to the pope. He was then taken to the piazza of St Peter's and was mounted on the back of Hanno, a white elephant, the gift of King Manuel I of Portugal. The magnificently ornamented animal was then led off in the direction of the Capitol to the sound of drums and trumpets. But while crossing the bridge of Sant'Angelo over the Tiber, the elephant, already distressed by the noise and confusion around him, shied violently, throwing his passenger onto the muddy riverbank below.\nLeo's biographer, Carlo Falconi, says Leo hid a private life of moral irregularity behind a mask of urbanity. Scabrous verse libels of the type known as pasquinades were particularly abundant during the conclave which followed Leo's death in 1521 and made imputations about Leo's unchastity, implying or asserting homosexuality. Suggestions of homosexual attraction appear in works by two contemporary historians, Francesco Guicciardini and Paolo Giovio. Zimmerman notes Giovio's \"disapproval of the pope's familiar banter with his chamberlains \u2013 handsome young men from noble families \u2013 and the advantage he was said to take of them.\"\nLuther spent a month in Rome in 1510, three years before Leo became pontiff, and was disillusioned at the corruption he found there. In 1520, the year before his excommunication from the Catholic Church, Luther claimed that Leo lived a \"blameless life.\" However, Luther later distanced himself from this claim and alleged in 1531 that Leo had vetoed a measure that cardinals should restrict the number of boys they kept for their pleasure, \"otherwise it would have been spread throughout the world how openly and shamelessly the pope and the cardinals in Rome practice sodomy.\" Against this allegation is the papal bull \"Supernae dispositionis arbitrio\" from 1514 which, \"inter alia\", required cardinals to live \"... soberly, chastely, and piously, abstaining not only from evil but also from every appearance of evil\" and a contemporary and eye-witness at Leo's Court (Matteo Herculaneo), emphasized his belief that Leo was chaste all his life.\nHistorians have dealt with the issue of Leo's sexuality at least since the late 18th century, and few have given credence to the imputations made against him in his later years and decades following his death, or else have at least regarded them as unworthy of notice; without necessarily reaching conclusions on whether he was homosexual. Those who stand outside this consensus generally fall short of concluding with certainty that Leo was unchaste during his pontificate. Joseph McCabe accused Pastor of untruthfulness and Vaughan of lying in the course of their treatment of the evidence, pointing out that Giovio and Guicciardini seemed to share the belief that Leo engaged in \"unnatural vice\" (homosexuality) while pope.\nBenevolence.\nLeo X made charitable donations of more than 6,000 ducats annually to retirement homes, hospitals, convents, discharged soldiers, pilgrims, poor students, exiles, cripples, and the sick and unfortunate.\nDeath and legacy.\nDeath.\nPope Leo X died suddenly of pneumonia at the age of 45 on 1 December 1521 and was buried in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome. His death came just 10 months after he had excommunicated Martin Luther, the seminal figure in the Protestant Reformation, who was accused of 41 errors in his teachings.\nFailure to stem the Reformation.\nPossibly the most lasting legacy of the reign of Pope Leo X was the perception that he did not simply fail to stem the Reformation, but actually fuelled it. A key issue was that his pontificate failed to bring about the reforms decreed by the Fifth Lateran Council (held between 1512 and 1517) which aimed to deal with many of their political problems as well as to reform Christendom, specifically relating to the papacy, cardinals, and curia. Some believe enforcing these decrees may have been enough to dampen support for radical challenges to church authority. But instead under his leadership, Rome's fiscal and political problems were deepened. A major contributor was his lavish spending (especially on the arts and himself) which led the papal treasury into mounting debt and his decision to authorize the sale of indulgences. The exploitation of people and corruption of religious principles linked to the practice of selling indulgences quickly became the key stimulus for the onset of the Protestant Reformation. Martin Luther's \"95 Theses\", otherwise entitled \"Disputation on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences\", was posted on a Church door in Wittenberg, Germany in October 1517 just seven months after the Lateran V was completed. But Pope Leo X's attempt to prosecute Luther's teaching on indulgences, and to eventually excommunicate him in January 1521, did not get rid of Lutheran doctrine but had the opposite effect of further splintering the Western church.\nExcessive spending.\nLeo was renowned for spending money lavishly on the arts; on charities; on benefices for his friends, relatives, and even people he barely knew; on dynastic wars, such as the War of Urbino; and on his own personal luxury. Within two years of becoming Pope, Leo X spent all of the treasure amassed by the previous Pope, the frugal Julius II, and drove the Papacy into deep debt. By the end of his pontificate in 1521, the papal treasury was 400,000 ducats in debt. This debt contributed not only to the calamities of Leo's own pontificate (particularly the sale of indulgences that precipitated Protestantism) but severely constrained later pontificates (Pope Adrian VI; and Leo's beloved cousin, Clement VII) and forced austerity measures.\nLeo X's personal spending was likewise vast. For 1517, his personal income is recorded as 580,000 ducats, of which 420,000 came from the states of the Church, 100,000 from annates, and 60,000 from the composition tax instituted by Sixtus IV. These sums, together with the considerable amounts accruing from indulgences, jubilees, and special fees, vanished as quickly as they were received. To remain financially solvent, the Pope resorted to desperate measures: instructing his cousin, Cardinal Giulio de' Medici, to pawn the Papal jewels; palace furniture; tableware; and even statues of the apostles. Additionally, Leo sold cardinals' hats; memberships to a fraternal order he invented in 1520, the \"Papal Knights of St. Peter and St. Paul\"; and borrowed such immense sums from bankers that upon his death, many were ruined.\nAt Leo's death, the Venetian ambassador Gradenigo estimated the number of salaried official posts in the Church at 2,150, with a capital value of approximately 3,000,000 ducats and a yearly income of 328,000 ducats.\nPatron of learning.\nLeo X raised the Church to a high rank as the friend of whatever seemed to extend knowledge or to refine and embellish life. He made the capital of Christendom, Rome, a centre of European culture. While yet a cardinal, he had restored the church of Santa Maria in Domnica after Raphael's designs; and as pope he had San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, on the Via Giulia, built, after designs by Jacopo Sansovino and pressed forward the work on St Peter's Basilica and the Vatican under Raphael and Agostino Chigi. Leo's constitution of 5 November 1513 reformed the Roman university, which had been neglected by Julius II. He restored all its faculties, gave larger salaries to the professors, and summoned distinguished teachers from afar; and, although it never attained to the importance of Padua or Bologna, it nevertheless possessed in 1514 a faculty (with a good reputation) of eighty-eight professors.\nLeo called Janus Lascaris to Rome to give instruction in Greek, and established a Greek printing press from which the first Greek book printed in Rome appeared in 1515. He made Raphael custodian of the classical antiquities of Rome and the vicinity, the ancient monuments of which formed the subject of a famous letter from Raphael to the pope in 1519. The distinguished Latinists Pietro Bembo and Jacopo Sadoleto were papal secretaries, as well as the famous poet Bernardo Accolti. Other poets, such as Marco Girolamo Vida, Gian Giorgio Trissino and Bibbiena, writers of \"novelle\" like Matteo Bandello, and a hundred other \"literati\" of the time were bishops, or papal scriptors or abbreviators, or in other papal employs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Under his pontificate, Latin Christianity assumed a pagan, Greco-Roman character, which, passing from art into manners, gives to this epoch a strange complexion. Crimes for the moment disappeared, to give place to vices; but to charming vices, vices in good taste, such as those indulged in by Alcibiades and sung by Catullus. \u2014Alexandre Dumas \"p\u00e8re\"\nStatesman.\nSeveral minor events of Leo's pontificate are worthy of mention. He was particularly friendly with King Manuel I of Portugal as a result of the latter's missionary enterprises in Asia and Africa. Pope Leo X was granted a large embassy from the Portuguese king furnished with goods from Manuel's colonies. His concordat with Florence (1516) guaranteed the free election of the clergy in that city.\nHis constitution of 1 March 1519 condemned the King of Spain's claim to refuse the publication of papal bulls. He maintained close relations with Poland because of the Turkish advance and the Polish contest with the Teutonic Knights. His bull of July 1519, which regulated the discipline of the Polish Church, was later transformed into a concordat by Clement VII.\nLeo showed special favours to the Jews and permitted them to erect a Hebrew printing-press in Rome. Under Daniel Bomberg, that press produced manuscripts of the Talmud and Mikraot Gedolot with Leo's approval and protection.\nHe approved the formation of the Oratory of Divine Love, a group of pious men in Rome which later became the Theatine Order, and he canonized Francis of Paola.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37872", "revid": "47012757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37872", "title": "Beta particle", "text": "Ionizing radiation\nA beta particle, also called beta ray or beta radiation (symbol \u03b2), is a high-energy, high-speed electron or positron emitted by the radioactive decay of an atomic nucleus, known as beta decay. There are two forms of beta decay, \u03b2\u2212 decay and \u03b2+ decay, which produce electrons and positrons, respectively.\nBeta particles with an energy of 0.5 MeV have a range of about one metre in the air; the distance is dependent on the particle's energy and the air's density and composition.\nBeta particles are a type of ionizing radiation, and for radiation protection purposes, they are regarded as being more ionizing than gamma rays, but less ionizing than alpha particles. The higher the ionising effect, the greater the damage to living tissue, but also the lower the penetrating power of the radiation through matter.\nBeta decay modes.\n\u03b2\u2212 decay (electron emission).\nAn unstable atomic nucleus with an excess of neutrons may undergo \u03b2\u2212 decay, where a neutron is converted into a proton, an electron, and an electron antineutrino (the antiparticle of the neutrino):\nThis process is mediated by the weak interaction. The neutron turns into a proton through the emission of a virtual W\u2212 boson. At the quark level, W\u2212 emission turns a down quark into an up quark, turning a neutron (one up quark and two down quarks) into a proton (two up quarks and one down quark).\nThe virtual W\u2212 boson then decays into an electron and an antineutrino.\n\u03b2\u2212 decay commonly occurs among the neutron-rich fission byproducts produced in nuclear reactors. Free neutrons also decay via this process. Both of these processes contribute to the copious quantities of beta rays and electron antineutrinos produced by fission-reactor fuel rods.\n\u03b2+ decay (positron emission).\nUnstable atomic nuclei with an excess of protons may undergo \u03b2+ decay, also called positron decay, where a proton is converted into a neutron, a positron, and an electron neutrino:\nBeta-plus decay can only happen inside nuclei when the absolute value of the binding energy of the daughter nucleus is greater than that of the parent nucleus, i.e., the daughter nucleus is a lower-energy state.\nBeta decay schemes.\nThe accompanying decay scheme diagram shows the beta decay of caesium-137. 137Cs is noted for a characteristic gamma peak at 661\u00a0keV, but this is actually emitted by the daughter radionuclide 137mBa. The diagram shows the type and energy of the emitted radiation, its relative abundance, and the daughter nuclides after decay.\nPhosphorus-32 is a beta emitter widely used in medicine. It has a short half-life of 14.29 days and decays into sulfur-32 by beta decay as shown in this nuclear equation:\n1.709\u00a0MeV of energy is released during the decay. The kinetic energy of the electron varies with an average of approximately 0.5\u00a0MeV and the remainder of the energy is carried by the nearly undetectable electron antineutrino. In comparison to other beta radiation-emitting nuclides, the electron is moderately energetic. It is blocked by around 1\u00a0m of air or 5\u00a0mm of acrylic glass.\nInteraction with other matter.\nOf the three common types of radiation given off by radioactive materials, alpha, beta and gamma, beta has the medium penetrating power and the medium ionising power. Although the beta particles given off by different radioactive materials vary in energy, most beta particles can be stopped by a few millimeters of aluminium. However, this does not mean that beta-emitting isotopes can be completely shielded by such thin shields: as they decelerate in matter, beta electrons emit secondary gamma rays, which are more penetrating than betas per se. Shielding composed of materials with lower atomic weight generates gammas with lower energy, making such shields somewhat more effective per unit mass than ones made of larger atoms such as lead.\nBeing composed of charged particles, beta radiation is more strongly ionizing than gamma radiation. When passing through matter, a beta particle is decelerated by electromagnetic interactions and may give off bremsstrahlung X-rays.\nIn water, beta radiation from many nuclear fission products typically exceeds the speed of light in that material (which is about 75% that of light in vacuum), and thus generates blue Cherenkov radiation when it passes through water. The intense beta radiation from the fuel rods of swimming pool reactors can thus be visualized through the transparent water that covers and shields the reactor (see illustration at right).\nDetection and measurement.\nThe ionizing or excitation effects of beta particles on matter are the fundamental processes by which radiometric detection instruments detect and measure beta radiation. The ionization of gas is used in ion chambers and Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller counters, and the excitation of scintillators is used in scintillation counters.\nThe following table shows radiation quantities in SI and non-SI units:\nBeta spectroscopy.\nThe energy contained within individual beta particles is measured via \"beta spectrometry\"; the study of the obtained distribution of energies as a spectrum is \"beta spectroscopy\". Determination of this energy is done by measuring the amount of deflection of the electron's path under a magnetic field.\nApplications.\nBeta particles can be used to treat health conditions such as eye and bone cancer and are also used as tracers. Strontium-90 is the material most commonly used to produce beta particles.\nBeta particles are also used in quality control to test the thickness of an item, such as paper, coming through a system of rollers. Some of the beta radiation is absorbed while passing through the product. If the product is made too thick or thin, a correspondingly different amount of radiation will be absorbed. A computer program monitoring the quality of the manufactured paper will then move the rollers to change the thickness of the final product.\nAn illumination device called a \"betalight\" contains tritium and a phosphor. As tritium decays, it emits beta particles; these strike the phosphor, causing the phosphor to give off photons, much like the cathode-ray tube in a television. The illumination requires no external power, and will continue as long as the tritium exists (and the phosphors do not themselves chemically change); the amount of light produced will drop to half its original value in 12.32 years, the half-life of tritium.\nBeta-plus (or positron) decay of a radioactive tracer isotope is the source of the positrons used in positron emission tomography (PET\u00a0scan).\nHistory.\nHenri Becquerel, while experimenting with fluorescence, accidentally found out that uranium exposed a photographic plate, wrapped with black paper, with some unknown radiation that could not be turned off like X-rays.\nErnest Rutherford continued these experiments and discovered two different kinds of radiation:\nHe published his results in 1899.\nIn 1900, Becquerel measured the mass-to-charge ratio (\"m\"/\"e\") for beta particles by the method of J. J. Thomson used to study cathode rays and identify the electron. He found that \"e\"/\"m\" for a beta particle is the same as for Thomson's electron, and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron.\nHealth.\nBeta particles are moderately penetrating in living tissue, and can cause spontaneous mutation in DNA.\nBeta sources can be used in radiation therapy to kill cancer cells.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37873", "revid": "15", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37873", "title": "Beta ray", "text": ""}
{"id": "37874", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37874", "title": "Beta particles", "text": ""}
{"id": "37875", "revid": "2819276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37875", "title": "August Ferdinand M\u00f6bius", "text": "German mathematician and astronomer (1790\u20131868)\nAugust Ferdinand M\u00f6bius (, ; ; 17\u00a0November 1790 \u2013 26\u00a0September 1868) was a German mathematician and theoretical astronomer.\nLife and education.\nM\u00f6bius was born in Schulpforta, Electorate of Saxony, and was descended on his mother's side from religious reformer Martin Luther. He was home-schooled until he was 13, when he attended the college in Schulpforta in 1803, and studied there, graduating in 1809. He then enrolled at the University of Leipzig, where he studied astronomy under the mathematician and astronomer Karl Mollweide. In 1813, he began to study astronomy under mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, while Gauss was the director of the G\u00f6ttingen Observatory. From there, he went to study with Carl Gauss's instructor, Johann Pfaff, at the University of Halle, where he completed his doctoral thesis \"The occultation of fixed stars\" in 1815. In 1816, he was appointed as Extraordinary Professor to the \"chair of astronomy and higher mechanics\" at the University of Leipzig. M\u00f6bius died in Leipzig in 1868 at the age of 77. \nHis son Theodor was a noted philologist.\nContributions.\nHe is best known for his discovery of the M\u00f6bius strip, a non-orientable two-dimensional surface with only one side when embedded in three-dimensional Euclidean space. It was independently discovered by Johann Benedict Listing a few months earlier. The M\u00f6bius configuration, formed by two mutually inscribed tetrahedra, is also named after him. M\u00f6bius was the first to introduce homogeneous coordinates into projective geometry. He is recognized for the introduction of the barycentric coordinate system. Before 1853 and Schl\u00e4fli's discovery of the 4-polytopes, M\u00f6bius (with Cayley and Grassmann) was one of only three other people who had also conceived of the possibility of geometry in more than three dimensions.\nMany mathematical concepts are named after him, including the M\u00f6bius plane, the M\u00f6bius transformations, important in projective geometry, and the M\u00f6bius transform of number theory. His interest in number theory led to the important M\u00f6bius function \u03bc(\"n\") and the M\u00f6bius inversion formula. In Euclidean geometry, he systematically developed the use of signed angles and line segments as a way of simplifying and unifying results.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37876", "revid": "11803024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37876", "title": "National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration", "text": "US government scientific agency\n \nThe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA ) is an American scientific and regulatory agency tasked with forecasting weather, monitoring oceanic and atmospheric conditions, charting the seas, conducting deep-sea exploration, and managing fishing and protection of marine mammals and endangered species in the US exclusive economic zone. The agency is part of the United States Department of Commerce and is headquartered in Silver Spring, Maryland.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nNOAA traces its history back to multiple agencies, some of which are among the earliest in the federal government:\n20th century.\nThe most direct predecessor of NOAA was the Environmental Science Services Administration (ESSA), into which several existing scientific agencies such as the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Weather Bureau, and the uniformed Corps were absorbed in 1965.\nNOAA was established within the Department of Commerce via the Reorganization Plan No. 4, and formed on October 3, 1970, after U.S. President Richard Nixon proposed creating a new agency to serve a national need for \"better protection of life and property from natural hazards... for a better understanding of the total environment... [and] for exploration and development leading to the intelligent use of our marine resources\".\nNOAA is a part of the Department of Commerce rather than the Department of Interior, because of a feud between President Nixon and his interior secretary, Wally Hickel, over the Nixon Administration's Vietnam War policy. Nixon did not like Hickel's letter urging Nixon to listen to the Vietnam War demonstrators, and punished Hickel by not putting NOAA in the Interior Department.\n21st century.\nIn 2007, NOAA celebrated 200 years of service in its role as successor to the U.S. Survey of the Coast.\nIn 2021, NOAA had 11,833 civilian employees. Its research and operations are further supported by 321 uniformed service members, who made up the NOAA Commissioned Corps.\nIn 2024, Project 2025 proposed to get rid of the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, which would \"dismantle\" NOAA's research division.\nNOAA has experienced numerous changes under the second presidency of Donald Trump. On February 27, 2025, several hundred NOAA staffers, mainly probationary, were laid off after staffers from the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) entered the headquarters of NOAA. By early March, 1,300 NOAA staff members (roughly 10% of the total workforce) were laid off.\nIn June, 2025, the Department of Defense announced it would no longer provide critical weather data to scientists and forecasters, including to NOAA staff.\nOrganizational structure.\nSilver Spring Campus.\nSince 1993, NOAA's administrative headquarters has been located at the Silver Spring Metro Center office complex in downtown Silver Spring, Maryland. The consolidated , four-building campus was constructed in 1993 and is home to over 40 NOAA sub-agencies and offices, including the National Weather Service.\nAdministrator.\nNeil Jacobs was confirmed as Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator on Oct 7th, 2025 and he took over shortly thereafter. Prior to that, NOAA Chief of Staff Laura Grimm had been the Acting Under Secretary since March 31, 2025 and prior to that Nancy Hann had held this role following the change of administrations on January 20, 2025 when Rick Spinrad resigned.\nNeil Jacobs, then Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Environmental Observation and Prediction, served as acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere at the US Department of Commerce and as NOAA's interim administrator from February 25, 2019, to January 20, 2021 during the first Trump Administration. Jacobs succeeded Timothy Gallaudet, who succeeded Benjamin Friedman. The three served in series as NOAA's interim administrator throughout the first Trump Administration.\nIndependent agency proposal.\nNOAA was created by an executive order in 1970 and has never been established in law, despite its critical role. In January 2023, \"The Washington Post\" reported that Congressman Frank Lucas, the new chair of the House Science, Space and Technology Committee, had released draft legislation to make NOAA an independent agency, rather than it being part of the Commerce Department. Lucas' push was in response to Republican leaders who had signaled plans to slash funding for agencies and programs that continued to receive annual appropriations, but had not been reauthorized by Congress. \"It's been made quite clear in the Republican conference that my friends don't want to fund programs that are not properly authorized,\" said Lucas. \"NOAA is very important, so we need to get it authorized.\"\nServices.\nNOAA works toward its mission through six major line offices: the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS), the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), the National Ocean Service (NOS), the National Weather Service (NWS), the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR) and the Office of Marine and Aviation Operations (OMAO). NOAA has more than a dozen staff offices, including the Office of the Federal Coordinator for Meteorology, the NOAA Central Library, the Office of Program Planning and Integration (PPI).\nNational Weather Service.\nThe National Weather Service (NWS) is tasked with providing \"weather, hydrologic and climate forecasts and warnings for the United States, its territories, adjacent waters and ocean areas, for the protection of life and property and the enhancement of the national economy\", according to NOAA. This is done through a collection of national and regional centers, 13 river forecast centers (RFCs), and more than 120 local weather forecast offices (WFOs). They are charged with issuing weather and river forecasts, advisories, watches, and warnings on a daily basis. They issue more than 734,000 weather and 850,000 river forecasts, and more than 45,000 severe weather warnings annually. NOAA data is also relevant to the issues of climate change and ozone depletion.\nThe NWS operates NEXRAD, a nationwide network of Doppler weather radars which can detect precipitation and their velocities. Many of their products are broadcast on NOAA Weather Radio, a network of radio transmitters that broadcasts weather forecasts, severe weather statements, watches and warnings 24 hours a day.\nNational Ocean Service.\nThe National Ocean Service (NOS) focuses on ensuring that ocean and coastal areas are safe, healthy, and productive. NOS scientists, natural resource managers, and specialists serve America by ensuring safe and efficient marine transportation, promoting innovative solutions to protect coastal communities, and conserving marine and coastal places.\nThe National Ocean Service is composed of eight program offices: the Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, the Office for Coastal Management, the National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science, the Office of Coast Survey, the Office of National Geodetic Survey, the Office of National Marine Sanctuaries, the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management, and the Office of Response and Restoration.\nThere are two NOS programs, the Mussel Watch Contaminant Monitoring Program and the NOAA Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS). There are two staff offices, the International Program Office and the Management and Budget Office.\nNational Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service.\nThe National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) was created by NOAA to operate and manage the US environmental satellite programs, and manage NWS data and those of other government agencies and departments. NESDIS's National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) archives data collected by the NOAA, United States Navy, United States Air Force, the Federal Aviation Administration, and meteorological services around the world. It comprises the Center for Weather and Climate, previously NOAA's National Climatic Data Center, the National Coastal Data Development Center (NCDDC), the National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC), and the National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC)).\nIn 1960, TIROS-1, NASA's first owned and operated geostationary satellite, was launched. Since 1966, NESDIS has managed polar orbiting satellites (POES). Since 1974, it has operated geosynchronous satellites (GOES). In 1979, NOAA's first polar-orbiting environmental satellite was launched. Current operational satellites include NOAA-15, NOAA-18, NOAA-19, GOES 13, GOES 14, GOES 15, Jason-2, DSCOVR and SWO-F1. In 1983, NOAA assumed operational responsibility for the Landsat satellite system.\nSince May 1998, NESDIS has operated the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites on behalf of the Air Force Weather Agency.\nNew generations of satellites are developed to succeed the current polar orbiting and geosynchronous satellites, the Joint Polar Satellite System, and GOES-R, which launched in November 2016.\nNESDIS runs the Office of Projects, Planning, and Analysis (OPPA) formerly the Office of Systems Development, the Office of Satellite Ground Systems (formerly the Office of Satellite Operations) the Office of Satellite and Project Operations, the Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR)], the Joint Polar Satellite System Program Office the GOES-R Program Office, the International &amp; Interagency Affairs Office, the Office of Space Commerce and the Office of System Architecture and Advanced Planning.\nNational Marine Fisheries Service.\nThe National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), also known as NOAA Fisheries, was initiated in 1871 with a primary goal of the research, protection, management, and restoration of commercial and recreational fisheries and their habitat, and protected species. The NMFS operates twelve headquarters offices, five regional offices, six fisheries science centers, and more than 20 laboratories throughout the United States and U.S. territories, which are the sites of research and management of marine resources. The NMFS operates the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office of Law Enforcement in Silver Spring, Maryland, which is the primary site of marine resource law enforcement.\nOffice of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research.\nNOAA's research, conducted through the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), is the driving force behind NOAA environmental products and services that protect life and property and promote economic growth. Research, conducted in OAR laboratories and by extramural programs, focuses on enhancing our understanding of environmental phenomena such as tornadoes, hurricanes, climate variability, solar flares, changes in the ozone, air pollution transport and dispersion, El Ni\u00f1o/La Ni\u00f1a events, fisheries productivity, ocean currents, deep sea thermal vents, and coastal ecosystem health. NOAA research also develops innovative technologies and observing systems.\nThe NOAA Research network consists of seven internal research laboratories, extramural research at 30 Sea Grant university and research programs, six undersea research centers, a research grants program through the Climate Program Office, and 13 cooperative institutes with academia. Through NOAA and its academic partners, thousands of scientists, engineers, technicians, and graduate students participate in furthering our knowledge of natural phenomena that affect the lives of us all.\nThe Air Resources Laboratory (ARL) is one of the laboratories in the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. It studies processes and develops models relating to climate and air quality, including the transport, dispersion, transformation and removal of pollutants from the ambient atmosphere. The emphasis of the ARL's work is on data interpretation, technology development and transfer. The specific goal of ARL research is to improve and eventually to institutionalize prediction of trends, dispersion of air pollutant plumes, air quality, atmospheric deposition, and related variables.\nThe Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory (AOML), is part of NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, located in Miami, Florida. AOML's research spans hurricanes, coastal ecosystems, oceans, and human health, climate studies, global carbon systems, and ocean observations. AOML's organizational structure consists of an Office of the Director and three scientific research divisions, Physical Oceanography, Ocean Chemistry and Ecosystems, and Hurricane Research. The Office of the Director oversees the Laboratory's scientific programs, as well as its financial, administrative, computer, outreach/education, and facility management services.\nResearch programs are augmented by the Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies (CIMAS), a joint enterprise with the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science. CIMAS enables AOML and university scientists to collaborate on research areas of mutual interest and facilitates the participation of students and visiting scientists. AOML is a member of a unique community of marine research and educational institutions located on Virginia Key in Miami, Florida.\nIn 1977, the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (PMEL) deployed the first successful moored equatorial current meter \u2013 the beginning of the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean, TAO, array. In 1984, the Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere program (TOGA) program began.\nThe Arctic Report Card is the annual update charts of the ongoing impact of changing conditions on the environment and community by NOAA. In 2019, it was compiled by 81 scientists from 12 nations.\nOffice of Marine and Aviation Operations.\nThe Office of Marine and Aviation Operations is responsible for the fleet of NOAA ships, aircraft, and diving operations. It is the largest research fleet in the Federal government. Its personnel is made up of federal civil service employees and NOAA Corps Commissioned Officers. The office is led by a NOAA Corps two-star Rear Admiral, who also commands the NOAA Corps.\nNational Geodetic Survey.\nThe National Geodetic Survey (NGS) is a major surveying organization in the United States.\nNational Integrated Drought Information System.\nThe National Integrated Drought Information System is a program within NOAA with an interagency mandate to coordinate and integrate drought research, building upon existing federal, tribal, state, and local partnerships in support of creating a national drought early warning information system.\nNOAA Commissioned Officer Corps.\nThe NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps is a uniformed service of men and women who operate NOAA ships and aircraft, and serve in scientific and administrative posts.\nIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.\nIn 2001, the chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's working group on climate science became Susan Solomon, an atmospheric chemist at NOAA's Boulder, Colorado offices.With co-chair Qin Dahe of Working Group 1 she produced the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4, 2007). She and other IPCC scientists, along with Vice President Al Gore, received the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize.\nHurricane Dorian controversy.\nHurricane Dorian was an extremely powerful and destructive tropical cyclone that devastated the northwestern Bahamas and caused significant damage to the Southeastern United States and Atlantic Canada in September 2019. By September 1, NOAA had issued a statement saying that the \"current forecast path of Dorian does not include Alabama\". However, on that date, President Donald Trump tweeted that Alabama, among other states, \"will most likely be hit (much) harder than anticipated\".\nShortly thereafter, the Birmingham, Alabama office of the National Weather Service issued a tweet that appeared to contradict Trump, saying that Alabama \"will NOT see any impacts from Dorian\". On September 6, NOAA published a statement from an unidentified spokesperson supporting Trump's September 1 claim. The statement also labelled the Birmingham, Alabama branch of the National Weather Service's contradiction of Trump as incorrect. \"The New York Times\" reported that the NOAA September 6 statement was prompted by a threat from U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross to fire high-level NOAA staff unless they supported Trump's claim. The Department of Commerce described this report as \"false\".\nMeanwhile, \"The Washington Post\" reported that NOAA had twice ordered National Weather Service employees not to provide \"any opinion\" on Hurricane Dorian and to \"only stick with official National Hurricane Center forecasts\". The first order came after Trump's September 1 comments and the Birmingham, Alabama National Weather Service's contradiction of Trump. The second order came on September 4 after Trump displayed an August 29 map that was altered with a black marker to show that Hurricane Dorian may hit Alabama.\nOn September 9, speaking at an Alabama National Weather Service (NWS) meeting the Director of the National Weather Service gave a speech supporting Birmingham NWS and said the team \"stopped public panic\" and \"ensured public safety\". He said that when Birmingham issued their instructions they were not aware that the calls they were receiving were a result of Trump's tweet. The acting chief scientist and assistant administrator for the ocean and atmospheric research said he is \"pursuing the potential violations\" of the agency's scientific integrity policy.\nFlag.\nThe NOAA flag is a modification of the flag of one of its predecessor organizations, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. The Coast and Geodetic Survey's flag, authorized in 1899 and in use until 1970, was blue, with a white circle centered in it and a red triangle centered within the circle. It symbolized the use of triangulation in surveying, and was flown by ships of the Survey.\nWhen NOAA was established in 1970 and the Coast and Geodetic Survey's assets became a part of NOAA, NOAA based its own flag on that of the Coast and Geodetic Survey. The NOAA flag is, in essence, the Coast and Geodetic Survey flag, with the NOAA logo\u2014a circle divided by the silhouette of a seabird into an upper dark blue and a lower light blue section, but with the \"NOAA\" legend omitted\u2014centered within the red triangle. NOAA ships in commission display the NOAA flag; those with only one mast fly it immediately beneath the ship's commissioning pennant or the personal flag of a civilian official or flag officer if one is aboard the ship, while multimasted vessels fly it at the masthead of the forwardmost mast. NOAA ships fly the same ensign as United States Navy ships but fly the NOAA flag as a distinguishing mark to differentiate themselves from Navy ships.\nSee also.\nFormer:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37877", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37877", "title": "Nyquist sampling theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "37879", "revid": "9203640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37879", "title": "Brain-wash", "text": ""}
{"id": "37880", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37880", "title": "Aleatory probability", "text": ""}
{"id": "37881", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37881", "title": "Epistemic probability", "text": ""}
{"id": "37882", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37882", "title": "Crocodile", "text": "Family of large reptilian carnivores\nA crocodile (family Crocodylidae) or true crocodile is a large, semiaquatic reptile that lives throughout the tropics in Africa, Asia, the Americas and Australia. The term \"crocodile\" is sometimes used more loosely to include all extant members of the order Crocodilia, which includes the alligators and caimans (both members of the family Alligatoridae), the gharial and false gharial (both members of the family Gavialidae) as well as other extinct taxa.\nCrocodile size, morphology, behaviour and ecology differ among species. However, they have many similarities in these areas as well. All crocodiles are semiaquatic and tend to congregate in freshwater habitats such as rivers, lakes, wetlands and sometimes in brackish water and saltwater. They are carnivorous animals, feeding mostly on vertebrates such as fish, reptiles, birds and mammals, and sometimes on invertebrates such as molluscs and crustaceans, depending on species and age. All crocodiles are tropical species that, unlike alligators, are very sensitive to cold. Many species are at the risk of extinction, some being classified as critically endangered.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"crocodile\" (\"croc.\") was derived during the Middle English period from the transliteration \"krok\u00f3dilos\" of a Greek word which translates as \"stones worm\". Through Ancient Greece the English language word has developed from Grecian origination in Anatolia.\nA very early extant Ancient Greek source is an Aesop's Fable named of the sixth century BC. Herodotus a century after in consideration of the Greek word thought it was from the Ionic period.\nThe Latin language word \"crocodilus\" existed in first century AD in the work \"Naturalis Historia\" of Pliny the Elder. Examples in writing in the sixth and seventh century AD, and existed, though and were forms in Medieval Latin. The Latin form is found as \"cocodrille\" c. the 13th century in the Old French work Li livres dou tresor, in which the croc. is \"jaune\" (yellow).\nThe earliest known source in the English language is within the work Kyng Alisaunder from towards the beginning of the 14th century, a magical romance poetry work of rhyming couplets, where the word is found line 5720:\nForth went the kyng wondres sekynde :\nA griselich hest he gonne fynde ; \nSo mychel seigh he neuere, ne non swiche ;\nTwo heudes it had wel ferlich\nTo a cokedrill that on was liche,\nThat others the monoceros selcouthliche.\nWriting sometime after 1483 on his visit to the Holy Lands Felix Fabri in German and Latin mentions the Cocodrillen and \"cocodrillos\" respectively. By 1538 the exact same form of the modern word as the current English is found in French; \"croc\". is within a poem of Edmund Spenser, thought written in 1579\u201380, and in the works of William Shakespeare, who died in 1616. The similitude of the English word formation to a Latin source was caused at least by the transmission of a relevant ancient science from the influx of the publication of translations of Pliny the Elder some time towards the end of fourteenth and, or, beginning of fifteenth century. The publication of concrete realization in the anatomical work of Andreas Vesalius during 1543 inspired the creation of monographs and books of animals contributing to new science in zoology.\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nCrocodylidae was named as a family by Georges Cuvier in 1807. It belongs to the larger superfamily Crocodyloidea, which also includes additional extinct crocodile relatives. These all belong to the order Crocodilia, which also includes alligators and gharials.\nAlthough crocodiles, alligators, and the gharial are similar in appearance, they belong to separate biological families. The gharial, with its narrow snout, is easier to distinguish, while morphological differences are more difficult to spot in crocodiles and alligators. The most obvious external differences are visible in the head, with crocodiles having narrower and longer heads, with a more V-shaped than a U-shaped snout compared to alligators and caimans. Another obvious trait is that the upper and lower jaws of the crocodiles are the same width, and the teeth in the lower jaw fall along the edge or outside the upper jaw when the mouth is closed; therefore, all teeth are visible, unlike an alligator, which possesses in the upper jaw small depressions into which the lower teeth fit. Also, when the crocodile's mouth is closed, the large fourth tooth in the lower jaw fits into a constriction in the upper jaw. For hard-to-distinguish specimens, the protruding tooth is the most reliable feature to define the species' family. Crocodiles have more webbing on the toes of the hind feet and can better tolerate saltwater due to specialized salt glands for filtering out salt, which are present, but non-functioning, in alligators. Another trait that separates crocodiles from other crocodilians is their much higher levels of aggression.\nCrocodylidae is cladistically defined as a crown group composed of the last common ancestor of the Nile crocodile (\"Crocodylus niloticus\"), the Dwarf crocodile (\"Osteolaemus tetraspis\"), and all of its descendants. It contains two subfamilies: Crocodylinae and Osteolaeminae. Crocodylinae contains 13\u201314 living species, as well as 6 extinct species. Osteolaeminae was named by Christopher Brochu in 2003 as a subfamily of Crocodylidae separate from Crocodylinae, and contains the two extant genera \"Osteolaemus\" and \"Mecistops\", along with several extinct genera. The number of extant species within Osteolaeminae is currently in question.\nPhylogeny.\nRecent molecular studies using DNA sequencing have shown crocodiles to be more closely related to the gavialids rather than to alligators, contrary to prior theories based on morphological studies alone.\nBelow is a cladogram showing the relationships of the major extant crocodile groups based on molecular studies, excluding separate extinct taxa:\nBelow is a more detailed cladogram of Crocodylidae, based on a 2021 study using paleogenomics that extracted DNA from the extinct \"Voay\". Recently recognised species (\"M. leptorhynchus\", \"C. halli\" and the third \"Osteolaemus\" species) placed according to 2023 study by Sales-Oliveira \"et al.\"\nAlternatively, some morphological studies have recovered \"Mecistops\" as a basal member of Crocodylinae, more closely related to \"Crocodylus\" than to \"Osteolaemus\" and the other members of Osteolaeminae, as shown in the cladogram below.\nSpecies.\nA total of 18 extant species have been recognized. Further genetic study is needed for the confirmation of proposed species under the genus \"Osteolaemus\".\nCharacteristics.\nApart from the advantage conferred by its sufficiently large size relative to other animals in the ecosystem, other physical traits contribute a crocodile's position as predator. Its external morphology is a sign of its aquatic and predatory lifestyle. Its streamlined body enables it to swim swiftly; it also tucks its feet to the side while swimming, making it faster by decreasing water resistance. Crocodiles have webbed feet which, though not used to propel them through the water, allow them to make fast turns and sudden moves in the water or initiate swimming. Webbed feet are an advantage in shallow water, where the animals sometimes move around by walking. Crocodiles have a palatal flap, a rigid tissue at the back of the mouth that blocks the entry of water. The palate has a special path from the nostril to the glottis that bypasses the mouth. The nostrils are closed during submergence.\nLike other archosaurs, crocodilians are diapsid, although their post-temporal fenestrae are reduced. The walls of the braincase are bony but lack supratemporal and postfrontal bones. Their tongues are not free, but held in place by a membrane that limits movement; as a result, crocodiles are unable to stick out their tongues. Crocodiles have smooth skin on their bellies and sides, while their dorsal surfaces are armoured with large osteoderms. The armoured skin has scales and is thick and rugged, providing some protection. They are still able to absorb heat through this armour, as a network of small capillaries allows blood through the scales to absorb heat. The osteoderms are highly vascularised and aid in calcium balance, both to neutralize acids while the animal cannot breathe underwater and to provide calcium for eggshell formation. Crocodilian tegument have pores believed to be sensory in function, analogous to the lateral line in fishes. They are particularly seen on their upper and lower jaws. Another possibility is that they are secretory, as they produce an oily substance which appears to flush mud off.\nSize.\nSize greatly varies among species, from the dwarf crocodile to the saltwater crocodile. Species of the dwarf crocodile \"Osteolaemus\" grow to an adult size of just , whereas the saltwater crocodile can grow to sizes over and weigh over . Several other large species can reach over long and weigh over . Crocodilians show pronounced sexual dimorphism, with males growing much larger and more rapidly than females. Despite their large adult sizes, crocodiles start their lives at around long. The largest species of crocodile is the saltwater crocodile, found in eastern India, northern Australia, throughout South-east Asia, and in the surrounding waters.\nThe brain volume of two adult crocodiles was 5.6\u00a0cm3 for a spectacled caiman and 8.5\u00a0cm3 for a larger Nile crocodile.\nThe largest crocodile ever held in captivity is a saltwater\u2013Siamese hybrid named Yai (, meaning big; 10 June 1972 \u2013 15 August 2025) at the Samutprakarn Crocodile Farm and Zoo, Thailand. This animal measures in length and weighs .\nThe longest crocodile captured alive was Lolong, a saltwater crocodile which was measured at and weighed at by a National Geographic team in Agusan del Sur Province, Philippines.\nTeeth.\nCrocodiles are polyphyodonts; they are able to replace each of their 80 teeth up to 50 times in their 35- to 75-year lifespan. Next to each full-grown tooth, there is a small replacement tooth and an odontogenic stem cell in the dental lamina in standby that can be activated if required.\nBiology and behaviour.\nCrocodilians are more closely related to birds and dinosaurs than to most animals classified as reptiles, the three families being included in the group Archosauria ('ruling reptiles'). Despite their prehistoric look, crocodiles are among the more biologically complex reptiles. Unlike other reptiles, a crocodile has a cerebral cortex and a four-chambered heart. Crocodilians also have the functional equivalent of a diaphragm by incorporating muscles used for aquatic locomotion into respiration. Salt glands are present in the tongues of crocodiles and they have a pore opening on the surface of the tongue, a trait that separates them from alligators. Salt glands are dysfunctional in Alligatoridae. Their function appears to be similar to that of salt glands in marine turtles. Crocodiles do not have sweat glands and release heat through their mouths. They often sleep with their mouths open and may pant like a dog. Four species of freshwater crocodile climb trees to bask in areas lacking a shoreline.\nSenses.\nCrocodiles have acute senses, an evolutionary advantage that makes them successful predators. The eyes, ears and nostrils are located on top of the head, allowing the crocodile to lie low in the water, almost totally submerged and hidden from prey.\nVision.\nCrocodiles have very good night vision, and are mostly nocturnal hunters. They use the disadvantage of most prey animals' poor nocturnal vision to their advantage. The light receptors in crocodilians' eyes include cones and numerous rods, so it is assumed all crocodilians can see colours. Crocodiles have vertical-slit shaped pupils, similar to those of domestic cats. One explanation for the evolution of slit pupils is that they exclude light more effectively than a circular pupil, helping to protect the eyes during daylight. On the rear wall of the eye is a tapetum lucidum, which reflects incoming light back onto the retina, thus utilizing the small amount of light available at night to best advantage. In addition to the protection of the upper and lower eyelids, crocodiles have a nictitating membrane (sometimes called a \"third eyelid\") that can be drawn over the eye from the inner corner while the lids are open. The eyeball surface is thus protected under the water while a certain degree of vision is still possible.\nOlfaction.\nCrocodilian sense of smell is also very well developed, aiding them to detect prey or animal carcasses that are either on land or in water, from far away. It is possible that crocodiles use olfaction in the egg prior to hatching.\nChemoreception in crocodiles is especially interesting because they hunt in both terrestrial and aquatic surroundings. Crocodiles have only one olfactory chamber and the vomeronasal organ is absent in the adults indicating all olfactory perception is limited to the olfactory system. Behavioural and olfactometer experiments indicate that crocodiles detect both air-borne and water-soluble chemicals and use their olfactory system for hunting. When above water, crocodiles enhance their ability to detect volatile odorants by gular pumping, a rhythmic movement of the floor of the pharynx. Crocodiles close their nostrils when submerged, so olfaction underwater is unlikely. Underwater food detection is presumably gustatory and tactile.\nHearing.\nCrocodiles can hear well; their tympanic membranes are concealed by flat flaps that may be raised or lowered by muscles.\nTouch.\nThe touch sensors, concentrated in crocodile skin, can be thicker than those in human fingerprints. Crocodiles can feel the touch on their skin.\nCranial: The upper and lower jaws are covered with sensory pits, visible as small, black speckles on the skin, the crocodilian version of the lateral line organs seen in fish and many amphibians, though arising from a completely different origin. These pigmented nodules encase bundles of nerve fibers innervated beneath by branches of the trigeminal nerve. They respond to the slightest disturbance in surface water, detecting vibrations and small pressure changes as small as a single drop. This makes it possible for crocodiles to detect prey, danger and intruders, even in total darkness. These sense organs are known as domed pressure receptors (DPRs).\nPost-Cranial: While alligators and caimans have DPRs only on their jaws, crocodiles have similar organs on almost every scale on their bodies. The function of the DPRs on the jaws is clear; to catch prey, but it is still not clear what the function is of the organs on the rest of the body. The receptors flatten when exposed to increased osmotic pressure, such as that experienced when swimming in sea water hyperosmotic to the body fluids. When contact between the integument and the surrounding sea water solution is blocked, crocodiles are found to lose their ability to discriminate salinities. It has been proposed that the flattening of the sensory organ in hyperosmotic sea water is sensed by the animal as \"touch\", but interpreted as chemical information about its surroundings. This might be why in alligators they are absent on the rest of the body.\nHunting and diet.\nCrocodiles are ambush predators, waiting for fish or land animals to come close, then rushing out to attack. Crocodiles mostly eat fish, amphibians, crustaceans, molluscs, birds, reptiles, and mammals, and they occasionally cannibalize smaller crocodiles. What a crocodile eats varies greatly with species, size and age. From the mostly fish-eating species, like the slender-snouted and freshwater crocodiles, to the larger species like the Nile crocodile and the saltwater crocodile that prey on large mammals, such as buffalo, deer and wild boar, diet shows great diversity. Diet is also greatly affected by the size and age of the individual within the same species. All young crocodiles hunt mostly invertebrates and small fish, gradually moving on to larger prey. Being ectothermic (cold-blooded) predators, they have a very slow metabolism, so they can survive long periods without food. Despite their appearance of being slow, crocodiles have a very fast strike and are top predators in their environment, and various species have been observed attacking and killing other predators such as sharks and big cats. Crocodiles are also known to be aggressive scavengers who feed upon carrion and steal from other predators. Evidence suggests that crocodiles also feed upon fruits, based on the discovery of seeds in stools and stomachs from many subjects as well as accounts of them feeding.\nCrocodiles have the most acidic stomach of any vertebrate. They can easily digest bones, hooves and horns. The BBC TV reported that a Nile crocodile that has lurked a long time underwater to catch prey builds up a large oxygen debt. When it has caught and eaten that prey, it closes its right aortic arch and uses its left aortic arch to flush blood loaded with carbon dioxide from its muscles directly to its stomach; the resulting excess acidity in its blood supply makes it much easier for the stomach lining to secrete more stomach acid to quickly dissolve bulks of swallowed prey flesh and bone. Many large crocodilians swallow stones (called gastroliths or stomach stones), which may act as ballast to balance their bodies or assist in crushing food, similar to grit ingested by birds. Herodotus claimed that Nile crocodiles had a symbiotic relationship with certain birds, such as the Egyptian plover, which enter the crocodile's mouth and pick leeches feeding on the crocodile's blood; with no evidence of this interaction actually occurring in any crocodile species, it is most likely mythical or allegorical fiction.\nBite.\nSince they feed by grabbing and holding onto their prey, they have evolved sharp teeth for piercing and holding onto flesh, and powerful muscles to close the jaws and hold them shut. The teeth are not well-suited to tearing flesh off of large prey items as are the dentition and claws of many mammalian carnivores, the hooked bills and talons of raptorial birds, or the serrated teeth of sharks. However, this is an advantage rather than a disadvantage to the crocodile since the properties of the teeth allow it to hold onto prey with the least possibility of the prey animal escaping. Cutting teeth, combined with the exceptionally high bite force, would pass through flesh easily enough to leave an escape opportunity for prey. The jaws can bite down with immense force, by far the strongest bite of any animal. The force of a large crocodile's bite is more than , which was measured in a Nile crocodile, in the field; comparing to for a Rottweiler, for a hyena, for an American alligator, and for the largest confirmed great white shark.\nA long saltwater crocodile has been confirmed as having the strongest bite force ever recorded for an animal in a laboratory setting. It was able to apply a bite force value of , and thus surpassed the previous record of made by a long American alligator. Based on regression of mean body mass versus mean bite force, the bite force of a saltwater crocodile with an estimated mass of was estimated at between and . The study, led by Dr. Gregory M. Erickson, also shed light on the larger, extinct species of crocodilians. Since crocodile anatomy has barely changed over the last 200 million years, current data on modern crocodilians can be used to estimate the bite force of extinct species. An \"Deinosuchus\" would apply a force of , nearly twice that of the latest, higher bite force estimations of \"Tyrannosaurus\" (). The extraordinary bite of crocodilians is a result of their anatomy. The space for the jaw muscle in the skull is very large, which is easily visible from the outside as a bulge at each side. The muscle is so stiff, it is almost as hard as bone to touch, as if it were the continuum of the skull. Another trait is that most of the muscle in a crocodile's jaw is arranged for clamping down. Despite the strong muscles to close the jaw, crocodiles have extremely small and weak muscles to open the jaw. Crocodiles can thus be subdued for study or transport by taping their jaws or holding their jaws shut with large rubber bands cut from automobile inner tubes.\nLocomotion.\nCrocodiles can move quickly over short distances, even out of water. The land speed record for a crocodile is measured in a galloping Australian freshwater crocodile. Maximum speed varies between species. Some species can gallop, including Cuban crocodiles, Johnston's crocodiles, New Guinea crocodiles, African dwarf crocodiles, and even small Nile crocodiles. The fastest means by which most species can move is a \"belly run\", in which the body moves in a snake-like (sinusoidal) fashion, limbs splayed out to either side paddling away frantically while the tail whips to and fro. Crocodiles can reach speeds of when they \"belly run\", and often faster if slipping down muddy riverbanks. When a crocodile walks quickly, it holds its legs in a straighter and more upright position under its body, which is called the \"high walk\". This walk allows a speed of up to 5\u00a0km/h.\nCrocodiles may possess a homing instinct. In northern Australia, three rogue saltwater crocodiles were relocated by helicopter, but returned to their original locations within three weeks, based on data obtained from tracking devices attached to them.\nLongevity.\nMeasuring crocodile age is unreliable, although several techniques are used to derive a reasonable guess. The most common method is to measure lamellar growth rings in bones and teeth\u2014each ring corresponds to a change in growth rate which typically occurs once a year between dry and wet seasons. Bearing these inaccuracies in mind, it can be safely said that all crocodile species have an average lifespan of at least 30\u201340 years, and in the case of larger species an average of 60\u201370 years. The oldest crocodiles appear to be the largest species. \"C. porosus\" is estimated to live around 70 years on average, with limited evidence of some individuals exceeding 100 years.\nIn captivity, some individuals are claimed to have lived for over a century. A male crocodile lived to an estimated age of 110\u2013115 years in a Russian zoo in Yekaterinburg. Named Kolya, he joined the zoo around 1913 to 1915, fully grown, after touring in an animal show, and lived until 1995. A male freshwater crocodile lived to an estimated age of 120\u2013140 years at the Australia Zoo. Known affectionately as \"Mr. Freshie\", he was rescued around 1970 by Bob Irwin and Steve Irwin, after being shot twice by hunters and losing an eye as a result, and lived until 2010. Crocworld Conservation Centre, in Scottburgh, South Africa, claims to have a male Nile crocodile that was born in 1900. Named Henry, the crocodile is said to have lived in Botswana along the Okavango River, according to centre director Martin Rodrigues.\nSocial behaviour and vocalization.\nCrocodiles are the most social of reptiles. Even though they do not form social groups, many species congregate in certain sections of rivers, tolerating each other at times of feeding and basking. Most species are not highly territorial, with the exception of the saltwater crocodile, which is a highly territorial and aggressive species: a mature, male saltwater crocodile will not tolerate any other males at any time of the year, but most other species are more flexible. There is a certain form of hierarchy in crocodiles: the largest and heaviest males are at the top, having access to the best basking site, while females are priority during a group feeding of a big kill or carcass. A good example of the hierarchy in crocodiles would be the case of the Nile crocodile. This species clearly displays all of these behaviours. Studies in this area are not thorough, however, and many species are yet to be studied in greater detail. Mugger crocodiles are also known to show toleration in group feedings and tend to congregate in certain areas. However, males of all species are aggressive towards each other during mating season, to gain access to females.\nCrocodiles are also the most vocal of all reptiles, producing a wide variety of sounds during various situations and conditions, depending on species, age, size and sex. Depending on the context, some species can communicate over 20 different messages through vocalizations alone. Some of these vocalizations are made during social communication, especially during territorial displays towards the same sex and courtship with the opposite sex; the common concern being reproduction. Therefore most conspecific vocalization is made during the breeding season, with the exception being year-round territorial behaviour in some species and quarrels during feeding. Crocodiles also produce different distress calls and in aggressive displays to their own kind and other animals; notably other predators during interspecific predatory confrontations over carcasses and terrestrial kills.\nSpecific vocalisations include\u00a0\u2014\nReproduction.\nMating.\nCourtship takes place in a series of behavioural interactions that include a variety of snout rubbing and submissive display that can take a long time. Mating always takes place in water, where the pair can be observed mating several times.\nEgg-laying &amp; nesting.\nEgg-laying usually takes place at night and about 30\u201340 minutes, which are laid in either holes or mound nests, depending on species. The eggs are hard shelled, but translucent at the time of egg-laying. Depending on the species of crocodile, 7 to 95 eggs are laid. Scutes may play a role in calcium storage for eggshell formation.\nNesting periods range from a few weeks up to six months. A hole nest is usually excavated in sand and a mound nest is usually constructed out of vegetation. Females can build or dig several trial nests which appear incomplete and abandoned later. Females are highly protective of their nests and young. Crocodile embryos do not have sex chromosomes, and unlike humans, sex is not determined genetically. Sex is determined by temperature, where at or less most hatchlings are females and at , offspring are of both sexes. A temperature of gives mostly males whereas above in some species continues to give males, but in other species resulting in females, which are sometimes called high-temperature females. Temperature also affects growth and survival rate of the young, which may explain the sexual dimorphism in crocodiles. The average incubation period is around 80 days, and also is dependent on temperature and species that usually ranges from 65 to 95 days. The eggshell structure is very conservative through evolution but there are enough changes to tell different species apart by their eggshell microstructure.\nAt the time of hatching, the young start calling within the eggs. They have an egg-tooth at the tip of their snouts, which is developed from the skin, and that helps them pierce out of the shell. Hearing the calls, the female usually excavates the nest and sometimes takes the unhatched eggs in her mouth, slowly rolling the eggs to help the process. The young is usually carried to the water in the mouth. She would then introduce her hatchlings to the water and even feed them. The mother would then take care of her young for over a year before the next mating season. In the absence of the mother crocodile, the father would act in her place to take care of the young. However, even with a sophisticated parental nurturing, young crocodiles have a very high mortality rate due to their vulnerability to predation. A group of hatchlings is called a pod or cr\u00e8che and may be protected for months.\nCognition.\nCrocodiles possess some advanced cognitive abilities. Crocodiles cooperatively hunt. Large numbers of crocodiles swim in circles to trap fish and take turns snatching them. In hunting larger prey, crocodiles swarm in, with one holding the prey down as the others rip it apart.\nVladimir Dinets of the University of Tennessee, observing crocodile's use of twigs as bait was inconclusive.\nRelationship with humans.\nDanger to humans.\nThe larger species of crocodiles are very dangerous to humans, mainly because of their ability to strike before the person can react. The saltwater crocodile and Nile crocodile are the most dangerous, killing hundreds of people each year in parts of Southeast Asia and Africa. The mugger crocodile and American crocodile are also dangerous to humans.\nCrocodile products.\nCrocodiles are protected in many parts of the world, but are also farmed commercially. Their hides are tanned and used to make leather goods such as shoes and handbags; crocodile meat is also considered a delicacy. The most commonly farmed species are the saltwater and Nile crocodiles, while a hybrid of the saltwater and the rare Siamese crocodile is also bred in Asian farms. Farming has resulted in an increase in the saltwater crocodile population in Australia, as eggs are usually harvested from the wild, so landowners have an incentive to conserve their habitat. Crocodile leather can be made into goods such as wallets, briefcases, purses, handbags, belts, hats, and shoes. Crocodile oil has been used for various purposes. Crocodiles were eaten by Vietnamese while they were taboo and off limits for Chinese. Vietnamese women who married Chinese men adopted the Chinese taboo.\nCrocodile meat is consumed in some countries, such as Australia, Ethiopia, Thailand, South Africa, China, and Cuba (in pickled form). It is also occasionally eaten as an \"exotic\" delicacy in the western world. Cuts of meat include backstrap and tail fillet.\nDue to high demand for crocodile products, TRAFFIC states that 1,418,487 Nile Crocodile skins were exported from Africa between 2006 and 2015.\nCrocodile hunting and conservation.\nAboriginal Australians harvested eggs and hunted crocodiles in a sustainable way for many thousands of years. The Brinkin people (aka Marrithiyal) of the Daly River in the Northern Territory (NT) used harpoons and bamboo, and even their own hands to capture crocodiles for food. After settlement of northern Australia, in the late-19th and early 20th centuries, non-Indigenous people killed individual crocodiles, mostly by locals to protect the population, or novelty-seeking visitors, or just opportunistically, so numbers were not noticeably reduced. From the 1930s, commercial hunting began, with Aboriginal people often employed to kill the crocodiles using traditional methods. From the 1940s to the 1960s, hunting began on a larger scale using .303 rifles. They were hunted for leather, with the skins shipped to plants in capital cities. Western Australia banned hunting freshwater crocodiles in 1962 and saltwater crocodiles in 1970, while NT bans were brought in 1964 and 1971; Queensland did not pass such legislation. The federal government later banned the export of crocodile skins, which brought commercial hunting to an end in Queensland. They have been a protected species since the 1970s, when numbers were down to approximately 3,000 in the NT at the lowest estimate. In 2021, after several attacks on humans by the \"salties\" and an estimated population of around 200,000 had been reached, Queensland politician Bob Katter called for the reintroduction of hunting.\nIn religion and mythology.\nCrocodiles have appeared in various forms in religions across the world. Ancient Egypt had Sobek, the crocodile-headed god, with his cult-city Crocodilopolis, as well as Taweret, the goddess of childbirth and fertility, with the back and tail of a crocodile. The Jukun shrine in the Wukari Federation, Nigeria is dedicated to crocodiles in thanks for their aid during migration. In Madagascar various peoples such as the Sakalava and Antandroy see crocodiles as ancestor spirits and under local \"fady\" often offer them food; in the case of the latter at least a crocodile features prominently as an ancestor deity.\nCrocodiles appear in different forms in Hinduism. Varuna, a Vedic and Hindu god, rides a part-crocodile makara; his consort Varuni rides a crocodile. Similarly the goddess personifications of the Ganga and Yamuna rivers are often depicted as riding crocodiles. Also in India, in Goa, crocodile worship is practised, including the annual \"Mannge Thapnee\" ceremony.\nSikh warriors known as nihang also have connections with crocodiles. \"Nihang\" may come from the Persian word for a mythical sea creature (). The term owes its origin to Mughal historians, who compared the ferocity of the Akali with that of crocodiles. In Sikhism however, \"Akali\" refers to the immortal army of Akal (god).\nIn Latin America, Cipactli was the giant earth crocodile of the Aztec and other Nahua peoples.\nThe name of Surabaya, Indonesia, is locally believed to be derived from the words \"suro\" (shark) and \"boyo\" (crocodile), two creatures which, in a local myth, fought each other in order to gain the title of \"the strongest and most powerful animal\" in the area. It was said that the two powerful animals agreed for a truce and set boundaries; that the shark's domain would be in the sea while the crocodile's domain would be on the land. However one day the shark swam into the river estuary to hunt; this angered the crocodile, who declared it his territory. The Shark argued that the river was a water-realm which meant that it was shark territory, while the crocodile argued that the river flowed deep inland, so it was therefore crocodile territory. The two animals bit each other and a ferocious fight ensued. Finally the shark, badly bitten, fled to the open sea, and in the end the crocodile ruled the estuarine area that today is the city. Another source alludes to a Jayabaya prophecy\u2014a 12th-century psychic king of Kediri Kingdom\u2014as he foresaw a fight between a giant white shark and a giant white crocodile taking place in the area. This is sometimes interpreted as a foretelling of the Mongol invasion of Java, a major conflict between the forces of the Kublai Khan, Mongol ruler of China, and those of Raden Wijaya's Majapahit in 1293. The two animals are now used as the city's symbol, with the two facing and circling each other, as depicted in a statue appropriately located near the entrance to the city zoo (see photo on the Surabaya page).\nIn language and as symbols.\nThe term \"crocodile tears\" (and equivalents in other languages) refers to a false, insincere display of emotion, such as a hypocrite crying fake tears of grief. It is derived from an ancient anecdote that crocodiles weep in order to lure their prey, or that they cry for the victims they are eating, first told in the \"Bibliotheca\" by Photios I of Constantinople. The story is repeated in bestiaries such as \"De bestiis et aliis rebus\". This tale was first spread widely in English in the stories of the \"Travels of Sir John Mandeville\" in the 14th century, and appears in several of Shakespeare's plays. In fact, crocodiles can and do generate tears, but they do not actually cry.\nIn the UK, a row of schoolchildren walking in pairs, or two by two is known as \"crocodile\".\nIn politics, a crocodile has been used in different countries to describe politicians and political groups, sometimes as a compliment for a leader seen as strong and strategic, while in others it is a negative label linked to corruption, greed, or predatory behavior.\nFashion logos.\nThe French clothing company Lacoste features a crocodile in its logo. The American shoe company Crocs also uses this imagery in its logo.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37885", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37885", "title": "Falstaff (opera)", "text": "1893 opera by Giuseppe Verdi\nFalstaff () is a comic opera in three acts by the Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi. The Italian-language libretto was adapted by Arrigo Boito from the play \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" and scenes from \"Henry\u00a0IV, Part\u00a01\" and \"Part\u00a02\", by William Shakespeare. The work premiered on 9 February 1893 at La Scala, Milan.\nVerdi wrote \"Falstaff\", the last of his 26 operas, as he approached the age of 80. It was his second comedy, and his third work based on a Shakespeare play, following \"Macbeth\" and \"Otello\". The plot revolves around the thwarted, sometimes farcical, efforts of the fat knight Sir John Falstaff to seduce two married women to gain access to their husbands' wealth.\nVerdi was concerned about working on a new opera at his advanced age, but he yearned to write a comic work and was pleased with Boito's draft libretto. It took the collaborators three years from mid-1889 to complete. Although the prospect of a new opera from Verdi aroused immense interest in Italy and around the world, \"Falstaff\" did not prove to be as popular as earlier works in the composer's canon. After the initial performances in Italy, other European countries and the US, the work was neglected until the conductor Arturo Toscanini insisted on its revival at La Scala and the Metropolitan Opera in New York from the late 1890s into the next century. Some felt that the piece suffered from a lack of the full-blooded melodies of the best of Verdi's previous operas, a view that Toscanini strongly opposed. Conductors of the generation after Toscanini who championed the work included Herbert von Karajan, Georg Solti and Leonard Bernstein. The work is now part of the standard operatic repertory.\nVerdi made numerous changes to the music after the first performance, and editors have found difficulty in agreeing on a definitive score. The work was first recorded in 1932 and has subsequently received many studio and live recordings. Singers closely associated with the title role have included Victor Maurel (the first Falstaff), Mariano Stabile, Giuseppe Valdengo, Tito Gobbi, Geraint Evans, Bryn Terfel and Ambrogio Maestri.\nComposition history.\nConception.\nBy 1889 Verdi had been an opera composer for more than fifty years. He had written 27 operas, of which only one was a comedy, his second work, \"Un giorno di regno\", staged unsuccessfully in 1840. His fellow composer Rossini commented that he admired Verdi greatly, but thought him incapable of writing a comedy. Verdi disagreed and said that he longed to write another light-hearted opera, but nobody would give him the chance. He had included moments of comedy even in his tragic operas, for example in \"Un ballo in maschera\" and \"La forza del destino\".\nFor a comic subject Verdi considered Cervantes' \"Don Quixote\" and plays by Goldoni, Moli\u00e8re and Labiche, but found none of them wholly suitable. The singer Victor Maurel sent him a French libretto based on Shakespeare's \"The Taming of the Shrew\". Verdi liked it, but replied that \"to deal with it properly you need a Rossini or a Donizetti\". Following the success of \"Otello\" in 1887 he commented, \"After having relentlessly massacred so many heroes and heroines, I have at last the right to laugh a little.\" He confided his ambition to the librettist of \"Otello\", Arrigo Boito. Boito said nothing at the time, but he secretly began work on a libretto based on \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" with additional material taken from \"Henry IV\", parts 1 and 2. Many composers had set the play to music, with little success, among them Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf (1796), Antonio Salieri (1799), Michael William Balfe (1835) and Adolphe Adam (1856). The first version to secure a place in the operatic repertoire was Otto Nicolai's \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" in 1849, but its success was largely confined to German opera houses.\nBoito was doubly pleased with \"The Merry Wives\" as a plot. Not only was it Shakespearian, it was based in part on Trecento Italian works \u2013 \"Il Pecorone\" by Ser Giovanni Fiorentino, and Boccaccio's \"Decameron\". Boito adopted a deliberately archaic form of Italian to \"lead Shakespeare's farce back to its clear Tuscan source\", as he put it. He trimmed the plot, halved the number of characters in the play, and gave the character of Falstaff more depth by incorporating dozens of passages from \"Henry IV\".\nVerdi received the draft libretto a few weeks later, by early July 1889, at a time when his interest had been piqued by reading Shakespeare's play: \"Benissimo! Benissimo!\u00a0... No one could have done better than you\", he wrote back. Like Boito, Verdi loved and revered Shakespeare. The composer did not speak English, but he owned and frequently re-read Shakespeare's plays in Italian translations by Carlo Rusconi and Giulio Carcano, which he kept by his bedside. He had earlier set operatic adaptations of Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\" (in 1847) and \"Othello\" (in 1887) and had considered \"King Lear\" as a subject; Boito had suggested \"Antony and Cleopatra\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat a joy! To be able to say to the Audience: \"We are here again!! Come and see us!!\"\nVerdi to Boito, 8 July 1889\nVerdi still had doubts, and on the next day sent another letter to Boito expressing his concerns. He wrote of \"the large number of years\" in his age, his health (which he admitted was still good) and his ability to complete the project: \"if I were not to finish the music?\" He said that the project could all be a waste of the younger man's time and distract Boito from completing his own new opera (which became \"Nerone\"). Yet, as his biographer Mary Jane Phillips-Matz notes, \"Verdi could not hide his delight at the idea of writing another opera\". On 10 July 1889 he wrote again:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Amen; so be it! So let's do \"Falstaff\"! For now, let's not think of obstacles, of age, of illnesses! I also want to keep the deepest \"secrecy\": a word that I underline three times to you that no one must know anything about it! [He notes that his wife will know about it, but assures Boito that she can keep a secret.] Anyway, if you are in the mood, then start to write.\nComposition.\nBoito's original sketch is lost, but surviving correspondence shows that the finished opera is not greatly different from his first thoughts. The major differences were that an act 2 monologue for Ford was moved from scene 2 to scene 1, and that the last act originally ended with the marriage of the lovers rather than with the lively vocal and orchestral fugue, which was Verdi's idea. He wrote to Boito in August 1889 telling him that he was writing a fugue: \"Yes, Sir! A fugue... and a \"buffa\" fugue\", which \"could probably be fitted in\".\nVerdi accepted the need to trim Shakespeare's plot to keep the opera within an acceptable length. He was sorry, nonetheless, to see the loss of Falstaff's second humiliation, dressed up as the Wise Woman of Brentford to escape from Ford. He wrote of his desire to do justice to Shakespeare: \"To sketch the characters in a few strokes, to weave the plot, to extract all the juice from that enormous Shakespearian orange\". Shortly after the premiere an English critic, R A Streatfeild, remarked on how Verdi succeeded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The leading note of [Falstaff]'s character is sublime self-conceit. If his belief in himself were shattered, he would be merely a vulgar sensualist and debauchee. As it is, he is a hero. For one terrible moment in the last act his self-satisfaction wavers. He looks round and sees every one laughing at him. Can it be that he has been made a fool of? But no, he puts the horrible suggestion from him, and in a flash is himself again. \"Son io,\" he exclaims with a triumphant inspiration, \"che vi fa scaltri. L'arguzia mia crea l'arguzia degli altri.\" [\"I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men\", a line from Henry IV part 2.] Verdi has caught this touch and indeed a hundred others throughout the opera with astonishing truth and delicacy.\nIn November Boito took the completed first act to Verdi at Sant'Agata, along with the second act, which was still under construction: \"That act has the devil on its back; and when you touch it, it burns\", Boito complained. They worked on the opera for a week, then Verdi and his wife Giuseppina Strepponi went to Genoa. No more work was done for some time.\nThe writer Russ McDonald observes that a letter from Boito to Verdi touches on the musical techniques used in the opera \u2013 he wrote of how to portray the characters Nannetta and Fenton: \"I can't quite explain it: I would like as one sprinkles sugar on a tart to sprinkle the whole comedy with that happy love without concentrating it at any one point.\"\nThe first act was completed by March 1890; the rest of the opera was not composed in chronological order, as had been Verdi's usual practice. The musicologist Roger Parker comments that this piecemeal approach may have been \"an indication of the relative independence of individual scenes\". Progress was slow, with composition \"carried out in short bursts of activity interspersed with long fallow periods\" partly caused by the composer's depression. Verdi was weighed down by the fear of being unable to complete the score, and also by the deaths and impending deaths of close friends, including the conductors Franco Faccio and Emanuele Muzio. There was no pressure on the composer to hurry. As he observed at the time, he was not working on a commission from a particular opera house, as he had in the past, but was composing for his own pleasure: \"in writing \"Falstaff\", I haven't thought about either theatres or singers\". He reiterated this idea in December 1890, a time when his spirits were very low after Muzio's death that November: \"Will I finish it [Falstaff]? Or will I not finish it? Who knows! I am writing without any aim, without a goal, just to pass a few hours of the day\". By early 1891 he was declaring that he could not finish the work that year, but in May he expressed some small optimism, which by mid-June, had turned into:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Big Belly [\"pancione\", the name given to the opera before the composition of \"Falstaff\" became public knowledge] is on the road to madness. There are some days when he does not move, he sleeps, and is in a bad humour. At other times he shouts, runs, jumps, and tears the place apart; I let him act up a bit, but if he goes on like this, I will put him in a muzzle and straitjacket.\nBoito was overjoyed, and Verdi reported that he was still working on the opera. The two men met in October or November 1891, after which the Verdis were in Genoa for the winter. They were both taken ill there, and two months of work were lost. By mid-April 1892 the scoring of the first act was complete and by June\u2013July Verdi was considering potential singers for roles in \"Falstaff\". For the title role he wanted Victor Maurel, the baritone who had sung Iago in \"Otello\", but at first the singer sought contractual terms that Verdi found unacceptable: \"His demands were so outrageous, exorbitant, [and] incredible that there was nothing else to do but stop the entire project\". Eventually they reached agreement and Maurel was cast.\nBy September Verdi had agreed in a letter to his publisher Casa Ricordi that La Scala could present the premiere during the 1892\u201393 season, but that he would retain control over every aspect of the production. An early February date was mentioned along with the demand that the house would be available exclusively after 2 January 1893 and that, even after the dress rehearsal, he could withdraw the opera: \"I will leave the theatre, and [Ricordi] will have to take the score away\". The public learned of the new opera towards the end of 1892, and intense interest was aroused, increased rather than diminished by the secrecy with which Verdi surrounded the preparations; rehearsals were in private, and the press was kept at arm's length. Apart from Verdi's outrage at the way that La Scala announced the season's programme on 7 December \u2013 \"either a revival of \"Tannh\u00e4user\" or \"Falstaff\"\" \u2013 things went smoothly in January 1893 up to the premiere performance on 9 February.\nPerformance history.\nPremieres.\nThe first performance of \"Falstaff\" was at La Scala in Milan on 9 February 1893, nearly six years after Verdi's previous premiere. For the first night, official ticket prices were thirty times greater than usual. Royalty, aristocracy, critics and leading figures from the arts all over Europe were present. The performance was a huge success under the baton of Edoardo Mascheroni; numbers were encored, and at the end the applause for Verdi and the cast lasted an hour. That was followed by a tumultuous welcome when the composer, his wife and Boito arrived at the Grand Hotel de Milan.\nOver the next two months the work was given twenty-two performances in Milan and then taken by the original company, led by Maurel, to Genoa, Rome, Venice, Trieste, Vienna and, without Maurel, to Berlin. Verdi and his wife left Milan on 2 March; Ricordi encouraged the composer to go to the planned Rome performance of 14 April, to maintain the momentum and excitement that the opera had generated. The Verdis, along with Boito and Giulio Ricordi, attended together with King Umberto I and other major royal and political figures of the day. The king introduced Verdi to the audience from the Royal Box to great acclaim, \"a national recognition and apotheosis of Verdi that had never been tendered him before\", notes Phillips-Matz.\nDuring these early performances Verdi made substantial changes to the score. For some of these he altered his manuscript, but for others musicologists have had to rely on the numerous full and piano scores put out by Ricordi. Further changes were made for the Paris premiere in 1894, which are also inadequately documented. Ricordi attempted to keep up with the changes, issuing new edition after new edition, but the orchestral and piano scores were often mutually contradictory. The Verdi scholar James Hepokoski considers that a definitive score of the opera is impossible, leaving companies and conductors to choose between a variety of options. In a 2013 study Philip Gossett disagrees, believing that the autograph is essentially a reliable source, augmented by contemporary Ricordi editions for the few passages that Verdi omitted to amend in his own score.\nThe first performances outside the Kingdom of Italy were in Trieste and Vienna, in May 1893. The work was given in the Americas and across Europe. The Berlin premiere of 1893 so excited Ferruccio Busoni that he drafted a letter to Verdi, in which he addressed him as \"Italy's leading composer\" and \"one of the noblest persons of our time\", and in which he explained that \"\"Falstaff\" provoked in me such a revolution of spirit that I can\u00a0... date [to the experience] the beginning of a new epoch in my artistic life.\" Antonio Scotti played the title role in Buenos Aires in July 1893; Gustav Mahler conducted the opera in Hamburg in January 1894; a Russian translation was presented in St Petersburg in the same month. Paris was regarded by many as the operatic capital of Europe, and for the production there in April 1894 Boito, who was fluent in French, made his own translation with the help of the Parisian poet Paul Solanges. This translation, approved by Verdi, is quite free in its rendering of Boito's original Italian text. Boito was content to delegate the English and German translations to William Beatty-Kingston and Max Kalbeck respectively. The London premiere, sung in Italian, was at Covent Garden on 19 May 1894. The conductor was Luigi Mancinelli, and Zilli and Pini Corsi repeated their original roles. Falstaff was sung by Arturo Pessina; Maurel played the role at Covent Garden the following season. On 4 February 1895 the work was first presented at the Metropolitan Opera, New York; Mancinelli conducted and the cast included Maurel as Falstaff, Emma Eames as Alice, Z\u00e9lie de Lussan as Nannetta and Sofia Scalchi as Mistress Quickly.\nNeglect.\nAfter the initial excitement, audiences quickly diminished. Operagoers were nonplussed by the absence of big traditional arias and choruses. A contemporary critic summed it up: \"'Is this our Verdi?' they asked themselves. 'But where is the \"motive\"; where are the broad melodies\u00a0... where are the usual \"ensembles\"; the \"finales\"?'\" By the time of Verdi's death in 1901 the work had fallen out of the international repertoire, though Gustav Mahler, an admirer of Verdi, led a production of \"exceptional quality\" in 1904 at the Vienna Court Opera. The rising young conductor Arturo Toscanini was a strong advocate of the work, and did much to save it from neglect. As musical director of La Scala (from 1898) and the Metropolitan Opera (from 1908), he programmed \"Falstaff\" from the start of his tenure. Richard Aldrich, music critic of \"The New York Times\", wrote that Toscanini's revival \"ought to be marked in red letters in the record of the season. \"Falstaff\", which was first produced here on February 4, 1895, has not been given since the following season, and was heard in these two seasons only half a dozen times in all.\" Aldrich added that though the general public might have had difficulty with the work, \"to connoisseurs it was an unending delight\".\nIn Britain, as in continental Europe and the US, the work fell out of the repertoire. Sir Thomas Beecham revived it in 1919, and recalling in his memoirs that the public had stayed away he commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have often been asked why I think \"Falstaff\" is not more of a box-office attraction, and I do not think the answer is far to seek. Let it be admitted that there are fragments of melody as exquisite and haunting as anything that Verdi has written elsewhere, such as the duet of Nanetta and Fenton in the first act and the song of Fenton at the beginning of the final scene, which have something of the lingering beauty of an Indian summer. But in comparison with every other work of the composer, it is wanting in tunes of a broad and impressive character, and one or two of the type of \"O Mia Regina\", \"Ritorna Vincitor\", or \"Ora per sempre addio\" might have helped the situation.\nToscanini recognised that this was the view of many, but he believed the work to be Verdi's greatest opera; he said, \"I believe it will take years and years before the general public understand this masterpiece, but when they really know it they will run to hear it like they do now for \"Rigoletto\" and \"La traviata\".\"\nRe-emergence.\nToscanini returned to La Scala in 1921 and remained in charge there until 1929, presenting \"Falstaff\" in every season. He took the work to Germany and Austria in the late 1920s and the 1930s, conducting it in Vienna, Berlin and at three successive Salzburg Festivals. Among those inspired by Toscanini's performances were Herbert von Karajan and Georg Solti, who were among his \"r\u00e9p\u00e9titeurs\" at Salzburg. Toscanini's younger colleague Tullio Serafin continued to present the work in Germany and Austria after Toscanini refused to perform there because of his loathing of the Nazi regime.\nWhen Karajan was in a position to do so he added \"Falstaff\" to the repertoire of his opera company at Aachen in 1941, and he remained a proponent of the work for the rest of his career, presenting it frequently in Vienna, Salzburg and elsewhere, and making audio and video recordings of it. Solti also became closely associated with \"Falstaff\", as did Carlo Maria Giulini; they both conducted many performances of the work in mainland Europe, Britain and the US and made several recordings. Leonard Bernstein conducted the work at the Met and the Vienna State Opera, and on record. The advocacy of these and later conductors has given the work an assured place in the modern repertoire.\nAmong revivals in the 1950s and later, Hepokoski singles out as particularly notable the Glyndebourne productions with Fernando Corena and later Geraint Evans in the title role; three different stagings by Franco Zeffirelli, for the Holland Festival (1956), Covent Garden (1961) and the Metropolitan Opera (1964); and Luchino Visconti's 1966 version in Vienna. A 1982 production by Ronald Eyre, more reflective and melancholy than usual, was staged in Los Angeles, London and Florence; Renato Bruson was Falstaff and Giulini conducted. Among more recent players of the title role Bryn Terfel has taken the part at Covent Garden in 1999, in a production by Graham Vick, conducted by Bernard Haitink. and at the Metropolitan Opera in a revival of the Zeffirelli production, conducted by James Levine in 2006.\nAlthough \"Falstaff\" has become a regular repertoire work there nonetheless remains a view expressed by John von Rhein in the \"Chicago Tribune\" in 1985: \"\"Falstaff\" probably always will fall into the category of 'connoisseur's opera' rather than taking its place as a popular favorite on the order of \"La traviata\" or \"Aida.\"\"\nTime: The reign of Henry IV, 1399 to 1413\nPlace: Windsor, England\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\n\"A room at the Garter Inn\"\nFalstaff and his servants, Bardolfo and Pistola, are drinking at the inn. Dr Caius bursts in and accuses Falstaff of burgling his house and Bardolfo of picking his pocket. Falstaff laughs at him; he leaves, vowing only to go drinking with honest, sober companions in future. When the innkeeper presents a bill for the wine, Falstaff tells Bardolfo and Pistola that he needs more money, and plans to obtain it by seducing the wives of two rich men, one of whom is Ford. Falstaff hands Bardolfo a love-letter to one of the wives (Alice Ford), and hands Pistola an identical letter addressed to the other (Meg). Bardolfo and Pistola refuse to deliver the letters, claiming that honour prevents them from obeying him. Falstaff loses his temper and rants at them, saying that \"honour\" is nothing but a word, with no meaning (Monologue: \"L'onore! Ladri\u00a0... !\" / \"Honour! You rogues\u00a0... !\") Brandishing a broom, he chases them out of his sight.\n\"Ford's garden\"\nAlice and Meg have received Falstaff's letters. They compare them, see that they are identical and, together with Mistress Quickly and Nannetta Ford, resolve to punish Falstaff. Meanwhile, Bardolfo and Pistola warn Ford of Falstaff's plan. Ford resolves to disguise himself and visit Falstaff and set a trap for him.\nA young, handsome fellow called Fenton is in love with Ford's daughter Nannetta, but Ford wants her to marry Dr. Caius, who is wealthy and respected. Fenton and Nannetta enjoy a moment of privacy, but are interrupted by the return of Alice, Meg and Mistress Quickly. The act ends with an ensemble in which the women and the men separately plan revenge on Falstaff, the women gleefully anticipating an enjoyable prank, while the men angrily mutter dire threats.\nAct 2.\n\"A room at the Garter Inn\"\nFalstaff is alone at the inn. Bardolfo and Pistola, now in the pay of Ford, enter and beg Falstaff to allow them to re-enter his service, secretly planning to spy on him for Ford. Mistress Quickly enters and tells him that Alice is in love with him and will be alone in Ford's home that afternoon, from two o'clock until three o'clock, just time for an amorous dalliance. Falstaff celebrates his potential success (\"Va, vecchio John\" / \"Go, old Jack, go your own way\").\nFord arrives, masquerading as a wealthy stranger, using the false name \"Signor Fontana\". He tells Falstaff that he is in love with Alice, but she is too virtuous to entertain him. He offers to pay Falstaff to use his impressive title and (alleged) charms to seduce her away from her virtuous convictions, after which he (\"Fontana\") might have a better chance of seducing her himself. Falstaff, delighted at the prospect of being paid to seduce the wealthy and beautiful woman, agrees, and reveals that he already has a rendezvous arranged with Alice for two o'clock \u2013 the hour when Ford is always absent from home. Ford is consumed with jealousy, but conceals his feelings. Falstaff withdraws to a private room to change into his finest clothes, and Ford, left alone, reflects on the evil of an uncertain marriage and vows to have revenge (\"\u00c8 sogno o realt\u00e0?\" / \"Is it a dream or reality?\"). When Falstaff returns in his finery, they leave together with elaborate displays of mutual courtesy.\n\"A room in Ford's house\"\nThe three women plot their strategy (\"Gaie Comari di Windsor\" / \"Merry wives of Windsor, the time has come!\"). Alice notices that Nannetta is too unhappy and anxious to share their gleeful anticipation. This is because Ford plans to marry her to Dr Caius, a man old enough to be her grandfather; the women reassure her that they will prevent it. Mistress Quickly announces Falstaff's arrival, and Mistress Ford has a large laundry basket and a screen placed in readiness. Falstaff attempts to seduce Alice with tales of his past youth and glory (\"Quand'ero paggio del Duca di Norfolk\" / \"When I was page to the Duke of Norfolk I was slender\"). Mistress Quickly rushes in, shouting that Ford has returned home unexpectedly with a retinue of henchmen to catch his wife's lover. Falstaff hides first behind the screen, but realizes that Ford will likely look for him there. The women urge him to hide in the laundry basket, which he does. In the meantime Fenton and Nannetta hide behind the screen for another moment of privacy. Ford and his men storm in and search for Falstaff, and hear the sound of Fenton and Nannetta kissing behind the screen. They assume it is Falstaff with Alice, but instead they find the young lovers. Ford orders Fenton to leave. Badly cramped and almost suffocating in the laundry hamper, Falstaff moans with discomfort while the men resume the search of the house. Alice orders her servants to throw the laundry basket through the window into the River Thames, where Falstaff endures the jeers of the crowd. Ford, seeing that Alice had never intended to betray him, smiles happily.\nAct 3.\n\"Before the inn\"\nFalstaff, cold and discouraged, glumly curses the sorry state of the world. Some mulled wine soon improves his mood. Mistress Quickly arrives and delivers another invitation to meet Alice. Falstaff at first wants nothing to do with it, but she persuades him. He is to meet Alice at midnight at Herne's Oak in Windsor Great Park dressed up as the ghost of Herne the Hunter who, according to local superstition, haunts the area near the tree, and appears there at midnight with a band of supernatural spirits. He and Mistress Quickly go inside the inn. Ford has realized his error in suspecting his wife, and they and their allies have been watching secretly. They now concoct a plan for Falstaff's punishment: dressed as supernatural creatures, they will ambush and torment him at midnight. Ford draws Dr. Caius aside and privately proposes a separate plot to marry him to Nannetta: Nannetta will be disguised as Queen of the Fairies, Caius will wear a monk's costume, and Ford will join the two of them with a nuptial blessing. Mistress Quickly overhears and quietly vows to thwart Ford's scheme.\n\"Herne's Oak in Windsor Park on a moonlit midnight\"\nFenton arrives at the oak tree and sings of his happiness (\"Dal labbro il canto estasiato vola\" / \"From my lips, a song of ecstasy flies\") ending with \"Lips that are kissed lose none of their allure.\" Nannetta enters to finish the line with \"Indeed, they renew it, like the moon.\" The women arrive and disguise Fenton as a monk, telling him that they have arranged to spoil Ford's and Caius's plans. Nannetta, as the Fairy Queen, instructs her helpers (\"Sul fil d'un soffio etesio\" / \"On the breath of a fragrant breeze, fly, nimble spirits\") before all the characters arrive on the scene. Falstaff's attempted love scene with Alice is interrupted by the announcement that witches are approaching, and the men, disguised as elves and fairies, soundly thrash Falstaff. In the middle of the beating, he recognizes Bardolfo in disguise. The joke is over, and Falstaff acknowledges that he has received his due. Ford announces that a wedding will ensue. Caius and the Queen of the Fairies enter. A second couple, also in masquerade, ask Ford to deliver the same blessing for them as well. Ford conducts the double ceremony. Caius finds that instead of Nannetta, his bride is the disguised Bardolfo, and Ford has unwittingly blessed the marriage of Fenton and Nannetta. Ford accepts the \"fait accompli\" with good grace. Falstaff, pleased to find himself not the only dupe, proclaims that all the world is folly, and all are figures of fun (\"Tutto nel mondo \u00e8 burla\u00a0... Tutti gabbati!...Ma ride ben chi ride La risata final.\" / \"Everything in the world is a jest\u00a0... but he laughs well who laughs the final laugh\"). The entire company repeats his proclamation in an exuberant ten-voice fugue.\nMusic and drama.\nVerdi scored \"Falstaff\" for three flutes (third doubling piccolo), two oboes, English horn, two clarinets, bass clarinet, two bassoons, four horns, three trumpets, three trombones, cimbasso, timpani, percussion (triangle, cymbals, bass drum), harp, and strings. In addition, a guitar, natural horn, and bell are heard from offstage. Unlike most of Verdi's earlier operatic scores, \"Falstaff\" is through-composed. No list of numbers is printed in the published full score. The score differs from much of Verdi's earlier work by having no overture: there are seven bars for the orchestra before the first voice (Dr Caius) enters. The critic Rodney Milnes comments that \"enjoyment... shines from every bar in its irresistible forward impulse, its effortless melody, its rhythmic vitality, and sureness of dramatic pace and construction.\" In \"The New Grove Dictionary of Opera\", Roger Parker writes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe opera was described by its creators as a \"commedia lirica\". McDonald commented in 2009 that \"Falstaff\" is very different \u2013 a stylistic departure \u2013 from Verdi's earlier work. In McDonald's view most of the musical expression is in the dialogue, and there is only one traditional aria. The result is that \"such stylistic economy \u2013 more sophisticated, more challenging than he had employed before \u2013 is the keynote of the work.\" McDonald argues that consciously or unconsciously, Verdi was developing the idiom that would come to dominate the music of the 20th century: \"the lyricism is abbreviated, glanced at rather than indulged. Melodies bloom suddenly and then vanish, replaced by contrasting tempo or an unexpected phrase that introduces another character or idea\". In McDonald's view the orchestral writing acts as a sophisticated commentator on the action. It has influenced at least one of Verdi's operatic successors: in 1952 Imogen Holst, musical assistant to Benjamin Britten, wrote, after a performance of \"Falstaff\", \"I realised for the first time how much Ben owes to [Verdi]. There are orchestral bits which are \"just\" as funny to listen to as the comic instrumental bits in \"A. Herring\"!\"\nThe extent to which \"Falstaff\" is a \"Shakespearian\" opera has often been debated by critics. Although the action is taken from \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\", some commentators feel that Boito and Verdi have transmuted Shakespeare's play into a wholly Italian work. The soprano Elisabeth Schwarzkopf believed there was nothing English or Shakespearian about the comedy: \"it was all done through the music\". In 1961 Peter Heyworth wrote in \"The Observer\", \"Because of Shakespeare we like to think of \"Falstaff\" as a work that has a certain Englishness. In fact the opera is no more English than \"Aida\" is Egyptian. Boito and Verdi between them transformed the fat knight into one of the archetypes of \"opera buffa\".\" Verdi himself, however, felt that the Falstaff of the opera is not a conventional Italian \"buffo\" character, but portrays Shakespeare's fuller, more ambiguous Falstaff of the \"Henry IV\" plays: \"My Falstaff is not merely the hero of \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\", who is simply a buffoon, and allows himself to be tricked by the women, but also the Falstaff of the two parts of \"Henry IV\". Boito has written the libretto in accordance.\" A contemporary critic argued that the text \"imitated with marvellous accuracy the metre and rhythm of Shakespeare's verse\", but Hepokoski notes Boito's use of traditional Italian metric conventions.\nAnother recurrent question is how much, if at all, Verdi was influenced by Wagner's comic opera \"Die Meistersinger\". At the time of the premiere this was a sensitive subject; many Italians were suspicious of or hostile to Wagner's music, and were protective in a nationalistic way of Verdi's reputation. Nevertheless, Verdi's new style was markedly different from that of his popular works of the 1850s and 1860s, and it seemed to some to have Wagnerian echoes. In 1999 the critic Andrew Porter wrote, \"That \"Falstaff\" was Verdi's and Boito's answer to Wagner's \"Meistersinger\" seems evident now. But the Italian \"Falstaff\" moves more quickly.\" Toscanini, who did more than anyone else to bring \"Falstaff\" into the regular operatic repertoire, commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the difference between \"Falstaff\", which is the absolute masterpiece, and \"Die Meistersinger\", which is an outstanding Wagnerian opera. Just think for a moment how many musical means \u2013 beautiful ones, certainly \u2013 Wagner must make use of to describe the Nuremberg night. And look how Verdi gets a similarly startling effect at a similar moment \"with three notes.\"\nVerdi scholars including Julian Budden have analysed the music in symphonic terms \u2013 the opening section \"a perfect little sonata movement\", the second act concluding with a variant of the classic slow concertante ensemble leading to a fast stretto, and the whole opera ending with \"the most academic of musical forms\", a fugue. Milnes suggests that this shows \"a wise old conservative's warning about the excesses of the \"verismo\" school of Italian opera\" already on the rise by the 1890s. Among the solo numbers woven into the continuous score are Falstaff's \"honour\" monologue, which concludes the first scene, and his reminiscent arietta (\"Quand'ero paggio\") about himself as a young page. The young lovers, Nannetta and Fenton, are given a lyrical and playful duet (\"Labbra di foco\") in act 1; in act 3, Fenton's impassioned love song, \"Dal labbro il canto estasiato vola\" briefly becomes a duet when Nannetta joins him. She then has the last substantial solo section of the score, the \"fairy\" aria, \"Sul fil d'un soffio etesio\", described by Parker as \"yet another aria suffused with the soft orchestral colours that characterize this scene\".\nThe score is seen by the critic Richard Osborne as rich in self-parody, with sinister themes from \"Rigoletto\" and \"Un ballo in maschera\" transmuted into comedy. For Osborne the nocturnal music of act 3 draws on the examples of Weber, Berlioz and Mendelssohn, creating a mood akin to that of Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". Osborne views the whole opera as an ensemble piece, and he comments that grand soliloquy in the old Verdian style is reserved for Ford's \"jealousy\" aria in act 2, which is almost tragic in style but comic in effect, making Ford \"a figure to be laughed at.\" Osborne concludes his analysis, \"\"Falstaff\" is comedy's musical apogee: the finest opera, inspired by the finest dramatist, by the finest opera composer the world has known\".\nRecordings.\nThere are two early recordings of Falstaff's short arietta \"Quand'ero paggio\". Pini Corsi, the original Ford, recorded it in 1904, and Maurel followed in 1907. The first recording of the complete opera was made by Italian Columbia in March and April 1932. It was conducted by Lorenzo Molajoli with the chorus and orchestra of La Scala, and a cast including Giacomo Rimini as Falstaff and Pia Tassinari as Alice. Some live stage performances were recorded in the 1930s, but the next studio recording was that conducted by Arturo Toscanini for the 1950 NBC radio broadcast released on disc by RCA Victor. The first stereophonic recording was conducted by Herbert von Karajan for EMI in 1956.\nAmong the singers whose performances of the title role are on live or studio recordings, Italians include Renato Bruson, Tito Gobbi, Rolando Panerai, Ruggero Raimondi, Mariano Stabile, Giuseppe Taddei and Giuseppe Valdengo; Francophone singers include Gabriel Bacquier, Jean-Philippe Lafont and Jos\u00e9 van Dam; Germans include Walter Berry, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau and Hans Hotter; and UK and US singers include Geraint Evans, Donald Gramm, Bryn Terfel, Leonard Warren and Willard White.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "37888", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37888", "title": "Aida", "text": "1871 tragic opera by Giuseppe Verdi\nAida (or A\u00efda, ) is a tragic opera in four acts by Giuseppe Verdi to an Italian libretto by Antonio Ghislanzoni. Set in the Old Kingdom of Egypt, it was commissioned by Cairo's Khedivial Opera House and had its premi\u00e8re there on 24 December 1871, in a performance conducted by Giovanni Bottesini. Today the work holds a central place in the operatic canon, receiving performances every year around the world. At New York's Metropolitan Opera alone, \"Aida\" has been sung more than 1,100 times since 1886. Ghislanzoni's scheme follows a scenario often attributed to the French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette, but Verdi biographer Mary Jane Phillips-Matz argues that the source is actually Temistocle Solera.\nElements of the opera's genesis and sources.\nIsma'il Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, commissioned Verdi to write an opera to celebrate the opening of the Suez Canal, but Verdi declined. However, Auguste Mariette, a French Egyptologist, proposed to Khedive Pasha a plot for a celebratory opera set in ancient Egypt. Khedive Pasha referred Mariette to theatre manager Camille du Locle, who sent Mariette's story idea to Verdi. Eventually, Verdi agreed to compose an opera based on that story, for 150,000 francs.\nBecause the scenery and costumes were stuck in the French capital during the Siege of Paris (1870\u201371) of the ongoing Franco-Prussian War, the premiere was delayed and Verdi's \"Rigoletto\" was performed instead. The first opera performed at the Khedivial Opera House, \"Aida\" eventually premiered in Cairo on 24 December 1871.\nPerformance history.\nCairo premiere and initial success in Italy.\nVerdi originally chose to write a brief orchestral prelude instead of a full overture for the opera. He then composed an overture of the \"potpourri\" variety to replace the original prelude. However, in the end he decided not to have the overture performed because of its\u2014his own words\u2014\"pretentious silliness\". This overture, never used today, was given a rare broadcast performance by Arturo Toscanini and the NBC Symphony Orchestra on 30 March 1940, but was never commercially issued.\n\"Aida\" met with great acclaim when it finally opened in Cairo on 24 December 1871. The costumes and accessories for the premi\u00e8re were designed by Auguste Mariette, who also oversaw the design and construction of the sets, which were made in Paris by the Op\u00e9ra's scene painters Auguste-Alfred Rub\u00e9 and Philippe Chaperon (acts 1 and 4) and \u00c9douard Desplechin and Jean-Baptiste Lavastre (acts 2 and 3), and shipped to Cairo. Although Verdi did not attend the premiere in Cairo, he was most dissatisfied with the fact that the audience consisted of invited dignitaries, politicians and critics, but no members of the general public. He therefore considered the Italian (and European) premi\u00e8re, held at La Scala, Milan on 8 February 1872, and a performance in which he was heavily involved at every stage, to be its \"real\" premi\u00e8re.\nVerdi had also written the role of Aida for the voice of Teresa Stolz, who sang it for the first time at the Milan premi\u00e8re. Verdi had asked her fianc\u00e9, Angelo Mariani, to conduct the Cairo premi\u00e8re, but he declined, so Giovanni Bottesini filled the gap. The Milan Amneris, Maria Waldmann, was his favourite in the role and she repeated it a number of times at his request.\n\"Aida\" was received with great enthusiasm at its Milan premi\u00e8re. The opera was soon mounted at major opera houses throughout Italy, including the Teatro Regio di Parma (20 April 1872), the Teatro di San Carlo (30 March 1873), La Fenice (11 June 1873), the Teatro Regio di Torino (26 December 1874), the Teatro Comunale di Bologna (30 September 1877, with Giuseppina Pasqua as Amneris and Franco Novara as the King), and the Teatro Costanzi (8 October 1881, with Theresia Singer as Aida and Giulia Novelli as Amneris) among others.\nOther 19th-century performances.\nDetails of important national and other premi\u00e8res of \"Aida\" follow:\n20th century and beyond.\nA complete concert version of the opera was given in New York City in 1949. Conducted by Toscanini with Herva Nelli as Aida and Richard Tucker as Radam\u00e8s, it was televised on the NBC television network. Due to the length of the opera, it was divided into two telecasts, preserved on kinescopes, and later released on video by RCA and Testament. The audio portion of the broadcast, including some remakes in June 1954, was released on LP and CD by RCA Victor. Other notable performances from this period include a 1955 performance conducted by Tullio Serafin with Maria Callas as Aida and Richard Tucker as Radam\u00e8s and a 1959 performance conducted by Herbert von Karajan with Renata Tebaldi as Aida and Carlo Bergonzi as Radam\u00e8s.\nLa Scala mounted a lavish new production of \"Aida\" designed by Franco Zeffirelli for the opening night of its 2006/2007 season. The production starred Violeta Urmana in the title role and Roberto Alagna as Radam\u00e8s. Alagna subsequently made the headlines when he was booed for his rendition of \"Celeste Aida\" during the second performance, walked off the stage, and was dismissed from the remainder of the run. The production continued to cause controversy in 2014 when Zeffirelli protested at La Scala's rental of the production to the Astana Opera House in Kazakhstan without his permission. According to Zeffirelli, the move had doomed his production to an \"infamous and brutal\" fate.\n\"Aida\" continues to be a staple of the standard operatic repertoire. It is frequently performed in the Verona Arena, and is a staple of its renowned opera festival.\nInstrumentation.\n3 flutes, 3 fl\u00fbtes d'amour, (3rd also piccolo), 2 oboes, English horn, 2 clarinets, bass clarinet, 2 bassoons, 4 horns, 2 trumpets, 3 trombones, cimbasso, timpani, triangle, bass drum, cymbals, tam-tam, harp, strings; on-stage banda: 6 Egyptian trumpets (\"Aida trumpets\"), military band, harp\nSetting.\nThe libretto does not specify a precise time period, so it is difficult to place the opera more specifically than the Old Kingdom. For the first production, Mariette went to great efforts to make the sets and costumes authentic. Considering the consistent artistic styles throughout the 3000-year history of ancient Egypt, a given production does not particularly need to choose a specific time period within the larger frame of ancient Egyptian history.\nSynopsis.\nBackstory: The Egyptians have captured and enslaved Aida, an Ethiopian princess. An Egyptian military commander, Radam\u00e8s, struggles to choose between his love for her and his loyalty to the King of Egypt. To complicate the story further, the King's daughter Amneris is in love with Radam\u00e8s, although he does not return her feelings.\nAct 1.\n\"Scene 1: A hall in the King's palace\"\nRamfis, the high priest of Egypt, tells Radam\u00e8s, the young warrior, that war with the Ethiopians seems inevitable, and Radam\u00e8s hopes that he will be chosen as the Egyptian commander by the Gods (Ramfis, Radam\u00e8s: \"S\u00ec, corre voce l'Etiope ardisca\" / Yes, it is rumoured that Ethiopia dares once again to threaten our power).\nRadam\u00e8s dreams both of gaining victory on the battlefield and of Aida, an Ethiopian slave, with whom he is secretly in love (Radam\u00e8s: \"Se quel guerrier io fossi!\u00a0... Celeste Aida\" / Heavenly Aida). Aida, who is also secretly in love with Radam\u00e8s, is the captured daughter of the Ethiopian King Amonasro, but her Egyptian captors are unaware of her true identity. Her father has invaded Egypt to deliver her from servitude.\nAmneris, the daughter of the Egyptian King, enters the hall. She too loves Radam\u00e8s, but fears that his heart belongs to someone else (Radam\u00e8s, Amneris: \"Quale insolita gioia nel tuo sguardo\" / What an unusual joy is in your gaze!).\nAida appears and, when Radam\u00e8s sees her, Amneris notices that he looks disturbed. She suspects that Aida could be her rival, but is able to hide her jealousy and approach Aida (Amneris, Aida, Radam\u00e8s: \"Vieni, o diletta, appressati\" / Come, O delight, come closer).\nThe King enters, along with the High Priest, Ramfis, and the whole palace court. A messenger announces that the Ethiopians, led by King Amonasro, are marching towards Thebes. The King declares war and proclaims that Radam\u00e8s is the man chosen by the goddess Isis to be the leader of the army (The King, Messenger, Radam\u00e8s, Aida, Amneris, Ramfis, chorus: \"Alta cagion v'aduna .. Guerra, guerra, guerra!\" / Oh fate o'er Egypt looming .. War, war, war!). Upon receiving this mandate from the King, Radam\u00e8s proceeds to the temple of Vulcan to take up the sacred arms (The King, Radam\u00e8s, Aida, Amneris, chorus: \"Su! del Nilo al sacro lido\" .. (reprise) \"Guerra, guerra, guerra!\" / On! Of Nilus' sacred river, guard the shores .. (reprise) War, war, war!).\nAlone in the hall, Aida feels torn between her love for her father, her country, and Radam\u00e8s (Aida: \"Ritorna vincitor!\" / Return a conqueror!).\n\"Scene 2: Inside the Temple of Ptah\"\nSolemn ceremonies and dances by the priestesses take place (High Priestess, chorus, Radam\u00e8s: \"Possente Ptah\u00a0... Tu che dal nulla\" / O mighty Ptah). This is followed by the installation of Radam\u00e8s to the office of commander-in-chief (High Priestess, chorus, Ramfis, Radam\u00e8s: \"Immenso Ptah.. Mortal, diletto ai Numi\" / O mighty one, guard and protect!). All present in the temple pray fervently for the victory of Egypt and protection for their warriors (\"Nume, custode e vindice\"/ Hear us, O guardian deity).\nAct 2.\n\"Scene 1: The chamber of Amneris\"\nDances and music to celebrate Radam\u00e8s' victory take place (Chorus, Amneris: \"Chi mai fra gli inni e i plausi\" / Our songs his glory praising). However, Amneris is still in doubt about Radam\u00e8s' love and wonders whether Aida is in love with him. She tries to forget her doubt, entertaining her worried heart with the dance of Moorish slaves (Chorus, Amneris: \"Vieni: sul crin ti piovano\" / Come bind your flowing tresses).\nWhen Aida enters the chamber, Amneris asks everyone to leave. By falsely telling Aida that Radam\u00e8s has died in the battle, she tricks her into professing her love for him. In grief, and shocked by the news, Aida confesses that her heart belongs to Radam\u00e8s eternally (Amneris, Aida: \"Fu la sorte dell'armi a' tuoi funesta\" / The battle's outcome was cruel for your people).\nThis confession fires Amneris with rage, and she plans on taking revenge on Aida. Ignoring Aida's pleadings (Amneris, Aida, chorus: \"Su! del Nilo al sacro lido\" / Up! at the sacred shores of the Nile), Amneris leaves her alone in the chamber.\n\"Scene 2: The grand gate of the city of Thebes\"\nRadam\u00e8s returns victorious and the troops march into the city (Chorus, Ramfis: \"Gloria all'Egitto, ad Iside\" / Glory to Egypt, [and] to Isis!).\nThe Egyptian king decrees that on this day the triumphant Radam\u00e8s may have anything he wishes. The Ethiopian captives are led onstage in chains, Amonasro among them. Aida immediately rushes to her father, who whispers to her to conceal his true identity as King of Ethiopia from the Egyptians. Amonasro deceptively proclaims to the Egyptians that the Ethiopian king (referring to himself) has been slain in battle. Aida, Amonasro, and the captured Ethiopians plead with the Egyptian King for mercy, but Ramfis and the Egyptian priests call for their death (Aida, Amneris, Radam\u00e8s, The King, Amonasro, chorus: \"Che veggo! .. Egli? .. Mio padre! .. Anch'io pugnai .. Struggi, o Re, queste ciurme feroci\" / What do I see?.. Is it he? My father? .. Destroy, O King, these ferocious creatures).\nClaiming the reward promised by the King of Egypt, Radam\u00e8s pleads with him to spare the lives of the prisoners and to set them free. The King grants Radam\u00e8s' wish, and declares that he (Radam\u00e8s) will be his (the King's) successor and will marry the King's daughter (Amneris). (Aida, Amneris, Radam\u00e8s, Ramfis, The King, Amonasro, chorus: \"O Re: pei sacri Numi! .. Gloria all'Egitto\" / O King, by the sacred gods ... Glory to Egypt!). At Ramfis' suggestion to the King, Aida and Amonasro remain as hostages to ensure that the Ethiopians do not avenge their defeat.\nAct 3.\n\"On the banks of the Nile, near the Temple of Isis\"\nPrayers are said (Chorus, High Priestess, Ramfis, Amneris: \"O tu che sei d'Osiride\" / O thou who to Osiris art) on the eve of Amneris and Radam\u00e8s' wedding in the Temple of Isis. Outside, Aida waits to meet with Radam\u00e8s as they had planned (Aida: \"Qui Radam\u00e8s verra .. O patria mia\" / Oh, my dear country!).\nAmonasro appears and orders Aida to find out the location of the Egyptian army from Radam\u00e8s. Aida, torn between her love for Radam\u00e8s and her loyalty to her native land and to her father, reluctantly agrees. (Aida, Amonasro: \"Ciel, mio padre! .. Rivedrai le foreste imbalsamate\" / Once again shalt thou gaze). When Radam\u00e8s arrives, Amonasro hides behind a rock and listens to their conversation.\nRadam\u00e8s affirms that he will marry Aida (\"Pur ti riveggo, mia dolce Aida .. Nel fiero anelito\"; \"Fuggiam gli ardori inospiti .. L\u00e0, tra foreste vergini\" / I see you again, my sweet Aida!), and Aida convinces him to flee to the desert with her.\nTo facilitate their escape, Radam\u00e8s suggests using a secure route free from the risk of discovery and discloses the location his army plans to attack. Upon hearing this, Amonasro emerges from hiding and reveals his true identity. Radam\u00e8s, horrified, realises he has inadvertently divulged a critical military secret to the enemy. Meanwhile, Amneris and Ramfis leave the temple, spot Radam\u00e8s in conference with the enemy, and summon the imperial guards. Amonasro, armed with a dagger, intends to kill Amneris and Ramfis before they can alert the guards, but Radam\u00e8s disarms him. He swiftly instructs Amonasro to flee with Aida and surrenders himself to the guards, who arrest him as a traitor.\nAct 4.\nPhilippe Chaperon's act 4, scene 2 set design for the 1880 Palais Garnier performance in Paris\n\"Scene 1: A hall in the Temple of Justice. To one side is the door leading to Radam\u00e8s' prison cell\"\nAmneris wishes to save Radam\u00e8s (\"L'aborrita rivale a me sfuggia\" / My hated rival has escaped me). She calls for the guard to bring him to her.\nShe asks Radam\u00e8s to deny the accusations, but Radam\u00e8s, who does not wish to live without Aida, refuses. He is relieved to know Aida is still alive and hopes she has reached her own country (Amneris, Radam\u00e8s: \"Gi\u00e0 i Sacerdoti adunansi\" / Already the priests are assembling).\nOffstage, Ramfis recites the charges against Radam\u00e8s and calls on him to defend himself, but he stands mute, and is condemned to death as a traitor. Amneris, who remains onstage, protests that Radam\u00e8s is innocent, and pleads with the priests to show mercy. The priests sentence him to be buried alive; Amneris weeps and curses the priests as he is taken away (Judgment scene, Amneris, Ramfis, and chorus: \"Ahim\u00e8! .. morir mi sento .. Radam\u00e8s, \u00e8 deciso il tuo fato\" / Alas\u00a0.. I feel death .. Radam\u00e8s, your fate is decided).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Scene 2: The lower portion of the stage shows the vault in the Temple of Ptah; the upper portion represents the temple itself\"\nRadam\u00e8s has been taken into the lower floor of the temple and sealed up in a dark vault, where he thinks that he is alone. As he hopes that Aida is in a safer place, he hears a sigh and then sees Aida. She has hidden herself in the vault in order to die with Radam\u00e8s (Radam\u00e8s: \"La fatal pietra sovra me si chiuse\" / The fatal stone now closes over me). They accept their terrible fate (Radam\u00e8s: \"Morir! S\u00ec pura e bella\" / To die! So pure and lovely!) and bid farewell to Earth and its sorrows (duet \"Invan! Tutto \u00e8 finito ... O terra addio\"). Above the vault in the temple of Ptah, Amneris weeps and prays to the goddess Isis. In the vault below, Aida dies in Radam\u00e8s' arms as the priests, offstage, pray to the god Ptah. (Chorus, Aida, Radam\u00e8s, Amneris: \"Immenso Ftha\" / Almighty Ptah).\nAdaptations.\nThe 1952 Broadway musical \"My Darlin' Aida\", set on a plantation in Tennessee in the first year of the American Civil War, is based on the opera and uses Verdi's music.\nThe opera has been adapted for motion pictures on several occasions, most notably in a 1953 production which starred Lois Maxwell as Amneris and Sophia Loren as Aida, and a 1987 Swedish production. In both cases, the lead actors lip-synched to recordings by actual opera singers. In the case of the 1953 film, Ebe Stignani sang as Amneris, while Renata Tebaldi sang as Aida.\nThe opera's story, but not its music, was used as the basis for a 1998 musical of the same name written by Elton John and Tim Rice.\nThe opera has been portrayed in the 2001 Italian animated film \"Aida of the Trees\" (\"Aida degli alberi\"). The characters are seen as anthropomorphic creatures between the fictional kingdoms of Alborea and Petra as the star-crossed lovers must find a way to unify their worlds while facing off against the evil high priest Ramfis.\nThe 2022 version choreographed by the Royal Opera House (directed by Robert Carsen) set the opera in a modern, Soviet-style, totalitarian state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37891", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37891", "title": "Micky Dolenz", "text": "American musician and actor (born 1945)\nGeorge Michael Dolenz Jr. ( ; born March 8, 1945) is an American musician and actor. He was the drummer and one of two primary vocalists for the pop rock band the Monkees (1966\u20131970, and reunions until 2021), and a co-star of the TV series \"The Monkees\" (1966\u20131968). Dolenz is the last surviving member of the group, following the deaths of Davy Jones (in 2012), Peter Tork (in 2019), and Michael Nesmith (in 2021).\nLife and entertainment career.\nDolenz was born on March 8, 1945, at the Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Hollywood, the son of actors George Dolenz and Janelle Johnson. He has three sisters, Gemma Marie (\"Coco\"), Deborah, and Kathleen (\"Gina\"). Gemma's nickname, Coco, is a shortened form of \"Coco Sunshine\", a nickname given to her as a child by Micky. Coco was a frequent guest on the set of \"The Monkees\" TV show and sometimes a guest performer on records by the Monkees, singing background vocals or duetting with Micky. She often performs as a member of Micky's backing band during his concerts.\nDolenz suffered from Perthes disease as a child, affecting his hip joint and right leg, leaving that leg weaker (and shorter) than the other. This resulted in Dolenz adapting an unorthodox drum setup \u2013 right-handed and left-footed \u2013 in his musical career.\n\"Circus Boy\".\nDolenz began his show-business career in 1956 when he starred in a children's TV show called \"Circus Boy\" under the name Mickey Braddock. He played Corky, an orphaned water boy for the elephants in a one-ring circus at the start of the 20th century. The program ran for two seasons, after which Dolenz made sporadic appearances on network television shows and pursued his education. Dolenz went to Ulysses S. Grant High School in Valley Glen and graduated in 1962. In 1964, he was cast as Ed in the episode \"Born of Kings and Angels\" of the NBC education drama series \"Mr. Novak\", starring James Franciscus as an idealistic Los Angeles teacher. Dolenz was attending college in Los Angeles when he was hired for the \"drummer\" role in NBC's \"The Monkees\".\nEarly musical career.\nDolenz originally had his own rock band called \"Micky and the One-Nighters\" in the early- to mid-1960s with himself as lead singer. He had already begun writing his own songs. According to Dolenz, his band's live stage act included rock songs, cover songs, and some R&amp;B. One of his favorite songs to sing was Chuck Berry's \"Johnny B. Goode\", which he sang at his Monkees audition, resulting in his being hired as one of the cast/band members. He recorded two 45s in 1965 that went unreleased until the Monkees' success in 1967. Issued on the Challenge label, the recordings were \"Don't Do It\" b/w \"Plastic Symphony III\" and \"Huff Puff\" b/w \"Fate (Big Ben)\". Neither B-side on the Challenge 45s is by Dolenz, but rather a band later credited as The Obvious.\nThe Monkees.\nIn 1965, Dolenz was cast in the television sitcom \"The Monkees\" and became the drummer and a lead vocalist in the band created for the show. Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart, writers of many of the Monkees' songs, observed quickly that when brought into the studio together, the four actors would try to make each other laugh. Because of this, the writers often brought in each singer individually. The antics escalated until Dolenz poured a cup of ice on Don Kirshner's head. At the time, Dolenz did not know Kirshner on sight.\nDuring tension-filled times, Mike Nesmith and Peter Tork voluntarily turned over lead vocal duties to Dolenz on their own songs.\nDolenz wrote a few of the band's songs, most prominently \"Randy Scouse Git\" from the album \"Headquarters\". He provided the lead vocals for such hits as \"Last Train to Clarksville\", \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\", and \"I'm a Believer\".\nDolenz purchased the third modular Moog synthesizer sold commercially. (The first two belonged to Wendy Carlos and Buck Owens.) His performance on the Monkees' song \"Daily Nightly\" (written by Nesmith), from the album \"Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn &amp; Jones Ltd.\", was one of the first uses of the synthesizer on a rock recording. He eventually sold his instrument to Bobby Sherman.\nHe is the last surviving member of the Monkees (after Davy Jones's death in 2012, Tork's in 2019, and Nesmith's in 2021). He is the only member of the Monkees who was part of every lineup from the band's inception, and the only member with contemporary recordings of his vocals on all studio albums.\nSolo MGM recordings.\nThe Moog synthesizer that Dolenz had bought proved vital when he wrote a song entitled \"Easy on You\" in 1971; he began recording it in his home studio, playing acoustic guitar and drums, and using the Moog like a keyboard. With that song completed, he next invited former Monkee Peter Tork over to help with more recordings. Then, a fortuitous street encounter led to former Monkee stand-in David Price joining, as well as contributing a rock song he had written called \"Oh Someone\". With Dolenz on drums and vocals, Tork on bass, and Price on rhythm guitar, the song was completed in only two hours; subsequently, guitarist B. J. Jones came in two days later and added lead guitar. With these two songs recorded, Dolenz contacted his former high school friend Mike Curb, then the head of MGM Records; after playing the songs for Curb, Dolenz was immediately signed to MGM.\nDolenz recorded and released songs for MGM for about three years (with a few of the songs being credited to Starship, an ersatz group, not the later Jefferson Starship). After the first year, Dolenz's friend Harry Nilsson contributed his song \"Daybreak\", also arranging and producing the recording, which included Keith Allison on guitar, former Monkees producer Chip Douglas on bass, and steel-guitarist Orville \"Red\" Rhodes.\nBy early 1974, with no chart successes to date, Dolenz headed to England, and with Tony Scotti, he cut four songs for MGM: two rock classics, \"Splish Splash\" and \"Purple People Eater\", as well as \"I Hate Rock and Roll\" and a new song, \"Wing Walker\". Meanwhile, Mike Curb left MGM and joined Warner Bros. Records. Dolenz's association with MGM then ended (and those final four songs remained unreleased).\nDolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart.\nIn part because of reruns of \"The Monkees\" on Saturday mornings and in syndication, \"The Monkees Greatest Hits\" charted in 1976. The LP, issued by Arista (a subsidiary of Columbia Pictures), was actually a repackaging of a 1972 compilation LP called \"Re-Focus\" that had been issued by Arista's previous label imprint, Bell Records, also owned by Columbia Pictures.\nDolenz and Jones took advantage of this, joining ex-Monkees songwriters Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart to tour the United States. They could not use the Monkees name for legal reasons, but from 1975 to 1977, as the \"Golden Hits of The Monkees\" show (\"The Guys Who Wrote 'Em and the Guys Who Sang 'Em!\"), they successfully performed in smaller venues such as state fairs and amusement parks, as well as making stops in Japan, Thailand, and Singapore. They also released an album of new material, appropriately called \"Dolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart\", and a live album, \"Concert in Japan\", was released by Capitol in 1976.\nA Christmas single (credited to Dolenz, Jones and Tork) was produced by Chip Douglas and released on his own label in 1976. The single featured Douglas's and Howard Kaylan's \"Christmas Is My Time of Year\" (originally recorded by a 1960s supergroup, The Christmas Spirit), with a B-side of Irving Berlin's \"White Christmas\" (Douglas released a remixed version of the single, with additional overdubbed instruments, in 1986). Tork also joined Dolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart on stage at Disneyland on July 4, 1976, and also joined Dolenz and Jones on stage at the Starwood in Hollywood, California in 1977.\nNotable stage work.\nIn 1977, he performed with former bandmate Davy Jones in a stage production of the Harry Nilsson musical \"The Point!\" at London's Mermaid Theatre, playing and singing the part of the \"Count's Kid\" and the Leafman to Jones's starring role as Oblio (according to the CD booklet). An original cast recording was made and released. The comedic chemistry of Dolenz and Jones proved so strong that the show was revived in 1978 with Nilsson inserting additional comedy for the two, plus two more songs, with one of them (\"Gotta Get Up\") being sung by Dolenz and Jones together. The show was considered successful enough that another revival was planned for 1979, but it proved cost-prohibitive. After the show's run, Dolenz remained in England and began directing for stage and television, as well as producing several of the shows he directed.\nFrom August to September 2006, Dolenz played Charlemagne at the Goodspeed Opera House for the revival of the musical \"Pippin\" in East Haddam, Connecticut. He also toured in that role. Also in the mid-2000s, Dolenz played the role of Zoser in the Broadway production of Elton John and Tim Rice's \"Aida\".\nAfter Monkees television and film career.\nAfter \"The Monkees\" television show ended, Dolenz continued performing providing voice-overs for a number of Saturday-morning cartoon series including \"The Funky Phantom\", \"Partridge Family 2200 A.D.\", \"The Scooby-Doo Show\", \"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kids\", \"These Are the Days\", \"Devlin\", and \"Wonder Wheels\" (from \"The Skatebirds\"). Dolenz starred in the first season of the animated series \"The Tick\", voicing the titular protagonist's sidekick Arthur; he was replaced by Rob Paulsen for the remainder of the series. In 1972, Dolenz played Vance in the murder mystery film \"Night of the Strangler\". He was featured in an episode of \"Adam-12\", entitled \"Dirt Duel\" (season 5, episode 1), and an episode of \"Cannon\", entitled \"Bitter Legion\" (season 2, episode 3). Dolenz provided the voice of Two-Face's twin henchmen Min and Max in the two-part episode \"Two-Face\" on \"\". In a September 2006 radio interview, Dolenz reported that he was the current voice of Snuggle the Fabric Softener Bear at that time. In 2017, Dolenz returned to voice-over, providing the voice of Wendell the Love Grub, as well as singing the featured song, in the Cartoon Network series \"Mighty Magiswords\" half-hour episode, \"The Saga of Robopiggeh!\". Dolenz recorded the voice-acting remotely in New York weeks before his Good Times! tour.\nBoth Dolenz and Michael Nesmith auditioned for the role of Arthur \"The Fonz\" Fonzarelli on \"Happy Days\". Dolenz was reportedly a finalist for the role.\nIn 1975, Dolenz acted in \"Linda Lovelace for President\", starring Linda Lovelace.\nIn 1994\u201395, Dolenz played in two episodes of the sitcom \"Boy Meets World\"; in the first one (entitled \"Band on the Run\"), he played Norm, a bandmate of Alan Matthews. In 1995, he joined Davy Jones and Peter Tork in episode eight of the third season (entitled \"Rave On\"), although they did not play the Monkees, per se \u2013 Dolenz's character is \"Gordy\", while Davy Jones is \"Reginald Fairfield\" and Tork is \"Jedidiah Lawrence\". However, at the climax of the program, the three are put on stage together and perform the classic Buddy Holly song \"Not Fade Away\", and the Temptations' \"My Girl\". As an inside joke, actor Dave Madden, who had played the manager on \"The Partridge Family\", cameoed as a manager; he suddenly appears, wanting to handle the \"new\" group, and tells them that they \"could be bigger than The Beatles\", which they all scoff at.\nIn 2007, he appeared in Rob Zombie's remake of \"Halloween\" as Derek Allan, the owner of a gun shop.\nOn January 29, 2011, Dolenz appeared in the Syfy Channel film \"Mega Python vs. Gatoroid\", alongside Debbie Gibson and Tiffany. On February 21, 2015, he had a cameo as himself in the Adult Swim TV special \"Bagboy\". In 2017, he appeared as himself on the sitcom \"Difficult People\".\nDirectorial work.\nIn 1980, Dolenz produced and directed the British television sitcom \"Metal Mickey\", featuring a large metallic robot with the catch-phrase \"boogie boogie\". In 1981, he directed a short film based on the sketch \"Balham, Gateway to the South\", with Robbie Coltrane playing multiple roles. In the early 1980s, Dolenz directed a stage adaptation of \"Bugsy Malone\". He was producer of the TV show \"Luna\" in 1983\u201384.\nMTV reignites Monkee Mania.\nIn 1986, a screening of the entire Monkees television series by MTV led to renewed interest in the band, followed by a single, \"That Was Then, This Is Now\", which reached No. 20 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the U.S. and No.41 in Canada, a 20th-anniversary tour, a greatest hits album, and a brand new LP, \"Pool It!\" in 1987. The band's original albums were reissued, and all hit the record charts at the same time.\nBeginning in 1986, Dolenz joined the other ex-Monkees for several reunion tours and toured extensively as a solo artist.\nWCBS-FM.\nOn January 10, 2005, Dolenz replaced Dan Taylor as the morning disc jockey at oldies radio station WCBS-FM in New York. On June 3, 2005, Dolenz celebrated his 100th show with a special morning show at B. B. King's. That was also his last regular show at the station; at 5:00\u00a0pm, WCBS-FM announced that the station would replace its oldies format with a \"Jack\" format, eliminating the need for on-air disc jockeys.\nHowever, WCBS-FM eventually returned to its oldies format on July 12, 2007, with Taylor re-assuming his role as the morning disc jockey the following day. Several months later, on February 3, 2008, Dolenz was invited back to the station to present his long-postponed 101st show and final in-studio appearance there by guest-hosting a three-hour broadcast during WCBS's Sunday evening \"New York Radio Greats\" program.\nSolo work and further Monkees reunions.\nIn 2009, Dolenz signed a deal to record an album of the classic songs of Carole King, titled \"King for a Day\". The album (released on Gigitone Records) was produced by Jeffrey Foskett, who has worked extensively with Brian Wilson and played on Wilson's 2004 Grammy-winning \"Brian Wilson Presents Smile\". King's songs \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\", \"Sometime in the Morning\", and \"Porpoise Song\" (Theme from \"Head\") have emerged as signature songs from the Monkees. As of February 2010, he was appearing on stage in London in \"Hairspray\" with Michael Ball. The show also went on tour and had a successful run in Dublin, Ireland, during November 2010. In 2011, he rejoined Tork and Jones for .\nAfter Jones' sudden death in February 2012, Dolenz and Tork reunited with Michael Nesmith for a 12-concert tour of the United States as a tribute. The three remaining Monkees toured again in 2013 and 2014 and Dolenz toured as a duo with Tork in 2015 and 2016.\nFollowing Tork's death in 2019, Dolenz toured with Nesmith as \"The Mike and Micky Show\" in 2018 and 2019. On May 4, 2021, Dolenz and Nesmith announced \"The Monkees Farewell Tour\" which was the last for the group. The tour consisted of 40 US dates from September to November. The final show was held on November 14, 2021, at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles.\nOn May 21, 2021, Dolenz released a solo album, \"Dolenz Sings Nesmith\", featuring songs written by Nesmith and produced by Christian Nesmith.\nOn November 3, 2023 Dolenz released an EP of R.E.M. cover songs.\nOther tours.\nIn late 2019, Dolenz toured with Todd Rundgren, Jason Scheff, Christopher Cross, and Joey Molland of Badfinger, in celebration of the Beatles' White Album on the \"It Was Fifty Years Ago Today \u2013 A Tribute to the Beatles' White Album\" tour. Dolenz performed the Monkees' songs \"I'm a Believer\" and \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\".\nPersonal life.\nDolenz has been married three times and is the father of four daughters. In 1967, while in the UK on tour with the Monkees, Dolenz met future wife Samantha Juste, a co-presenter on BBC TV's pop music show \"Top of the Pops\". They married in 1968, and their daughter Ami Bluebell Dolenz was born on January 8, 1969; she became an actress who was particularly active in the 1980s and 1990s. Dolenz and Juste divorced in 1975, but remained close friends until her death following a stroke on February 5, 2014.\nHe married Trina Dow in 1977. They had three daughters: Charlotte Janelle (born August 8, 1981), Emily Claire (born July 25, 1983), and Georgia Rose (born September 3, 1984). They divorced in 1991. Trina Dow Dolenz has become a couples therapist, still using her married name.\nDolenz married his third wife, Donna Quinter, in 2002.\nDiscography.\nAlbums\nSingles\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37892", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37892", "title": "Thrust", "text": "Reaction force\nThrust is a reaction force described quantitatively by Newton's third law. When a system expels or accelerates mass in one direction, the accelerated mass will cause a force of equal magnitude but opposite direction to be applied to that system.\nThe force applied on a surface in a direction perpendicular or normal to the surface is also called thrust. Force, and thus thrust, is measured using the International System of Units (SI) in newtons (symbol: N), and represents the amount needed to accelerate 1 kilogram of mass at the rate of 1 metre per second per second. In mechanical engineering, force orthogonal to the main load (such as in parallel helical gears) is referred to as static thrust.\nExamples.\nA fixed-wing aircraft propulsion system generates forward thrust when air is pushed in the direction opposite to flight. This can be done by different means such as the spinning blades of a propeller, the propelling jet of a jet engine, or by ejecting hot gases from a rocket engine. Reverse thrust can be generated to aid braking after landing by reversing the pitch of variable-pitch propeller blades, or using a thrust reverser on a jet engine. Rotary wing aircraft use rotors and thrust vectoring V/STOL aircraft use propellers or engine thrust to support the weight of the aircraft and to provide forward propulsion.\nA motorboat propeller generates thrust when it rotates and forces water backwards.\nA rocket is propelled forward by a thrust equal in magnitude, but opposite in direction, to the time-rate of momentum change of the exhaust gas accelerated from the combustion chamber through the rocket engine nozzle. This is the exhaust velocity with respect to the rocket, times the time-rate at which the mass is expelled, or in mathematical terms:\nformula_1\nWhere T is the thrust generated (force), formula_2 is the rate of change of mass with respect to time (mass flow rate of exhaust), and v is the velocity of the exhaust gases measured relative to the rocket.\nFor vertical launch of a rocket the initial thrust at liftoff must be more than the weight.\nEach of the three Space Shuttle Main Engines could produce a thrust of 1.8\u00a0meganewton, and each of the Space Shuttle's two Solid Rocket Boosters , together 29.4\u00a0MN.\nBy contrast, the Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue (SAFER) has 24 thrusters of each.\nIn the air-breathing category, the AMT-USA AT-180 jet engine developed for radio-controlled aircraft produce 90\u00a0N (20 lbf) of thrust. The GE90-115B engine fitted on the Boeing 777-300ER has a thrust of 569\u00a0kN (127,900\u00a0lbf). It was recognized by \"Guinness World Records\" as the \"World's Most Powerful Commercial Jet Engine\" until it was surpassed by the GE9X (fitted on the upcoming Boeing 777X), with 609 kN (134,300 lbf).\nConcepts.\nThrust to power.\nThe power needed to generate thrust and the force of the thrust can be related in a non-linear way. In general, formula_3. The proportionality constant varies, and can be solved for a uniform flow, where formula_4 is the incoming air velocity, formula_5 is the velocity at the actuator disc, and formula_6 is the final exit velocity:\nformula_7\nformula_8\nformula_9\nSolving for the velocity at the disc, formula_5, we then have:\nformula_11\nWhen incoming air is accelerated from a standstill \u2013 for example when hovering \u2013 then formula_12, and we can find:\nformula_13\nFrom here we can see the formula_3 relationship, finding:\nformula_15\nThe inverse of the proportionality constant, the \"efficiency\" of an otherwise-perfect thruster, is proportional to the area of the cross section of the propelled volume of fluid (formula_16) and the density of the fluid (formula_17). This helps to explain why moving through water is easier and why aircraft have much larger propellers than watercraft.\nThrust to propulsive power.\nA very common question is how to compare the thrust rating of a jet engine with the power rating of a piston engine. Such comparison is difficult, as these quantities are not equivalent. A piston engine does not move the aircraft by itself (the propeller does that), so piston engines are usually rated by how much power they deliver to the propeller. Except for changes in temperature and air pressure, this quantity depends basically on the throttle setting.\nA jet engine has no propeller, so the propulsive power of a jet engine is determined from its thrust as follows. Power is the force (F) it takes to move something over some distance (d) divided by the time (t) it takes to move that distance:\nformula_18\nIn case of a rocket or a jet aircraft, the force is exactly the thrust (T) produced by the engine. If the rocket or aircraft is moving at about a constant speed, then distance divided by time is just speed, so power is thrust times speed:\nformula_19\nThis formula looks very surprising, but it is correct: the \"propulsive power\" (or \"power available\" ) of a jet engine increases with its speed. If the speed is zero, then the propulsive power is zero. If a jet aircraft is at full throttle but attached to a static test stand, then the jet engine produces no propulsive power, however thrust is still produced. The combination piston engine\u2013propeller also has a propulsive power with exactly the same formula, and it will also be zero at zero speed \u2013 but that is for the engine\u2013propeller set. The engine alone will continue to produce its rated power at a constant rate, whether the aircraft is moving or not.\nNow, imagine the strong chain is broken, and the jet and the piston aircraft start to move. At low speeds:\nThe piston engine will have constant 100% power, and the propeller's thrust will vary with speed\nThe jet engine will have constant 100% thrust, and the engine's power will vary with speed\nExcess thrust.\nIf a powered aircraft is generating thrust T and experiencing drag D, the difference between the two, T\u00a0\u2212\u00a0D, is termed the excess thrust. The instantaneous performance of the aircraft is mostly dependent on the excess thrust.\nExcess thrust is a vector and is determined as the vector difference between the thrust vector and the drag vector.\nThrust axis.\nThe thrust axis for an airplane is the line of action of the total thrust at any instant. It depends on the location, number, and characteristics of the jet engines or propellers. It usually differs from the drag axis. If so, the distance between the thrust axis and the drag axis will cause a moment that must be resisted by a change in the aerodynamic force on the horizontal stabiliser. Notably, the Boeing 737 MAX, with larger, lower-slung engines than previous 737 models, had a greater distance between the thrust axis and the drag axis, causing the nose to rise up in some flight regimes, necessitating a pitch-control system, MCAS. Early versions of MCAS malfunctioned in flight with catastrophic consequences, leading to the deaths of over 300 people in 2018 and 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37894", "revid": "37102400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37894", "title": "Savoy knot", "text": "Decorative knot\nThe Savoy knot, a type of decorative knot, is a heraldic knot used primarily in Italian heraldry. It is most notable for its appearance on the heraldic badge of the House of Savoy, where it is accompanied by the motto \"Stringe ma non costringe\", \"It tightens, but does not constrain\". The Cavendish knot is an identical heraldic knot. In shape, the Savoy knot is comparable to a figure eight.\nWhen used outside heraldry (as a real knot), it is known as a figure-eight knot.\nThe Savoy knot can also be seen on the Alfa Romeo automobile badge (founded and manufactured in Milan, Italy) up to 1943.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37895", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37895", "title": "Collatz conjecture", "text": "Open problem on 3x+1 and x/2 functions\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in mathematics\nWith enough repetition, do all positive integers converge to 1?\nMore unsolved problems in mathematics\nThe Collatz conjecture is one of the most famous unsolved problems in mathematics. The conjecture asks whether repeating two simple arithmetic operations will eventually transform every positive integer into 1. It concerns sequences of integers in which each term is obtained from the previous term as follows: if a term is even, the next term is one half of it. If a term is odd, the next term is 3 times the previous term plus 1. The conjecture is that these sequences always reach 1, no matter which positive integer is chosen to start the sequence. The conjecture has been shown to hold for all positive integers up to , but no general proof has been found.\nIt is named after the mathematician Lothar Collatz, who introduced the idea in 1937, two years after receiving his doctorate. The sequence of numbers involved is sometimes referred to as the hailstone sequence, hailstone numbers or hailstone numerals (because the values are usually subject to multiple descents and ascents like hailstones in a cloud), or as wondrous numbers.\nPaul Erd\u0151s said about the Collatz conjecture: \"Mathematics may not be ready for such problems.\" Jeffrey Lagarias stated in 2010 that the Collatz conjecture \"is an extraordinarily difficult problem, completely out of reach of present day mathematics\". However, though the Collatz conjecture itself remains open, efforts to solve the problem have led to new techniques and many partial results.\nStatement of the problem.\nConsider the following operation on an arbitrary positive integer:\nIn modular arithmetic notation, define the function f as follows:\nformula_1\nNow form a sequence by performing this operation repeatedly, beginning with any positive integer, and taking the result at each step as the input at the next.\nIn notation:\nformula_2\n(that is: \"ai\" is the value of f applied to n recursively i times; \"ai\" \n \"f\"\u200a\"i\"(\"n\")).\nThe Collatz conjecture is: \"This process will eventually reach the number 1, regardless of which positive integer is chosen initially. That is, for each\" formula_3, there is some formula_4 with formula_5.\nIf the conjecture is false, it can only be because there is some starting number which gives rise to a sequence that does not contain 1. Such a sequence would either enter a repeating cycle that excludes 1, or increase without bound. No such sequence has been found.\nThe smallest i such that \"ai\" &lt; \"a\"0 is called the stopping time of n. Similarly, the smallest k such that \"ak\" \n 1 is called the total stopping time of n. If one of the indexes i or k does not exist, we say that the stopping time or the total stopping time, respectively, is infinite.\nThe Collatz conjecture asserts that the total stopping time of every n is finite. It is also equivalent to saying that every \"n\" \u2265 2 has a finite stopping time.\nSince 3\"n\" + 1 is even whenever n is odd, one may instead use the \"shortcut\" form of the Collatz function:\nformula_6\nThis definition yields smaller values for the stopping time and total stopping time without changing the overall dynamics of the process.\nEmpirical data.\nFor instance, starting with \"n\" \n 12 and applying the function \"f\" without \"shortcut\", one gets the sequence \nThe number \"n\" \n 19 takes longer to reach 1: \nThe sequence for \"n\" \n 27, listed and graphed below, takes 111 steps (41 steps through odd numbers, in bold), climbing as high as 9232 before descending to 1.\nNumbers with a total stopping time longer than that of any smaller starting value form a sequence beginning with:\n1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 18, 25, 27, 54, 73, 97, 129, 171, 231, 313, 327, 649, 703, 871, 1161, 2223, 2463, 2919, 3711, 6171, ... (sequence in the OEIS).\nThe starting values whose maximum trajectory point is greater than that of any smaller starting value are as follows:\n1, 2, 3, 7, 15, 27, 255, 447, 639, 703, 1819, 4255, 4591, 9663, 20895, 26623, 31911, 60975, 77671, 113383, 138367, 159487, 270271, 665215, 704511, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nNumber of steps for n to reach 1 are\n0, 1, 7, 2, 5, 8, 16, 3, 19, 6, 14, 9, 9, 17, 17, 4, 12, 20, 20, 7, 7, 15, 15, 10, 23, 10, 111, 18, 18, 18, 106, 5, 26, 13, 13, 21, 21, 21, 34, 8, 109, 8, 29, 16, 16, 16, 104, 11, 24, 24, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nThe starting value having the largest total stopping time while being\nless than 10 is 9, which has 19 steps,\nless than 100 is 97, which has 118 steps,\nless than 1000 is 871, which has 178 steps,\nless than 104 is 6171, which has 261 steps,\nless than 105 is , which has 350 steps,\nless than 106 is , which has 524 steps,\nless than 107 is , which has 685 steps,\nless than 108 is , which has 949 steps,\nless than 109 is , which has 986 steps,\nless than 1010 is , which has 1132 steps,\nless than 1011 is , which has 1228 steps,\nless than 1012 is , which has 1348 steps. (sequence in the OEIS)\nThese numbers are the lowest ones with the indicated step count, but not necessarily the only ones below the given limit. As an example, has 1132 steps, as does .\nThe starting values having the smallest total stopping time with respect to their number of digits (in base 2) are the powers of two, since 2\"n\" is halved n times to reach 1, and it is never increased. \nSupporting arguments.\nAlthough the conjecture has not been proven, most mathematicians who have looked into the problem think the conjecture is true because experimental evidence and heuristic arguments support it.\nExperimental evidence.\nThe conjecture has been checked by computer for all starting values up to 271 \u2248 . All values tested so far converge to 1.\nThis computer evidence is still not rigorous proof that the conjecture is true for all starting values, as counterexamples may be found when considering very large (or possibly immense) positive integers, as in the case of the disproven P\u00f3lya conjecture and Mertens conjecture.\nHowever, such verifications may have other implications. Certain constraints on any non-trivial cycle, such as lower bounds on the length of the cycle, can be proven based on the value of the lowest term in the cycle. Therefore, computer searches to rule out cycles that have a small lowest term can strengthen these constraints.\nA probabilistic heuristic.\nIf one considers only the \"odd\" numbers in the sequence generated by the Collatz process, then each odd number is on average of the previous one. (More precisely, the geometric mean of the ratios of outcomes is .) This yields a heuristic argument that every Hailstone sequence should decrease in the long run, although this is not evidence against other cycles, only against divergence. The argument is not a proof, however, because it assumes that Hailstone sequences are assembled from uncorrelated probabilistic events. (It does rigorously establish that the 2-adic extension of the Collatz process has two division steps for every multiplication step for almost all 2-adic starting values.)\nStopping times.\nAs proven by Riho Terras, almost every positive integer has a finite stopping time. In other words, almost every Collatz sequence reaches a point that is strictly below its initial value. The proof is based on the distribution of parity vectors and uses the central limit theorem.\nIn 2019, Terence Tao improved this result by showing, using logarithmic density, that almost all (in the sense of logarithmic density) Collatz orbits descend below any given function of the starting point, provided that this function diverges to infinity, no matter how slowly. Responding to this work, \"Quanta Magazine\" wrote that Tao \"came away with one of the most significant results on the Collatz conjecture in decades\".\nLower bounds.\nIn a computer-aided proof, Krasikov and Lagarias showed that the number of integers in the interval [1,\"x\"] that eventually reach 1 is at least equal to \"x\"0.84 for all sufficiently large x.\nCycles.\nIn this part, consider the shortcut form of the Collatz function\nformula_7\nA cycle is a sequence (\"a\"0, \"a\"1, ..., \"aq\") of distinct positive integers where \"f\"(\"a\"0) \n \"a\"1, \"f\"(\"a\"1) \n \"a\"2, ..., and \"f\"(\"aq\") \n \"a\"0.\nThe only known cycle is (1,2) of period 2, called the trivial cycle.\nCycle length.\nAs of 2025, the best known bound on cycle length is ( without shortcut). In 1993, Eliahou proved that the period p of any non-trivial cycle is of the form\nformula_8\nwhere a, b and c are non-negative integers, \"b\" \u2265 1 and \"ac\" = 0. This result is based on the simple continued fraction expansion of .\nk-cycles.\nA k-cycle is a cycle that can be partitioned into \"k\" contiguous subsequences, each consisting of an increasing sequence of odd numbers, followed by a decreasing sequence of even numbers. For instance, if the cycle consists of a single increasing sequence of odd numbers followed by a decreasing sequence of even numbers, it is called a \"1-cycle\".\nSteiner (1977) proved that there is no 1-cycle other than the trivial (1; 2). Simons (2005) used Steiner's method to prove that there is no 2-cycle. Simons and de Weger (2005) extended this proof up to 68-cycles; there is no k-cycle up to \"k\" \n 68. Hercher extended the method further and proved that there exists no \"k\"-cycle with \"k\" \u2264 91. As exhaustive computer searches continue, larger \"k\" values may be ruled out. To state the argument more intuitively; we do not have to search for cycles that have less than 92 subsequences, where each subsequence consists of consecutive ups followed by consecutive downs.\nOther formulations of the conjecture.\nIn reverse.\nThere is another approach to prove the conjecture, which considers the bottom-up\nmethod of growing the so-called \"Collatz graph\". The \"Collatz graph\" is a graph defined by the inverse relation\nformula_9\nSo, instead of proving that all positive integers eventually lead to 1, we can try to prove that 1 leads backwards to all positive integers. For any integer n, \"n\" \u2261 1 (mod 2) if and only if 3\"n\" + 1 \u2261 4 (mod 6). Equivalently, \u2261 1 (mod 2) if and only if \"n\" \u2261 4 (mod 6). Conjecturally, this inverse relation forms a tree for positive integers except for the 1\u20132\u20134 loop (the inverse of the 4\u20132\u20131 loop of the unaltered function f defined in the Statement of the problem section of this article).\nWhen the relation 3\"n\" + 1 of the function f is replaced by the common substitute \"shortcut\" relation , the Collatz graph is defined by the inverse relation,\nformula_10\nFor any integer n, \"n\" \u2261 1 (mod 2) if and only if \u2261 2 (mod 3). Equivalently, \u2261 1 (mod 2) if and only if \"n\" \u2261 2 (mod 3). Conjecturally, this inverse relation forms a tree for positive integers except for a 1\u20132 loop (the inverse of the 1\u20132 loop of the function f(n) revised as indicated above).\nAlternatively, replace the 3\"n\" + 1 with where \"n\"\u2032 \n 3\"n\" + 1 and \"H\"(\"n\"\u2032) is the highest power of 2 that divides \"n\"\u2032 (with no remainder). The resulting function f maps from odd numbers to odd numbers. Now suppose that for some odd number n, applying this operation k times yields the number 1 (that is, \"f\"\"k\"(\"n\") \n 1). Then in binary, the number n can be written as the concatenation of strings \"w\"\"k\" \"w\"\"k\"\u22121 ... \"w\"1 where each \"w\"\"h\" is a finite and contiguous extract from the representation of . The representation of n therefore holds the repetends of , where each repetend is optionally rotated and then replicated up to a finite number of bits. It is only in binary that this occurs. Conjecturally, every binary string s that ends with a '1' can be reached by a representation of this form (where we may add or delete leading '0's to\u00a0s).\nAs an abstract machine that computes in base two.\nRepeated applications of the Collatz function can be represented as an abstract machine that handles strings of bits. The machine will perform the following three steps on any odd number until only one 1 remains:\n 3\"n\" + 1);\nExample.\nThe starting number 7 is written in base two as 111. The resulting Collatz sequence is:\n 111\n 1111\n 10110\n 10111\n 100010\n 100011\n 110100\n 11011\n 101000\n 1011\n 10000\nAs a parity sequence.\nFor this section, consider the shortcut form of the Collatz function\nformula_11\nIf P(...) is the parity of a number, that is P(2\"n\") \n 0 and P(2\"n\" + 1) \n 1, then we can define the Collatz parity sequence (or parity vector) for a number n as \"pi\" \n P(\"ai\"), where \"a\"0 \n \"n\", and \"a\"\"i\"+1 \n \"f\"(\"a\"\"i\").\nWhich operation is performed, or , depends on the parity. The parity sequence is the same as the sequence of operations.\nUsing this form for \"f\"(\"n\"), it can be shown that the parity sequences for two numbers m and n will agree in the first k terms if and only if m and n are equivalent modulo 2\"k\". This implies that every number is uniquely identified by its parity sequence, and moreover that if there are multiple Hailstone cycles, then their corresponding parity cycles must be different.\nApplying the f function k times to the number \"n\" \n 2\"k\"\"a\" + \"b\" will give the result 3\"c\"\"a\" + \"d\", where d is the result of applying the f function k times to b, and c is how many increases were encountered during that sequence. For example, for 25\"a\" + 1 there are 3 increases as 1 iterates to 2, 1, 2, 1, and finally to 2 so the result is 33\"a\" + 2; for 22\"a\" + 1 there is only 1 increase as 1 rises to 2 and falls to 1 so the result is 3\"a\" + 1. When b is 2\"k\" \u2212 1 then there will be k rises and the result will be 3\"k\"\"a\" + 3\"k\" \u2212 1. The power of 3 multiplying a is independent of the value of a; it depends only on the behavior of b. This allows one to predict that certain forms of numbers will always lead to a smaller number after a certain number of iterations: for example, 4\"a\" + 1 becomes 3\"a\" + 1 after two applications of f and 16\"a\" + 3 becomes 9\"a\" + 2 after four applications of f. Whether those smaller numbers continue to 1, however, depends on the value of a.\nAs a tag system.\nFor the Collatz function in the shortcut form\nformula_12\nHailstone sequences can be computed by the with production rules\n\"a\" \u2192 \"bc\", \"b\" \u2192 \"a\", \"c\" \u2192 \"aaa\".\nIn this system, the positive integer n is represented by a string of n copies of a, and iteration of the tag operation halts on any word of length less than\u00a02. (Adapted from De Mol.)\nThe Collatz conjecture equivalently states that this tag system, with an arbitrary finite string of a as the initial word, eventually halts (see \"\" for a worked example).\nExtensions to larger domains.\nIterating on all integers.\nAn extension to the Collatz conjecture is to include all integers, not just positive integers. Leaving aside the cycle 0 \u2192 0 which cannot be entered from outside, there are a total of four known cycles, which all nonzero integers seem to eventually fall into under iteration of f. These cycles are listed here, starting with the well-known cycle for positive\u00a0n:\nOdd values are listed in large bold. Each cycle is listed with its member of least absolute value (which is always odd) first.\nThe generalized Collatz conjecture is the assertion that every integer, under iteration by f, eventually falls into one of the four cycles above or the cycle 0 \u2192 0.\nIterating on rationals with odd denominators.\nThe Collatz map can be extended to (positive or negative) rational numbers which have odd denominators when written in lowest terms.\nThe number is taken to be 'odd' or 'even' according to whether its numerator is odd or even. Then the formula for the map is exactly the same as when the domain is the integers: an 'even' such rational is divided by 2; an 'odd' such rational is multiplied by 3 and then 1 is added. A closely related fact is that the Collatz map extends to the ring of 2-adic integers, which contains the ring of rationals with odd denominators as a subring.\nWhen using the \"shortcut\" definition of the Collatz map, it is known that any periodic parity sequence is generated by exactly one rational. Conversely, it is conjectured that every rational with an odd denominator has an eventually cyclic parity sequence (Periodicity Conjecture).\nIf a parity cycle has length n and includes odd numbers exactly m times at indices \"k\"0 &lt; \u22ef &lt; \"k\"\"m\"\u22121, then the unique rational which generates immediately and periodically this parity cycle is\nFor example, the parity cycle (1 0 1 1 0 0 1) has length 7 and four odd terms at indices 0, 2, 3, and 6. It is repeatedly generated by the fraction\nformula_13\nas the latter leads to the rational cycle\nformula_14\nAny cyclic permutation of (1 0 1 1 0 0 1) is associated to one of the above fractions. For instance, the cycle (0 1 1 0 0 1 1) is produced by the fraction\nformula_15\nFor a one-to-one correspondence, a parity cycle should be \"irreducible\", that is, not partitionable into identical sub-cycles. As an illustration of this, the parity cycle (1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0) and its sub-cycle (1 1 0 0) are associated to the same fraction when reduced to lowest terms.\nIn this context, assuming the validity of the Collatz conjecture implies that (1 0) and (0 1) are the only parity cycles generated by positive whole numbers (1 and 2, respectively).\nIf the odd denominator d of a rational is not a multiple of 3, then all the iterates have the same denominator and the sequence of numerators can be obtained by applying the \"3\"n\" + \"d\"\u00a0\" generalization of the Collatz function\nformula_16\n2-adic extension.\nThe function\nformula_17\nis well-defined on the ring formula_18 of 2-adic integers, where it is continuous and measure-preserving with respect to the 2-adic measure. Moreover, its dynamics is known to be ergodic.\nDefine the \"parity vector\" function Q acting on formula_18 as\nformula_20\nThe function Q is a 2-adic isometry. Consequently, every infinite parity sequence occurs for exactly one 2-adic integer, so that almost all trajectories are acyclic in formula_18.\nAn equivalent formulation of the Collatz conjecture is that\nformula_22\nIterating on real or complex numbers.\nThe Collatz map can be extended to the real line by choosing any function which evaluates to formula_23 when formula_24 is an even integer, and to either formula_25 or formula_26 (for the \"shortcut\" version) when formula_24 is an odd integer. This is called an interpolating function. A simple way to do this is to pick two functions formula_28 and formula_29, where:\nformula_30\nformula_31\nand use them as switches for our desired values:\nformula_32.\nOne such choice is formula_33 and formula_34. The iterations of this map lead to a dynamical system, further investigated by Marc Chamberland. He showed that the conjecture does not hold for positive real numbers since there are infinitely many fixed points, as well as orbits escaping monotonically to infinity. The function formula_35 has two attracting cycles of period formula_36: formula_37 and formula_38. Moreover, the set of unbounded orbits is conjectured to be of measure formula_39.\nLetherman, Schleicher, and Wood extended the study to the complex plane. They used Chamberland's function for complex sine and cosine and added the extra term formula_40\nformula_41, where formula_42 is any entire function. Since this expression evaluates to zero for real integers, the extended function\nformula_43\nis an interpolation of the Collatz map to the complex plane. The reason for adding the extra term is to make all integers critical points of formula_35. With this, they show that no integer is in a Baker domain, which implies that any integer is either eventually periodic or belongs to a wandering domain. They conjectured that the latter is not the case, which would make all integer orbits finite.\nMost of the points have orbits that diverge to infinity. Coloring these points based on how fast they diverge produces the image on the left, for formula_45. The inner black regions and the outer region are the Fatou components, and the boundary between them is the Julia set of formula_35, which forms a fractal pattern, sometimes called a \"Collatz fractal\".\nThere are many other ways to define a complex interpolating function, such as using the complex exponential instead of sine and cosine:\nformula_47,\nwhich exhibit different dynamics. In this case, for instance, if formula_48, then formula_49. The corresponding Julia set, shown on the right, consists of uncountably many curves, called \"hairs\", or \"rays\".\nOptimizations.\nTime\u2013space tradeoff.\nThe section \"As a parity sequence\" above gives a way to speed up simulation of the sequence. To jump ahead k steps on each iteration (using the f function from that section), break up the current number into two parts, b (the k least significant bits, interpreted as an integer), and a (the rest of the bits as an integer). The result of jumping ahead k is given by\n\"f\"\"k\"(2\"k\"\"a\" + \"b\") \n 3\"c\"(\"b\", \"k\")\"a\" + \"d\"(\"b\", \"k\").\nThe values of c (or better 3\"c\") and d can be precalculated for all possible k-bit numbers b, where \"d\"(\"b\", \"k\") is the result of applying the f function k times to b, and \"c\"(\"b\", \"k\") is the number of odd numbers encountered on the way. For example, if \"k\" \n 5, one can jump ahead 5 steps on each iteration by separating out the 5 least significant bits of a number and using\n c(0...31, 5) = {\u202f0, 3, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 4, 1, 4, 1, 3, 2, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 3, 1, 1, 3, 3, 2, 3, 2, 4, 3, 3, 4, 5\u202f},\n d(0...31, 5) = {\u202f0, 2, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 20, 1, 26, 1, 10, 4, 4, 13, 40, 2, 5, 17, 17, 2, 2, 20, 20, 8, 22, 8, 71, 26, 26, 80, 242\u202f}.\nThis requires 2\"k\" precomputation and storage to speed up the resulting calculation by a factor of k, a space\u2013time tradeoff.\nModular restrictions.\nFor the special purpose of searching for a counterexample to the Collatz conjecture, this precomputation leads to an even more important acceleration, used by Tom\u00e1s Oliveira e Silva in his computational confirmations of the Collatz conjecture up to large values of\u00a0n. If, for some given b and k, the inequality\n\"f\"\"k\"(2\"k\"\"a\" + \"b\") \n 3\"c\"(\"b\")\"a\" + \"d\"(\"b\") &lt; 2\"k\"\"a\" + \"b\"\nholds for all a, then the first counterexample, if it exists, cannot be b modulo 2\"k\". For instance, the first counterexample must be odd because \"f\"(2\"n\") \n \"n\", smaller than 2\"n\"; and it must be 3 mod 4 because \"f\"2(4\"n\" + 1) \n 3\"n\" + 1, smaller than 4\"n\" + 1. For each starting value a which is not a counterexample to the Collatz conjecture, there is a k for which such an inequality holds, so checking the Collatz conjecture for one starting value is as good as checking an entire congruence class. As k increases, the search only needs to check those residues b that are not eliminated by lower values of\u00a0k. Only an exponentially small fraction of the residues survive. For example, the only surviving residues mod 32 are 7, 15, 27, and 31.\nIntegers divisible by 3 cannot form a cycle, so these integers do not need to be checked as counter examples.\nSyracuse function.\nIf k is an odd integer, then 3\"k\" + 1 is even, so 3\"k\" + 1 \n 2\"a\"\"k\"\u2032 with \"k\"\u2032 odd and \"a\" \u2265 1. The Syracuse function is the function f from the set I of positive odd integers into itself, for which \"f\"(\"k\") \n \"k\"\u2032 (sequence in the OEIS).\nSome properties of the Syracuse function are:\n \"f\"(\"k\"). (Because 3(4\"k\" + 1) + 1 \n 12\"k\" + 4 \n 4(3\"k\" + 1).)\n 2 \u00d7 3\"p\" \u2212 1\"h\" \u2212 1. (Here \"f\"\"p\" \u2212 1 is function iteration notation.)\nThe Collatz conjecture is equivalent to the statement that, for all k in I, there exists an integer \"n\" \u2265 1 such that \"f\"\"n\"(\"k\") \n 1.\nUndecidable generalizations.\nIn 1972, John Horton Conway proved that a natural generalization of the Collatz problem is algorithmically undecidable.\nSpecifically, he considered functions of the form\nformula_50\nwhere \"a\"0, \"b\"0, ..., \"a\"\"P\" \u2212 1, \"b\"\"P\" \u2212 1 are rational numbers which are so chosen that \"g\"(\"n\") is always an integer. The standard Collatz function is given by \"P\" \n 2, \"a\"0 \n , \"b\"0 \n 0, \"a\"1 \n 3, \"b\"1 \n 1. Conway proved that the problem\n Given g and n, does the sequence of iterates \"gk\"(\"n\") reach 1?\nis undecidable, by representing the halting problem in this way.\nCloser to the Collatz problem is the following \"universally quantified\" problem:\n Given g, does the sequence of iterates \"gk\"(\"n\") reach 1, for all \"n\" &gt; 0?\nModifying the condition in this way can make a problem either harder or easier to solve (intuitively, it is harder to justify a positive answer but might be easier to justify a negative one). Kurtz and Simon proved that the universally quantified problem is, in fact, undecidable and even higher in the arithmetical hierarchy; specifically, it is \u03a0-complete. This hardness result holds even if one restricts the class of functions g by fixing the modulus P to 6480.\nIterations of g in a simplified version of this form, with all formula_51 equal to zero, are formalized in an esoteric programming language called FRACTRAN.\nIn computational complexity.\nThe Collatz and related conjectures are often used when studying computational complexity. The connection is made through the busy beaver function, where BB(n) is the maximum number of steps taken by any n state Turing machine that halts. There is a 15 state Turing machine that halts if and only if the following conjecture by Paul Erd\u0151s (closely related to the Collatz conjecture) is false: for all n &gt; 8 there is at least one digit 2 in the base 3 representation of 2\"n\". Hence if BB(15) was known, and this machine did not stop in that number of steps, it would be known to run forever and hence no counterexamples exist (which proves the conjecture true). This is a completely impractical way to settle the conjecture; instead it is used to suggest that BB(15) will be very hard to compute, at least as difficult as settling this Collatz-like conjecture.\nIn 2024, a six-state machine was found for which determining whether it halts involves solving a Collatz-like problem called the antihydra problem. As proofs of even simple conjectures of this nature are not currently known, this suggests that BB(6) will be very hard to compute.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
