{"id": "33166", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33166", "title": "West Germany", "text": "Federal Republic of Germany from 1949 to 1990\nWest Germany was the common English name for the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) from its formation on 23 May 1949 until its reunification with East Germany on 3 October 1990. It was sometimes known as the Bonn Republic after its capital city of Bonn, or as the Second German Republic. During the Cold War, the western portion of Germany and the associated territory of West Berlin were parts of the Western Bloc. West Germany was formed as a political entity during the Allied occupation of Germany after World War II, established from twelve states formed in the three Allied zones of occupation held by the United States, the United Kingdom, and France.\nAt the onset of the Cold War, Europe was divided between the Western and Eastern blocs. Germany was divided into the two countries. Initially, West Germany claimed an exclusive mandate for all of Germany, representing itself as the sole democratically reorganised continuation of the 1871\u20131945 German Reich.\nThree southwestern states of West Germany merged to form Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg in 1952, and the Saarland joined West Germany as a state in 1957 after it had been separated as the Saar Protectorate from Allied-occupied Germany by France (the separation had not been legal as it had not been recognised by the Allied Control Council). In addition to the resulting ten states, West Berlin was considered an unofficial eleventh state. While \"de jure\" not part of West Germany, for Berlin was under the control of the Allied Control Council, West Berlin politically aligned itself with West Germany and was directly or indirectly represented in its federal institutions.\nThe foundation for the influential position held by Germany today was laid during the economic miracle of the 1950s (), when West Germany rose from the enormous destruction wrought by World War II to become the world's second-largest economy. The first Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who remained in office until 1963, worked for a full alignment with the NATO rather than neutrality, and secured membership in the military alliance. Adenauer was also a proponent of agreements that developed into the present-day European Union. When the G6 was established in 1975, there was no serious debate as to whether West Germany would become a member.\nFollowing the collapse of the Eastern Bloc, symbolised by the opening of the Berlin Wall, both states took action to achieve German reunification. East Germany voted to dissolve and accede to the Federal Republic of Germany in 1990. The five post-war states () were reconstituted, along with the reunited Berlin, which ended its special status and formed a sixth . They formally joined the federal republic on 3 October 1990, raising the total number of states from ten to 16, and ending the division of Germany. The reunited Germany is thus the direct continuation of the state previously informally called West Germany and not a new state, as the process was essentially a voluntary act of accession: the Federal Republic of Germany was enlarged to include the additional six states of the dissolved German Democratic Republic. The expanded Federal Republic retained West Germany's political culture and continued its existing memberships in international organisations, as well as its Western foreign policy alignment and affiliation to Western alliances such as the United Nations, NATO, OECD, and the European Economic Community.\nNaming conventions.\nBefore reunification, Germany was divided between the (Federal Republic of Germany; commonly known as West Germany) and the (DDR; German Democratic Republic; commonly known as East Germany). Reunification was achieved by accession () of the German Democratic Republic to the Federal Republic of Germany, so became the official name of reunified Germany.\nIn East Germany, the terms (West Germany) or (West German Federal Republic) were preferred during the 1950s and 1960s. This changed under its constitutional amendment in 1974, when the idea of a single German nation was abandoned by East Germany. As a result, it officially considered West Germans and West Berliners as foreigners. The initialism \"BRD\" (FRG in English) began to prevail in East German usage in the early 1970s, beginning in the newspaper . Other Eastern Bloc nations soon followed suit.\nIn 1965, the West German Federal Minister of All-German Affairs, Erich Mende, had issued the \"Directives for the Appellation of Germany\", recommending avoiding the initialism BRD. On 31 May 1974, the heads of West German federal and state governments recommended always using the full name in official publications. From then on, West German sources avoided the abbreviated form, with the exception of left-leaning organisations which embraced it. In November 1979, the federal government informed the Bundestag that the West German public broadcasters ARD and ZDF had agreed to refuse to use the initialism.\nThe ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code of West Germany was DE (for \"Deutschland\", Germany), which has remained the country code of Germany after reunification. ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 codes are the most widely used country codes, and the DE code is notably used as a country identifier, extending the postal code and as the Internet's country code top-level domain .de. The less widely used ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 country code of West Germany was DEU, which has remained the country code of reunified Germany. The now deleted codes for East Germany, on the other hand, were DD in ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 and DDR in ISO 3166-1 alpha-3.\nThe colloquial term \"West Germany\" or its equivalent was used in many languages. was also a widespread colloquial form used in German-speaking countries, usually without political overtones.\nHistory.\nOn 4\u201311 February 1945 leaders from the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union held the Yalta Conference where future arrangements regarding post-war Europe and Allied strategy against Japan in the Pacific were negotiated. They agreed that the boundaries of Germany as at 31 December 1937 would be chosen as demarcating German national territory from German-occupied territory; all German annexations after 1937 were automatically null. Subsequently, and into the 1970s, the West German state was to maintain that these 1937 boundaries continued to be 'valid in international law', although the Allies had already agreed amongst themselves that the territories east of the Oder-Neisse line must be transferred to Poland and the Soviet Union in any peace agreement. The conference agreed that post-war Germany, minus these transfers, would be divided into four occupation zones: a French Zone in the far west; a British Zone in the northwest; an American Zone in the south; and a Soviet Zone in the East. Berlin was separately divided into four zones. These divisions were not intended to dismember Germany, only to designate zones of administration.\nBy the subsequent Potsdam Agreement, the four Allied Powers asserted joint sovereignty over \"Germany as a whole\", defined as the totality of the territory within the occupation zones. Former German areas east of the rivers Oder and Neisse and outside of 'Germany as a whole' were officially separated from German sovereignty in August 1945 and transferred from Soviet military occupation to Polish and Soviet (in the case of the territory of Kaliningrad) civil administration, their Polish and Soviet status to be confirmed at a final Peace Treaty. Following wartime commitments by the Allies to the governments-in-exile of Czechoslovakia and Poland, the Potsdam Protocols also agreed to the 'orderly and humane' transfer to Germany as a whole of the ethnic German populations in Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary. Eight million German expellees and refugees eventually settled in West Germany. Between 1946 and 1949, three of the occupation zones began to merge. First, the British and American zones were combined into the quasi-state of Bizonia. Soon afterwards, the French zone was included into Trizonia. Conversely, the Soviet zone became East Germany. At the same time, new federal states () were formed in the Allied zones; replacing the geography of pre-Nazi German states such as the Free State of Prussia and the Republic of Baden, which had derived ultimately from former independent German kingdoms and principalities.\nIn the dominant post-war narrative of West Germany, the Nazi regime was characterised as having been a 'criminal' state, illegal and illegitimate from the outset; while the Weimar Republic was characterised as having been a 'failed' state, whose inherent institutional and constitutional flaws had been exploited by Hitler in his illegal seizure of dictatorial powers. Consequently, following the death of Hitler in 1945 and the subsequent capitulation of the German Armed Forces, the national political, judicial, administrative, and constitutional instruments of both Nazi Germany and the Weimar Republic were understood as entirely defunct, such that a new West Germany could be established in a condition of constitutional nullity. Nevertheless, the new West Germany asserted its fundamental continuity with the 'overall' German state that was held to have embodied the unified German people since the Frankfurt Parliament of 1848, and which from 1871 had been represented within the German Reich; albeit that this overall state had become effectively dormant long before 8 May 1945.\nIn 1949 with the continuation and aggravation of the Cold War (for example, the Berlin Airlift of 1948\u201349), the two German states that had originated in the Western Allied and the Soviet Zones respectively became known internationally as West Germany and East Germany. Commonly known in English as East Germany, the former Soviet occupation zone in Germany, eventually became the \"German Democratic Republic\" or \"GDR\". In 1990 West Germany and East Germany jointly signed the Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany (also known as the \"Two-plus-Four Agreement\"); by which transitional status of Germany following World War II was definitively ended and the Four Allied powers relinquished their joint residual sovereign authority for Germany as a whole including the area of West Berlin which had officially remained under Allied occupation for the purposes of international and GDR law (a status that the Western countries applied to Berlin as a whole despite the Soviets declaring the end of occupation of East Berlin unilaterally many decades before). The Two-plus-Four Agreement also saw the two parts of Germany confirm their post-war external boundaries as final and irreversible (including the 1945 transfer of former German lands east of the Oder\u2013Neisse line), and the Allied Powers confirmed their consent to German Reunification. From 3 October 1990, after the reformation of the GDR's , the East German states and East Berlin joined the Federal Republic.\nNATO membership.\nWith territories and frontiers that coincided largely with the ones of old Middle Ages East Francia and the 19th-century Napoleonic Confederation of the Rhine, the Federal Republic of Germany was founded on 23 May 1949 under the terms of the Bonn\u2013Paris conventions, whereby it obtained \"the full authority of a sovereign state\" on 5 May 1955 (although \"full sovereignty\" was not obtained until the Two Plus Four Agreement in 1990). The former occupying Western troops remained on the ground, now as part of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which West Germany joined on 9 May 1955, promising to rearm itself soon.\nWest Germany became a focus of the Cold War with its juxtaposition to East Germany, a member of the subsequently founded Warsaw Pact. The former capital, Berlin, had been divided into four sectors, with the Western Allies joining their sectors to form West Berlin, while the Soviets held East Berlin. West Berlin was completely surrounded by East German territory and had suffered a Soviet blockade in 1948\u201349, which was overcome by the Berlin airlift.\nThe outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 led to US calls to rearm West Germany to help defend Western Europe from the perceived Soviet threat. Germany's partners in the European Coal and Steel Community proposed to establish a European Defence Community (EDC), with an integrated army, navy and air force, composed of the armed forces of its member states. The West German military would be subject to complete EDC control, but the other EDC member states (Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands) would cooperate in the EDC while maintaining independent control of their own armed forces.\nThough the EDC treaty was signed (May 1952), it never entered into force. France's Gaullists rejected it on the grounds that it threatened national sovereignty, and when the French National Assembly refused to ratify it (August 1954), the treaty died. Then other means had to be found to allow West German rearmament. In response, at the London and Paris Conferences, the Brussels Treaty was modified to include West Germany, and to form the Western European Union (WEU). West Germany was to be permitted to rearm (an idea many Germans rejected), and have full sovereign control of its military, called the . The WEU, however, would regulate the size of the armed forces permitted to each of its member states. Also, the German constitution prohibited any military action, except in the case of an external attack against Germany or its allies (). Also, Germans could reject military service on grounds of conscience, and serve for civil purposes instead.\nThe three Western Allies retained occupation powers in Berlin and certain responsibilities for Germany as a whole. Under the new arrangements, the Allies stationed troops within West Germany for NATO defence, pursuant to stationing and status-of-forces agreements. With the exception of 55,000 French troops, Allied forces were under NATO's joint defence command. (France withdrew from the collective military command structure of NATO in 1966.)\nReforms during the 1960s.\nKonrad Adenauer was 73 years old when he became chancellor in 1949, and for this reason he was initially reckoned as a caretaker. However, he ruled for 14 years. The grand statesman of German postwar politics had to be dragged\u2014almost literally\u2014out of office in 1963.\nIn October 1962 the weekly news magazine published an analysis of the West German military defence. The conclusion was that there were several weaknesses in the system. Ten days after publication, the offices of in Hamburg were raided by the police and quantities of documents were seized. Chancellor Adenauer proclaimed in the that the article was tantamount to high treason and that the authors would be prosecuted. The editor/owner of the magazine, Rudolf Augstein spent some time in jail before the public outcry over the breaking of laws on freedom of the press became too loud to be ignored. The FDP members of Adenauer's cabinet resigned from the government, demanding the resignation of Franz Josef Strauss, Defence Minister, who had decidedly overstepped his competence during the crisis. Adenauer was still wounded by his brief run for president, and this episode damaged his reputation even further. He announced that he would step down in the fall of 1963. His successor was to be Ludwig Erhard.\nIn the early 1960s, the rate of economic growth slowed down significantly. In 1962 growth rate was 4.7% and the following year, 2.0%. After a brief recovery, the growth rate slowed again into a recession, with no growth in 1967.\nA new coalition was formed to deal with this problem. Erhard stepped down in 1966 and was succeeded by Kurt Georg Kiesinger. He led a grand coalition between West Germany's two largest parties, the CDU/CSU and the Social Democratic Party (SPD). This was important for the introduction of new emergency acts: the grand coalition gave the ruling parties the two-thirds majority of votes required for their ratification. These controversial acts allowed basic constitutional rights such as freedom of movement to be limited in case of a state of emergency.\nDuring the time leading up to the passing of the laws, there was fierce opposition to them, above all by the Free Democratic Party, the rising West German student movement, a group calling itself (\"Democracy in Crisis\") and members of the Campaign against Nuclear Armament. A key event in the development of open democratic debate occurred in 1967, when the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, visited West Berlin. Several thousand demonstrators gathered outside the Opera House where he was to attend a special performance. Supporters of the Shah (later known as ), armed with staves and bricks attacked the protesters while the police stood by and watched. A demonstration in the centre was being forcibly dispersed when a bystander named Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head and killed by a plainclothes policeman. (It has now been established that the policeman, Kurras, was a paid spy of the East German security forces.) Protest demonstrations continued, and calls for more active opposition by some groups of students were made. In a massive campaign against the protesters, the press, especially the tabloid newspaper, described these as a massive disruption to life in Berlin. Protests against the US intervention in Vietnam, mingled with anger over the vigour with which demonstrations were repressed led to mounting militance among the students at the universities in Berlin. One of the most prominent campaigners was a young man from East Germany called Rudi Dutschke who also criticised the forms of capitalism that were to be seen in West Berlin. Just before Easter 1968, a young man tried to kill Dutschke as he bicycled to the student union, seriously injuring him. All over West Germany, thousands demonstrated against the Springer newspapers which were seen as the prime cause of the violence against students. Trucks carrying newspapers were set on fire and windows in office buildings broken.\nIn the wake of these demonstrations, in which the question of America's role in Vietnam began to play a bigger role, came a desire among the students to find out more about the role of the parent-generation in the Nazi era. The proceedings of the War Crimes Tribunal at Nuremberg had been widely publicised in Germany; the attorney Fritz Bauer gathered evidence on the guards of the concentration camp, and about twenty were put on trial in Frankfurt in 1963. Daily newspaper reports and visits by school classes to the proceedings revealed to the German public the nature of the concentration camp system, and it became evident that the was of vastly greater dimensions than the German population had believed. The term \"Holocaust\" for the systematic mass-murder of Jews first came into use in 1979, when a 1978 American mini-series with that name was shown on West German television. The processes set in motion by the Auschwitz trial reverberated decades later.\nThe calling in question of the actions and policies of government led to a new climate of debate. The issues of emancipation, colonialism, environmentalism and grassroots democracy were discussed at all levels of society. In 1979, the environmental party, the Greens, reached the 5% limit required to obtain parliamentary seats in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen provincial election. Also of great significance was the steady growth of a feminist movement in which women demonstrated for equal rights. Until 1977, a married woman had to have the permission of her husband if she wanted to take on a job or open a bank account. Further reforms in 1979 to parental rights law gave equal legal rights to the mother and the father, abolishing the legal authority of the father. Parallel to this, a gay movement began to grow in the larger cities, especially in West Berlin, where homosexuality had been widely accepted during the twenties in the Weimar Republic.\nAnger over the treatment of demonstrators following the death of Benno Ohnesorg and the attack on Rudi Dutschke, coupled with growing frustration over the lack of success in achieving their aims led to growing militance among students and their supporters. In May 1968, three young people set fire to two department stores in Frankfurt; they were brought to trial and made very clear to the court that they regarded their action as a legitimate act in what they described as the \"struggle against imperialism\". The student movement began to split into different factions, ranging from the unattached liberals to the Maoists and supporters of direct action in every form\u2014the anarchists. Several groups set as their objective the aim of radicalising the industrial workers; taking an example from activities in Italy of the Red Brigades (), many students went to work in the factories, but with little or no success. The most notorious of the underground groups was the Red Army Faction, which began by making bank raids to finance their activities and eventually went underground having killed a number of policemen, several bystanders and eventually two prominent West Germans, whom they had taken captive in order to force the release of prisoners sympathetic to their ideas. In the 1990s, attacks were still being committed under the name \"RAF\". The last action took place in 1993 and the group announced it was giving up its activities in 1998. Evidence that the groups had been infiltrated by German Intelligence undercover agents has since emerged, partly through the insistence of the son of the State Counsel Siegfried Buback, who had been shot by members of the RAF in 1977.\nWilly Brandt.\nIn October 1969, Willy Brandt became chancellor. He maintained West Germany's close alignment with the United States and focused on strengthening European integration in western Europe, while launching the new policy of \"Ostpolitik\" aimed at improving relations with Eastern Europe. Brandt was controversial on both the right wing, for his \"Ostpolitik\", and on the left wing, for his support of right-wing authoritarian regimes and of American policies, including the Vietnam War. The Brandt Report became a recognised measure for describing the general North-South divide in world economics and politics between an affluent North and a poor South. Brandt was also known for his fierce anti-communist policies at the domestic level, culminating in the \"Radikalenerlass\" (Anti-Radical Decree) in 1972. In 1970, while visiting a memorial to the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising crushed by the Germans, Brandt unexpectedly knelt and meditated in silence, a moment remembered as the Kniefall von Warschau.\nBrandt resigned as chancellor in 1974, after G\u00fcnter Guillaume, one of his closest aides, was exposed as an agent of the Stasi, the East German secret service.\nHelmut Schmidt.\nFinance Minister Helmut Schmidt (SPD) formed a coalition and he served as Chancellor from 1974 to 1982. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, a leading FDP official, became Vice-Chancellor and Foreign Minister. Schmidt, a strong supporter of the European Community (EC) and the Atlantic alliance, emphasised his commitment to \"the political unification of Europe in partnership with the USA\". Mounting external problems forced Schmidt to concentrate on foreign policy and limited the domestic reforms that he could carry out. The USSR upgraded its intermediate-range missiles, which Schmidt complained was an unacceptable threat to the balance of nuclear power, because it increased the likelihood of political coercion and required a western response. NATO responded in the form of its twin-track policy. The domestic reverberations were serious inside the SPD, and undermined its coalition with the FDP. One of his major successes, in collaboration with French President Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing, was the launching of the European Monetary System (EMS) in April 1978.\nHelmut Kohl.\nIn October 1982 the SPD\u2013FDP coalition fell apart when the FDP joined forces with the CDU/CSU to elect CDU Chairman Helmut Kohl as Chancellor in a constructive vote of no confidence. Following national elections in March 1983, Kohl emerged in firm control of both the government and the CDU. The CDU/CSU fell just short of an absolute majority, due to the entry into the Bundestag of the Greens, who received 5.6% of the vote.\nIn January 1987 the Kohl\u2013Genscher government was returned to office, but the FDP and the Greens gained at the expense of the larger parties. Kohl's CDU and its Bavarian sister party, the CSU, slipped from 48.8% of the vote in 1983 to 44.3%. The SPD fell to 37%; long-time SPD Chairman Brandt subsequently resigned in April 1987 and was succeeded by Hans-Jochen Vogel. The FDP's share rose from 7% to 9.1%, its best showing since 1980. The Greens' share rose to 8.3% from their 1983 share of 5.6%.\nReunification.\nWith the collapse of eastern bloc in 1989, symbolised by the opening of the Berlin Wall, there was a rapid move towards German reunification; and a final settlement of the post-war special status of Germany. Following democratic elections, East Germany declared its accession to the Federal Republic subject to the terms of the Unification Treaty between the two states; and then both West Germany and East Germany radically amended their respective constitutions in accordance with that Treaty's provisions. East Germany then dissolved itself, and its five post-war states () were reconstituted, along with the reunited Berlin which ended its special status and formed an additional . They formally joined the Federal Republic on 3 October 1990, raising the number of states from 10 to 16, ending the division of Germany. The expanded Federal Republic retained West Germany's political culture and continued its existing memberships in international organisations, as well as its Western foreign policy alignment and affiliation to Western alliances like NATO and the European Union.\nThe official German reunification ceremony on 3 October 1990 was held at the building, including Chancellor Helmut Kohl, President Richard von Weizs\u00e4cker, former Chancellor Willy Brandt and many others. One day later, the parliament of the united Germany would assemble in an act of symbolism in the Reichstag building.\nHowever, at that time, the role of Berlin had not yet been decided upon. Only after a fierce debate, considered by many as one of the most memorable sessions of parliament, the concluded on 20 June 1991, with quite a slim majority, that both government and parliament should move to Berlin from Bonn.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment structure.\nWest Germany was a federal parliamentary republic with the national capital being in Bonn. The executive branch consisted of a President and a Chancellor with the President being the head of state and a largely ceremonial role while the Chancellor was the head of the government and functioned in a capacity similar to that of a prime minister. The Chancellor was elected by the legislature for a 4-year term and could not be removed from office during that term except for if the Bundestag had selected a replacement.\nThe country had a bicameral legislature consisting of an upper house, the Bundesrat and a lower house, the Bundestag. The Bundesrat had 45 members and they were elected by the Laender (states). The lower house named the Bundestag had 496 members.\nPolitical dynamics.\nPolitical life in West Germany was remarkably stable and orderly. The Adenauer era (1949\u201363) was followed by a brief period under Ludwig Erhard (1963\u201366) who, in turn, was replaced by Kurt Georg Kiesinger (1966\u201369). All governments between 1949 and 1966 were formed by the united caucus of the Christian-Democratic Union (CDU) and Christian Social Union (CSU), either alone or in coalition with the smaller Free Democratic Party (FDP) or other right leaning parties.\nKiesinger's 1966\u201369 \"Grand Coalition\" was between West Germany's two largest parties, the CDU/CSU and the Social Democratic Party (SPD). This was important for the introduction of new emergency acts\u2014the Grand Coalition gave the ruling parties the two-thirds majority of votes required to see them in. These controversial acts allowed basic constitutional rights such as freedom of movement to be limited in case of a state of emergency.\nLeading up to the passing of the laws, there was fierce opposition to them, above all by the FDP, the rising German student movement, a group calling itself Notstand der Demokratie (\"Democracy in a State of Emergency\") and the labour unions. Demonstrations and protests grew in number, and in 1967 the student Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head by a policeman. The press, especially the tabloid newspaper, launched a campaign against the protesters.\nBy 1968, a stronger desire to confront the Nazi past had come into being. In the 1970s environmentalism and anti-nationalism became fundamental values among left-wing Germans. As a result, in 1979 the Greens were able to reach the 5% minimum required to obtain parliamentary seats in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen state election, and with the foundation of the national party in 1980 developed into one of the most politically successful green movements in the world.\nAnother result of the unrest in the 1960s was the founding of the Red Army Faction (RAF). The RAF was active from 1968, carrying out a succession of terrorist attacks in West Germany during the 1970s. Even in the 1990s, attacks were still being committed under the name \"RAF\". The last action took place in 1993, and in 1998 the group announced it was ceasing activities.\nIn the 1969 election, the SPD gained enough votes to form a coalition government with the FDP. SPD leader and Chancellor Willy Brandt remained head of government until May 1974, when he resigned after the Guillaume affair, in which a senior member of his staff was uncovered as a spy for the East German intelligence service, the . However, the affair is widely considered to have been merely a trigger for Brandt's resignation, not a fundamental cause. Instead, Brandt, dogged by scandal relating to alcohol and depression as well as the economic fallout of the 1973 oil crisis, almost seems simply to have had enough. As Brandt himself later said, \"I was exhausted, for reasons which had nothing to do with the process going on at the time\".\nFinance Minister Helmut Schmidt (SPD) then formed a government, continuing the SPD\u2013FDP coalition. He served as Chancellor from 1974 to 1982. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, a leading FDP official, was Vice-Chancellor and Foreign Minister in the same years. Schmidt, a strong supporter of the European Community (EC) and the Atlantic alliance, emphasised his commitment to \"the political unification of Europe in partnership with the USA\".\nThe goals of SPD and FDP drifted apart in the late 1970s and early 1980s. On 1 October 1982 the FDP joined forces with the CDU/CSU to elect CDU Chairman Helmut Kohl as Chancellor in a constructive vote of no confidence. Following national elections in March 1983, Kohl emerged in firm control of both the government and the CDU. The CDU/CSU fell just short of an absolute majority due to the entry into the Bundestag of the Greens, who received 5.6% of the vote.\nIn January 1987 the Kohl\u2013Genscher government was returned to office, but the FDP and the Greens gained at the expense of the larger parties. The Social Democrats concluded that not only were the Greens unlikely to form a coalition, but also that such a coalition would be far from a majority. Neither condition changed until 1998.\nDenazification.\nDenazification was an Allied initiative to rid German politics, judiciary, society, culture, press and economy of Nazi ideology and personnel following the Second World War. It was carried out by removing those who had been Nazi Party or SS members from positions of power and influence, by disbanding the organisations associated with Nazism, and by trying prominent Nazis for war crimes. The program was hugely unpopular in West Germany and was opposed by the new government of Konrad Adenauer. In 1951, several laws were passed granting amnesties and ending denazification. As a result, many people with a former Nazi past ended up again in the political apparatus of West Germany.\nBetween 1951 and 1953, there was even an effort by a clandestine group of former Nazi functionaries, known as the Naumann Circle, to infiltrate the Free Democratic Party (FDP) in order to lay the groundwork for an eventual return to power. Although this effort was exposed and disrupted, many former Nazis still attained positions of power and influence in the political system. West German President (1974\u20131979) Walter Scheel and Chancellor (1966\u20131969) Kurt Georg Kiesinger were both former members of the Nazi Party. Konrad Adenauer's State Secretary Hans Globke had played a major role in drafting the antisemitic Nuremberg Race Laws in Nazi Germany. In 1957, 77% of the West German Ministry of Justice's senior officials were former Nazi Party members.\nGeographical distribution of government.\nIn West Germany, most of the political agencies and buildings were located in Bonn, while the German Stock Market was located in Frankfurt which became the economic center. The judicial branch of both the German Federal Constitutional Court () and the highest Court of Appeals, were located in Karlsruhe.\nThe West German government was known to be much more decentralised than its state socialist East German counterpart, the former being a federal state and the latter a unitary one. Whilst East Germany was divided into 15 administrative districts (), which were merely local branches of the national government, West Germany was divided into states () with independently elected state parliaments and control of the , the second legislative chamber of the Federal Government.\nForeign relations.\nPosition towards East Germany.\nThe official position of West Germany concerning East Germany at the outset was that the West German government was the only democratically elected, and therefore the only legitimate, representative of the German people. According to the Hallstein Doctrine, any country (with the exception of the USSR) that recognised the authorities of the German Democratic Republic would not have diplomatic relations with West Germany.\nIn the early 1970s, Willy Brandt's policy of \"\" led to a form of mutual recognition between East and West Germany. The Treaty of Moscow (August 1970), the Treaty of Warsaw (December 1970), the Four Power Agreement on Berlin (September 1971), the Transit Agreement (May 1972), and the Basic Treaty (December 1972) helped to normalise relations between East and West Germany and led to both German states joining the United Nations. The Hallstein Doctrine was relinquished, and West Germany ceased to claim an exclusive mandate for Germany as a whole.\nFollowing the Ostpolitik, the West German view was that East Germany was a \"de facto\" government within a single German nation and a \"de jure\" state organisation of parts of Germany outside the Federal Republic. The Federal Republic continued to maintain that it could not within its own structures recognise the GDR \"de jure\" as a sovereign state under international law; while at the same time acknowledging that, within the structures of international law, the GDR was an independent sovereign state. By distinction, West Germany then viewed itself as being within its own boundaries, not only the \"de facto\" and \"de jure\" government, but also the sole \"de jure\" legitimate representative of a dormant \"Germany as whole\". The two Germanies relinquished any claim to represent the other internationally, which they acknowledged as necessarily implying a mutual recognition of each other as both capable of representing their own populations \"de jure\" in participating in international bodies and agreements, such as the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act.\nThis assessment of the Basic Treaty was confirmed in a decision of the Federal Constitutional Court in 1973;\n \"... the German Democratic Republic is in the international law sense a State and as such a subject of international law. This finding is independent of recognition in international law of the German Democratic Republic by the Federal Republic of Germany. Such recognition has not only never been formally pronounced by the Federal Republic of Germany but on the contrary repeatedly explicitly rejected. If the conduct of the Federal Republic of Germany towards the German Democratic Republic is assessed in the light of its d\u00e9tente policy, in particular the conclusion of the Treaty as de facto recognition, then it can only be understood as de facto recognition of a special kind. The special feature of this Treaty is that while it is a bilateral Treaty between two States, to which the rules of international law apply and which like any other international treaty possesses validity, it is between two States that are parts of a still existing, albeit incapable of action as not being reorganized, comprehensive State of the Whole of Germany with a single body politic.\"\nThe West German Constitution (, \"Basic Law\") provided two articles for the unification with other parts of Germany:\nAfter the peaceful revolution of 1989 in East Germany, the Volkskammer of the GDR on 23 August 1990 declared the accession of East Germany to the Federal Republic under Article 23 of the Basic Law and thus initiated the process of reunification, to come into effect on 3 October 1990. Nevertheless, the act of reunification itself (with its many specific terms and conditions; including fundamental amendments to the West German Basic Law) was achieved constitutionally by the subsequent Unification Treaty of 31 August 1990; that is through a binding agreement between the former GDR and the Federal Republic now recognising each another as separate sovereign states in international law. This treaty was then voted into effect on 20 September 1990 by both the Volkskammer and the Bundestag by the constitutionally required two-thirds majorities; effecting on the one hand, the extinction of the GDR and the re-establishment of on the territory of East Germany; and on the other, the agreed amendments to the Basic Law of the Federal Republic. Amongst these amendments was the repeal of the very Article 23 in respect of which the GDR had nominally declared its postdated accession to the Federal Republic.\nThe two German states entered into a currency and customs union in July 1990, and on 3 October 1990, the German Democratic Republic dissolved and the re-established five East German (as well as a unified Berlin) joined the Federal Republic of Germany, bringing an end to the East\u2013West divide.\nEconomy.\nEconomic miracle.\nThe West German (\"economic miracle\", coined by \"The Times\") began in 1950. This improvement was sustained by the currency reform of 1948 which replaced the with the and halted rampant inflation. The Allied dismantling of the West German coal and steel industry finally ended in 1950.\nAs demand for consumer goods increased after World War II, the resulting shortage helped overcome lingering resistance to the purchase of German products. At the time, Germany had a large pool of skilled and cheap labour, partly as a result of the flight and expulsion of Germans from Central and Eastern Europe, which affected up to 16.5 million Germans. This helped Germany to more than double the value of its exports during the war. Apart from these factors, hard work and long hours at full capacity among the population and in the late 1950s and 1960s extra labour supplied by thousands of (\"guest workers\") provided a vital base for the economic upturn. This would have implications later on for successive German governments as they tried to assimilate this group of workers.\nWith the dropping of Allied reparations, the freeing of German intellectual property and the impact of the Marshall Plan stimulus, West Germany developed one of the strongest economies in the world, almost as strong as before the Second World War. The East German economy showed a certain growth, but not as much as in West Germany, partly because of continued reparations to the USSR.\nIn 1952, West Germany became part of the European Coal and Steel Community, which would later evolve into the European Union. On 5 May 1955 West Germany was declared to have the \"authority of a sovereign state\". The British, French and US militaries remained in the country, just as the Soviet Army remained in East Germany. Four days after obtaining the \"authority of a sovereign state\" in 1955, West Germany joined NATO. The UK and the USA retained an especially strong presence in West Germany, acting as a deterrent in case of a Soviet invasion. In 1976, West Germany became one of the founding nations of the Group of Six (G6). In 1973, West Germany\u2014home to roughly 1.26% of the world's population\u2014featured the world's fourth-highest GDP of 814,796 million compared to East Germany's 129,969 million, together combining for 944,755 million and accounting for 5.9% of the world total. In 1987, the FRG held a 7.4% share of total world production.\nDemographics.\nPopulation and vital statistics.\nTotal population of West Germany from 1950 to 1990, as collected by the .\nReligion.\nReligious affiliation in West Germany decreased from the 1960s onward. Religious affiliation declined faster among Protestants than among Catholics, causing the Roman Catholic Church to overtake the EKD as the largest denomination in the country during the 1970s.\nCulture.\nIn many aspects, German culture continued in spite of the dictatorship and wartime. Old and new forms coexisted next to each other, and the American influence, already strong in the 1920s, grew.\nLiterary scene.\nBesides the interest in the older generation of writers, new authors emerged on the background of the experiences of war and after war period. Wolfgang Borchert, a former soldier who died young in 1947, is one of the best known representatives of the . Heinrich B\u00f6ll is considered an observer of the young Federal Republic from the 1950s to the 1970s, and caused some political controversies because of his increasingly critical view on society. The Frankfurt Book Fair (and its Peace Prize of the German Book Trade) soon developed into a regarded institution. Exemplary for West Germany's literature are\u2014among others\u2014Siegfried Lenz (with \"The German Lesson\") and G\u00fcnter Grass (with \"The Tin Drum\" and \"The Flounder\").\nSport.\nIn the 20th century, association football became the largest sport in Germany. The Germany national football team, established in 1900, continued its tradition based in the Federal Republic of Germany, winning the 1954 FIFA World Cup in a stunning upset dubbed the miracle of Bern. Earlier, the German team was not considered part of the international top. The 1974 FIFA World Cup was held in West German cities and West Berlin. After having been beaten by their East German counterparts in the first round, the team of the German Football Association won the cup again, defeating the Netherlands 2\u20131 in the final. With the process of unification in full swing in the summer of 1990, the Germans won a third World Cup, with players that had been capped for East Germany not yet permitted to contribute. European championships have been won too, in 1972 and 1980.\nAfter both Olympic Games of 1936 had been held in Germany, Munich was selected to host the 1972 Summer Olympics. These were also the first summer games in which the East Germans showed up with the separate flag and anthem of the GDR. Since the 1950s, Germany at the Olympics had been represented by a united team led by the pre-war German NOC officials as the IOC had denied East German demands for a separate team. At the 1956 Summer Olympics, the Olympic teams of West Germany, East Germany, and Saarland were merged to represent Germany together. Four years earlier Saarland had attended as separate teams while East Germany had not attended. After 1956, 1962, and 1964; East Germany competed in the Summer Olympics as a separate member of the IOC.\nThe 800-page \"Doping in Germany from 1950 to today\" study details how the West German government helped fund a wide-scale doping programme. West Germany encouraged and covered up a culture of doping across many sports for decades.\nAs in 1957, when the Saarland acceded, East German sport organisations ceased to exist in late 1990 as their subdivisions and their members joined their Western counterparts. Thus, the present German organisations and teams in football, Olympics and elsewhere are identical to those that had been informally called \"West German\" before 1991. The only differences were a larger membership and a different name used by some foreigners. These organisations and teams in turn mostly continued the traditions of those that represented Germany before the Second World War, and even the First World War, thus providing a century-old continuity despite political changes. On the other hand, the separate East German teams and organisations were founded in the 1950s; they were an episode lasting less than four decades, yet quite successful in that time.\nWest Germany played 43 matches at the European Championships, more than any other national team.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "33167", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33167", "title": "WIPO", "text": ""}
{"id": "33170", "revid": "44290549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33170", "title": "West Berlin", "text": "Political enclave (1948\u20131990)\nWest Berlin ( or , ) was a political enclave which comprised the western part of Berlin from 1948 until 1990, during the Cold War. Although West Berlin was de jure not part of West Germany, lacked any sovereignty, and was under military occupation until German reunification in 1990, the territory was claimed by the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). The legality of this claim was contested by the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc countries, although West Berlin de facto aligned itself politically with the FRG from May 1949, was thereafter directly or indirectly represented in its federal institutions, and most of its residents were citizens of the FRG.\nWest Berlin was formally controlled by the Western Allies and entirely surrounded by East Berlin and East Germany. West Berlin had great symbolic significance during the Cold War, as it was widely considered by westerners an \"island of freedom.\" It was heavily subsidized by West Germany as a \"showcase of the West.\" A wealthy city, West Berlin was noted for its distinctly cosmopolitan character, and as a centre of education, research and culture. With about two million inhabitants, West Berlin had the largest population of any city in Germany during the Cold War era.\nWest Berlin was east and north of the inner German border and only accessible by land from West Germany by narrow rail and highway corridors. It consisted of the American, British, and French occupation sectors established in 1945. The Berlin Wall, built in 1961, physically separated West Berlin from both the eastern half of the city and its hinterland in Brandenburg, until it fell in 1989. On 3 October 1990, the day Germany was officially reunified, East and West Berlin united, joined the Federal Republic as a Stadtstaat (city-state) and eventually became the capital of Germany again.\nOrigins.\nThe London Protocol of 1944 and the Potsdam Agreement established the legal framework for the occupation of Germany in the wake of World War II. According to these agreements, Germany would be formally under the administration of four Allies (the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and France) until a German government \"acceptable to all parties\" could be established. The territory of Germany, as it existed in 1937, would be reduced by most of \"Eastern Germany\" thus creating the former eastern territories of Germany. The remaining territory would be divided into four zones, each administered by one of the four allied countries. Berlin, which was surrounded by the Soviet zone of occupation\u2014newly established in most of Middle Germany\u2014would be similarly divided, with the Western Allies occupying an enclave consisting of the western parts of the city. According to the agreement, the occupation of Berlin could end only as a result of a quadripartite agreement. The Western Allies were guaranteed three air corridors to their sectors of Berlin, and the Soviets also informally allowed road and rail access between West Berlin and the western parts of Germany.\nAt first, this arrangement was intended to be of a temporary administrative nature, with all parties declaring that Germany and Berlin would soon be reunited. However, as the relations between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union soured and the Cold War began, the joint administration of Germany and Berlin broke down. Soon, Soviet-occupied Berlin and western-occupied Berlin had separate city administrations. In 1948, the Soviets tried to force the Western Allies out of Berlin by imposing a land blockade on the western sectors\u2014the Berlin Blockade. The West responded by using its air corridors for supplying their part of the city with food and other goods through the Berlin Airlift. In May 1949, the Soviets lifted the blockade, and West Berlin as a separate city with its own jurisdiction was maintained.\nFollowing the Berlin Blockade, normal contacts between East and West Berlin resumed. This was temporary until talks were resumed. In 1952, the East German government began sealing its borders, further isolating West Berlin. As a direct result, electrical grids were separated and phone lines were cut. The Volkspolizei and Soviet military personnel also continued the process of blocking all the roads leading away from the city, resulting in several armed standoffs and at least one skirmish with the French Gendarmerie and the Bundesgrenzschutz that June. However, the culmination of the schism did not occur until 1961 with the construction of the Berlin Wall.\nLegal status.\nFrom the legal theory followed by the Western Allies, the occupation of most of Germany ended in 1949 with the establishment of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) on 23 May and of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) on 7 October. Under Article 127 of the Basic Law (or constitution) of the Federal Republic, provision was made for federal laws to be extended to Greater Berlin (as Berlin was called during the 1920 expansion of its municipal boundaries) as well as Baden, Rhineland-Palatinate and W\u00fcrttemberg-Hohenzollern within one year of its promulgation. However, because the occupation of Berlin could be ended only by a quadripartite agreement, Berlin remained an occupied territory under the formal sovereignty of the allies. Hence, the Basic Law was not fully applicable to West Berlin.\nOn 4 August 1950, the House of Representatives, the city's legislature, passed a new constitution, declaring Berlin to be a state of the Federal Republic and the provisions of the Basic Law as binding law superior to Berlin state law (Article 1, clauses 2 and 3). However, that became statutory law only on 1 September and only with the inclusion of the western Allied provision according to which Art. 1, clauses 2 and 3, were deferred for the time being; the clauses became valid law only on 3 October 1990 (the day of Germany's unification). It stated:\nArticle 87 is interpreted as meaning that during the transitional period Berlin shall possess none of the attributes of a twelfth Land. The provision of this Article concerning the Basic Law will only apply to the extent necessary to prevent a conflict between this Law and the Berlin Constitution...\nThus, civic liberties and personal rights (except for the privacy of telecommunications) guaranteed by the Basic Law were also valid in West Berlin.\nIn addition, West German federal statutes could only take effect in West Berlin with the approval of the city's legislature.\nThe ambiguous legal status of the city, then still legally styled as Greater Berlin (although technically only comprising the western sectors), meant that West Berliners were not eligible to vote in federal elections. In their notification of permission of 12 May 1949 the three western military governors for Germany explained their proviso in No. 4, as follows:\nA third reservation concerns the participation of Greater Berlin in the Federation. We interpret the effect of Articles 23 and 144 (2) of the Basic Law as constituting acceptance of our previous request that while Berlin may not be accorded voting membership in the Bundestag or Bundesrat nor be governed by the Federation she may, nevertheless, designate a small number of representatives to the meetings of those legislative bodies.\nConsequently, West Berliners were indirectly represented in the Bundestag in Bonn by 22 non-voting delegates chosen by the House of Representatives. Similarly, the Senate (the city's executive) sent four non-voting delegates to the Bundesrat. In addition, when the first direct elections to the European Parliament were held in 1979, West Berlin's three members were instead indirectly elected by the House of Representatives.\nHowever, as West German citizens, West Berliners were able to stand for election in West Germany. For example, Social Democrat Willy Brandt, who eventually became Chancellor, was elected via his party's list of candidates. The West German government considered all West Berliners as well as all citizens of the GDR to be citizens of West Germany. Male residents of West Berlin were exempt from the Federal Republic's compulsory military service. This exemption made the city a popular destination for West German young people, which resulted in a flourishing counterculture, which in turn became one of the defining features of the city.\nThe Western Allies remained the ultimate political authorities in West Berlin. All legislation of the House of Representatives, whether of the West Berlin legislature or adopted federal law, only applied under the proviso of confirmation by the three Western Allied commanders-in-chief. If they approved a bill, it was enacted as part of West Berlin's statutory law. If the commanders-in-chief rejected a bill, it did not become law in West Berlin; this, for example, was the case with West German laws on military duty. West Berlin was run by the elected Governing Mayor and Senate seated at Rathaus Sch\u00f6neberg. The Governing Mayor and Senators (ministers) had to be approved by the Western Allies and thus derived their authority from the occupying forces, not from their electoral mandate.\nThe Soviets unilaterally declared the occupation of East Berlin at an end along with the rest of East Germany. This move was, however, not recognised by the Western Allies, who continued to view all of Berlin as a jointly occupied territory belonging to neither of the two German states. This view was supported by the continued practice of patrols of all four sectors by soldiers of all four occupying powers. Thus, occasionally Western Allied soldiers were on patrol in East Berlin as were Soviet soldiers in West Berlin. After the Wall was built, East Germany wanted to control Western Allied patrols upon entering or leaving East Berlin, a practice that the Western Allies regarded as unacceptable. After protests to the Soviets, the patrols continued uncontrolled on both sides, with the tacit agreement that the western Allies would not use their patrolling privileges for helping Easterners to flee to the West.\nIn many ways, West Berlin functioned as the \"de facto\" 11th state of West Germany and was depicted on maps published in the West as being a part of West Germany. There was freedom of movement (to the extent allowed by geography) between West Berlin and West Germany. There were no separate immigration regulations for West Berlin, all immigration rules for West Germany being followed in West Berlin. West German entry visas issued to visitors were stamped with \"for the Federal Republic of Germany, including the State of Berlin\" (), prompting complaints from the Soviet Union. However, this wording remained on the visas throughout the rest of the entire period of West Berlin's existence.\nWest Berlin remained under military occupation until 3 October 1990, the day of unification of East Germany, East and West Berlin with the Federal Republic of Germany. The West German Federal Government, as well as the governments of most western nations, considered East Berlin to be a \"separate entity\" from East Germany, and while the Western Allies later opened embassies in East Berlin, they recognised the city only as the \"seat of government\" of the GDR, not as its \"capital\".\nCommunist countries, however, did not recognise West Berlin as part of West Germany and usually described it as a \"third\" German jurisdiction, called an \"independent political unit\" (). On maps of East Berlin, West Berlin often did not appear as an adjacent urban area but as a monochrome terra incognita, sometimes showing the letters WB, meaning \"Westberlin\" () or overlaid with a legend or pictures. It was often labelled \"Westberlin special political area\" ().\nImmigration.\nThe Federal Republic of Germany issued West German passports to West Berliners on request that showed West Berlin as their place of residence. However, West Berliners could not use their passports for crossing East German borders and were denied entrance by any country of the Eastern Bloc, since governments of these countries held the view that West Germany was not authorized to issue legal papers for West Berliners. \nSince West Berlin was not a sovereign state, it did not issue passports. Instead, West Berliners were issued with \"auxiliary identity cards\" by the West Berlin authorities. These differed visually from the regular West German identity cards, with green bindings instead of the grey standard, they did not show the \"Federal Eagle\" or coat of arms, and contained no indications as to the issuing State. However, they did have a statement that the holder of the document was a German citizen. From 11 June 1968, East Germany made it mandatory that West Berlin and West German \"transit passengers\" obtain a transit visa, issued upon entering East Germany, because under its second constitution East Germany considered West Germans and West Berliners foreigners. Since identity cards had no pages to stamp visas, issuers of East German visas stamped their visas onto separate leaflets which were loosely stuck into the identity cards, which, until the mid-1980s, were little booklets. Although the West German government subsidized visa fees, they were still payable by individual travellers.\nIn order to enter visa-requiring Western countries, such as the US, West Berliners commonly used West German passports. However, for countries which did not require stamped visas for entry, including Switzerland, Austria, and many members of the then European Economic Community, including the United Kingdom, West Berlin identity cards were also acceptable for entry.\nActive immigration and asylum politics in West Berlin triggered waves of immigration in the 1960s and 1970s. As of 2017,[ [update]] Berlin was home to at least 178,000 Turkish and Turkish German residents, making it the largest Turkish community outside of Turkey.\nWest Berlin was also a destination for many people fleeing East Germany both before and after the construction of the Berlin Wall. As many immigrants from East Germany did not intend to stay in Berlin, flights \u2013 the only option for those people to reach West Germany without coming into contact with East German authorities \u2013 were subsidized by the West German government despite being operated only by companies registered in and owned by nationals of the western occupying powers.\nNaming conventions.\nMost Westerners called the Western sectors \"Berlin\" unless further distinction was necessary. The West German Federal government officially called West Berlin , although it also used the hyphenated , whereas the East German government commonly referred to it as . Starting from 31 May 1961, East Berlin was officially called ('Berlin, Capital of the GDR'), replacing the formerly used term ('Democratic Berlin'), or simply , by East Germany, and by the West German Federal government. Other names used by West German media included , , or . These different naming conventions for the divided parts of Berlin, when followed by individuals, governments, or media, commonly indicated their political leanings, with the centre-right using and the centre-left using .\nPeriod following the building of the Berlin Wall.\nAfter the Berlin Wall was constructed in 1961, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer suggested to U.S. President John F. Kennedy that the United States propose a swap of West Berlin with Thuringia and parts of Saxony and Mecklenburg; the city's population would have been relocated to West Germany. Adenauer did not believe that the Soviets would accept the offer because East Germany would lose important industry, but hoped that making the proposal would reduce tensions between the western and eastern blocs, and perhaps hurt relations between the USSR and East Germany if they disagreed on accepting the offer. While the Kennedy administration seriously considered the idea, it did not make the proposal to the Soviet Union.\nNATO also took an increased interest in the specific issue related to West Berlin, and drafted plans to ensure to defend the city against a possible attack from the East. A tripartite planning group known as LIVE OAK, working together with NATO, was entrusted with potential military responses to any crisis.\nOn 26 June 1963, President Kennedy visited West Berlin. On his triumphant tour, cheered by hundred of thousands of West Berliners in the streets, he stopped at the Congress Hall, near the Brandenburg Gate, and at Checkpoint Charlie, before delivering at West Berlin's city hall a speech, which became famous for its phrase \"\" and a hallmark of America's solidarity with the city.\nThe Four Power Agreement on Berlin (September 1971) and the Transit Agreement (May 1972) helped to significantly ease tensions over the status of West Berlin. While many restrictions remained in place, it also made it easier for West Berliners to travel to East Germany and it simplified the regulations for Germans travelling along the autobahn transit routes.\nAt the Brandenburg Gate in 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan provided a challenge to the then Soviet leader:\nGeneral Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization: Come here to this gate! Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate! Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!\nOn 9 November 1989, the Wall was opened, and the two parts of the city were once again physically\u2014though at this point not legally\u2014united. The Two Plus Four Treaty, signed by the two German states and the four wartime allies, paved the way for German reunification and an end to the Western Allies' occupation of West Berlin. On 3 October 1990\u2014the day Germany was officially reunified\u2014East and West Berlin formally reunited as the city of Berlin, which then joined the enlarged Federal Republic as a city-state along the lines of the existing West German city-states of Bremen and Hamburg. Walter Momper, the mayor of West Berlin, became the first mayor of the reunified city in the interim. City-wide elections in December 1990 resulted in the first \"all Berlin\" mayor being elected to take office in January 1991, with the separate offices of mayors in East and West Berlin expiring by that time, and Eberhard Diepgen (a former mayor of West Berlin) became the first elected mayor of a reunited Berlin.\nBoroughs.\nWest Berlin comprised the following boroughs ():\nIn the American sector:\nIn the British sector:\nIn the French sector:\nExclaves.\n West Berlin's border was identical to the municipal boundary of Berlin as defined in the Greater Berlin Act of 1920 and amended in 1938, and the border between the Soviet sector and the French, British, and American sectors respectively, which followed the boundaries of Berlin administrative boroughs as defined in the same years. Another amendment was added in 1945 at the border between the British sector of Berlin (ceding West-Staaken) and the Soviet zone (ceding the Seeburg Salient) so that the Wehrmacht airfield at Berlin-Gatow became part of the British sector and the airfield at Berlin-Staaken became part of the Soviet sector. The resulting borderline was further complicated with a lot of geographical oddities, including a number of exclaves and enclaves that Greater Berlin had inside some neighbouring municipalities since 1920, all of which happened to become part of the British or American sectors after 1945, so that parts of West Berlin came to be surrounded by East Germany\nFurthermore, the Gatow/Staaken exchange in August 1945 resulted in the geographically western half of Berlin-Staaken, which was located in the western outskirts of the city, becoming \"de jure\" Soviet occupied. However, the \"de facto\" administration remained with the Borough of Spandau in the British sector. Therefore, all inhabitants of Staaken could vote in West Berlin's city state elections in 1948 and 1950. On 1 February 1951, East German Volkspolizei surprised the people of western Staaken by occupying the area and ended its administration by the Spandau Borough; instead, western Staaken became an exclave of the Soviet occupied borough Berlin-Mitte in the city centre. However, on 1 June 1952, western Staaken's \"de facto\" administration was placed with neighbouring East German Falkensee in the East German district Nauen.\nPost and telecommunications.\nWest Berlin had its own postal administration first called (1947\u20131955) and then , separate from West Germany's , and issuing its own postage stamps until 1990. However, the separation was merely symbolic; in reality, West Berlin's postal service was completely integrated with West Germany's, using the same postal code system.\nWest Berlin was also integrated into the West German telephone network, using the same international dialling code as West Germany, +49, with the area code 0311, later changed to 030. Unlike West Germany, from where calls to East Berlin were made using the prefix 00372 (international access code 00, East German country code 37, area code 2), calls from West Berlin required only the short code 0372. Conversely, those made to West Berlin from East Berlin only required the short code 849.\nIn order to reduce eastern wiretapping of telecommunications between West Berlin and West Germany, microwave radio relay connections were built, which transmitted telephone calls between antenna towers in West Germany and West Berlin by radio. Two such towers were built, one antenna in Berlin-Wannsee and later a second in Berlin-Frohnau, finished on 16 May 1980 with a height of . This tower was demolished on 8 February 2009.\nTransport and transit travel.\nWest Berliners could travel to West Germany and all Western and non-aligned states at all times, except during the Berlin Blockade by the Soviet Union (24 June 1948 to 12 May 1949) when there were restrictions on passenger flight capacity imposed by the airlift.\nTravelling to and from West Berlin by road or train always required passing through East German border checks, since West Berlin was an enclave surrounded by East Germany and East Berlin. On 2 October 1967, six years after the Wall was constructed, tram tracks in West Berlin were removed because the authorities wanted to promote car usage, meaning that the tram system remaining today runs almost entirely within the former East Berlin.\nRoad traffic.\nAs there were no dedicated walled-off-road corridors between West Germany and West Berlin under West German jurisdiction, travellers needed to pass through East Germany. A valid passport was required for citizens of West Germany and other western nationals to be produced at East German border checks. West Berliners could get admission only through their identity cards (see above). For travel from West Berlin to Denmark, Sweden and West Germany via dedicated East German transit routes (), East German border guards issued a \"transit visa\" for a fee of 5 Western Deutsche Mark. For journeys between West Berlin and Poland or Czechoslovakia through East Germany, each traveller was also required to present a valid visa for the destination country.\nThe transit routes for road travel connecting West Berlin to other destinations usually consisted of autobahns and other highways, marked by \"Transit\" signs. \"Transit travellers\" () were prohibited to leave the transit routes, and occasional traffic checkpoints would check for violators.\nThere were four transit routes between West Berlin and West Germany:\nThe latter three routes used autobahns built during the Nazi era. They left West Berlin at \"Checkpoint Dreilinden\", also called Checkpoint Bravo (W)/Potsdam-Drewitz (E). Transit routes to Poland were via today's A 11 to Nadrensee-Pomellen (East Germany, GDR)/Ko\u0142baskowo (Kolbitzow) (PL), eastwards via today's A 12 to Frankfurt upon Oder (GDR)/S\u0142ubice (PL), or southeastwards via today's A 13 and A 15 to Forst in Lusatia/Bar\u0161\u0107 (GDR)/Zasieki (Berge) (PL). Additional routes led to Denmark and Sweden by ferry between Warnem\u00fcnde (GDR) and Gedser (DK) and by ferry between Sassnitz (GDR) and R\u00f8nne (DK) or Trelleborg (S). Routes to Czechoslovakia were via Schmilka (GDR)/H\u0159ensko (Herrnskretschen) (\u010cSSR) and via F\u00fcrstenau (a part of today's Geising) (GDR)/C\u00ednovec (Cinvald/B\u00f6hmisch Zinnwald) (\u010cSSR).\nThe transit routes were also used for East German domestic traffic. This meant that transit passengers could potentially meet with East Germans and East Berliners at restaurants at motorway rest stops. Since such meetings were deemed illegal by the East German government, border guards would calculate the travel duration from the time of entry and exit of the transit route. Excessive time spent for transit travel could arouse their suspicion and prompt questioning or additional checking by the border guards. Western coaches could stop only at dedicated service areas since the East German government was concerned that East Germans might potentially use coaches to escape into the West.\nOn 1 September 1951, East Germany, because of a shortage in foreign currencies, started to levy road tolls on cars using the transit routes. At first, the toll amounted to 10 Ostmark per passenger car and 10 to 50 for trucks, depending on size. Ostmarks had to be exchanged into Deutsche Mark at a rate of 1:1. On 30 March 1955, East Germany raised the toll for passenger cars to 30 Deutsche Marks, but after West German protests, in June of the same year, it changed it back to the previous rate.\nRailway.\nFour transit train connections\u2014earlier also called \"interzonal train\" ()\u2014connected West Berlin with Hamburg via Schwanheide (E)/B\u00fcchen (W) in the North, with Hanover via Marienborn (E)/Helmstedt (W) in the West, with Frankfurt am Main via Gerstungen (E)/H\u00f6nebach (W) in the Southwest, and with Nuremberg via Probstzella (E)/Ludwigsstadt (W) in the South of West Germany. These transit trains did not service domestic passengers of East Germany and made stops in East Germany almost exclusively for East German border guards upon entering and leaving the country. Until the construction of the Berlin Wall, \"interzonal trains\" would also stop once on their way within East Germany for travellers having a visa for entering or leaving East Germany. Train travel from West Berlin to Czechoslovakia, Denmark (by ferry), Poland and Sweden (by ferry) required a visa to enter East Berlin or East Germany to allow transfer to an international train\u2014which also carried domestic passengers\u2014bound for an international destination. One railway connection between West Berlin and Oebisfelde (E)/Wolfsburg (W) was reserved for freight trains only.\nIn July and August 1945, the three Western Allies and the Soviet Union decided that the railways, previously serviced by the Deutsche Reichsbahn (German Reich Railways), should continue to be operated by one railway administration to service all four sectors. West Berlin had \u2013 with the exception of a few small private railway lines \u2013 no separate railway administration. Furthermore, the operation of the Reichsbahn's Berlin S-Bahn electric metropolitan transport network, consisting of commuter trains, was also maintained. After the founding of East Germany on 7 October 1949 it gained responsibility for the Reichsbahn in its territory. East Germany continued to run its railways under the official name Deutsche Reichsbahn, which thus maintained responsibility for almost all railway transport in all four sectors of Berlin. The GDR-controlled 'Bahnpolizei', the Reichsbahn's railway police, were authorised to patrol station premises and other railway property in the whole city including West Berlin. The legal necessity of keeping the term 'Deutsche Reichsbahn' explains the surprising use of the word 'Reich' (with its Imperial and Nazi connotations) in the name of an official organisation of the communist GDR.\nAfter the Berlin Blockade \"transit trains\" () would leave and enter West Berlin only via one line through Berlin-Wannsee railway station (W) and Potsdam Griebnitzsee railway station (E). All transit trains would start or end in East Berlin, passing through West Berlin with only one stop in the Western Berlin Zoologischer Garten railway station, which became West Berlin's main railway station. Until 1952, the Reichsbahn also permitted stops at other stations on the way through the Western sectors.\nMany Reichsbahn employees working in West Berlin were West Berliners. Their East German employer, whose proceeds from ticket sales for Western Deutsche Marks contributed to East Germany's foreign revenues, tried to hold down wage social security contributions in Western Deutsche Mark. Therefore, West Berlin employees of the Reichsbahn were paid partly in Eastern German currency. They could spend this money in East Germany and take their purchases to West Berlin, which other Westerners could not do to the same extent. West Berlin employees were trained in East Germany and employed under East German labour laws. West Berliners employed by the Reichsbahn were not included in the Western health insurance system either. The Reichsbahn ran its own hospital for them in West Berlin, the building of which is now used as the headquarters of Bombardier Transportation. For certain patients, the Reichsbahn would facilitate treatment in a hospital in East Berlin. In medical emergencies, the employees could use West Berlin doctors and hospitals, which would then be paid for by the Reichsbahn.\nThe GDR used the western stations to distribute propaganda and display posters with slogans like \"Americans Go Home.\" On 1 May, May Day, a state holiday in East and West, S-Bahn trains were sometimes decorated with the East German banner and a red flag.\nWaterways.\nTwo waterways via the rivers and canals Havel and Mittellandkanal were open for inland navigation, but only freight vessels were allowed to cross from West Berlin into East German waters. The Havel crossed at the East German border in Nedlitz (a part of Potsdam-Bornstedt), continuing through the Elbe-Havel Canal and then either taking the Elbe northwestwards crossing the border again at Cumlosen (E)/Schnackenburg (W) or westwards following the Mittellandkanal to Buchhorst (Oebisfelde) (E)/R\u00fchen (W). Western freight vessels could stop only at dedicated service areas, because the East German government wanted to prevent any East Germans from boarding them.\nIn July and August 1945, the Western Allies and the Soviet Union decided that the operation and maintenance of the waterways and locks, which were previously run by the national German directorate for inland navigation (), should be continued and reconstructed in all four sectors. Except for the originally city-owned Neuk\u00f6lln Ship Canal and some canals built later (e.g. Westhafen Canal) and locks, West Berlin had no separate inland navigation authority, but the East Berlin-based authority operated most waterways and locks, their lockmasters employed by the East. Because of their negligent maintenance, the western Allies later transferred their control to the Senate of Berlin (West).\nThe western entrance to the Teltowkanal, connecting several industrial areas of West Berlin for heavy freight transport, was blocked by East Germany in Potsdam-Klein Glienicke. Therefore, vessels going to the Teltowkanal had to take a detour via the river Spree through West and East Berlin's city centre to enter the canal from the East. On 20 November 1981, East Germany reopened the western entrance, which required two more vessel border checkpoints \u2013 Dreilinden and Kleinmachnow \u2013 because the waterway crossed the border between East Germany and West Berlin four times.\nAir traffic.\nAir traffic was the only connection between West Berlin and the Western world that was not directly under East German control. On 4 July 1948, British European Airways opened the first regular service for civilians between West Berlin and Hamburg. Tickets were originally sold for pounds sterling only. West Berliners and West Germans who had earlier fled East Germany or East Berlin, and thus could face imprisonment on entering East Germany or East Berlin, could only take flights for travel to and from West Berlin. To enable individuals threatened by East German imprisonment to fly to and from West Berlin the West German government subsidised the flights.\nFlights between West Germany and West Berlin were under Allied control by the quadripartite Berlin Air Safety Centre. According to permanent agreements, three air corridors to West Germany were provided, which were open only for British, French, or U.S. military planes or civilian planes registered with companies in those countries.\nThe airspace controlled by the \"Berlin Air Safety Center\" comprised a radius of around the seat of the center in the Kammergericht building in Berlin-Sch\u00f6neberg \u2013 thus covering most of East and West Berlin and the three corridors, of the same width \u2013 one northwestwards to Hamburg (Fuhlsb\u00fcttel Airport), one westwards to Hanover, and one southwestwards to Frankfurt upon Main (Rhein-Main Air Base).\nThe West German airline Lufthansa and most other international airlines were not permitted to fly to West Berlin. Flights by Lufthansa or the East German airline Interflug servicing connections between East and West Germany (such as between D\u00fcsseldorf and Hamburg in West Germany and the East German city of Leipzig) began in August 1989, but these routes had to go through Czechoslovak or Danish airspace.\nTraffic between West Berlin and East Germany.\nUntil 1953, travelling from West Berlin into East Germany (German Democratic Republic (GDR)) fell under Interzonal traffic regulations overseen by the three Allied military governments (the Soviet Military Administration in Germany (SVAG), the Control Commission for Germany \u2013 British Element, and the Office of Military Government/United States (OMGUS)). On 27 May 1952, East Germany closed its border with West Germany and its -long border with West Berlin. From then on West Berliners required a permit to enter East Germany. East German border checkpoints were established in East German suburbs of West Berlin, and most streets were gradually closed for interzonal travel into East Germany. The last checkpoint to remain open was located at the Glienicker Br\u00fccke near Potsdam, until it was also closed by East Germany on 3 July 1953. The checkpoint at Staaken's Heerstra\u00dfe remained open only for transit traffic to West Germany.\nThis caused hardship for many West Berlin residents, especially those who had friends and family in East Germany. However, East Germans could still enter West Berlin. A number of cemeteries located in East Germany were also affected by the closure. Many church congregations in Berlin owned cemeteries outside the city, so many West Berlin congregations had cemeteries that were located in East Germany. For example, the \"Friedhof vor Charlottenburg\" (in \"Cemetery in front/outside of Charlottenburg\") was located in the East German suburb of Dallgow, yet belonged to Catholic congregations in Berlin-Charlottenburg. Many West Berliners wishing to visit the grave of a relative or friend on cemeteries located in East Germany were now unable to do so. Until 1961, East Germany occasionally issued permits to West Berliners to visit the cemeteries on the Catholic feast of \"All Saints\" on 1 November and on the Protestant Day of Repentance and Prayer.\nIn 1948\u20131952, the Reichsbahn connected the western suburbs of West Berlin to its S-Bahn network. Train routes servicing these suburbs formerly went through West Berlin stations, but ceased to make stops in the western stations or terminated service before entering West Berlin. Private West Berlin railway lines like the Neuk\u00f6lln\u2013Mittenwalde railway (Neuk\u00f6lln-Mittenwalder Eisenbahn, NME), connecting the East German Mittenwalde with West Berlin-Neuk\u00f6lln and the \"B\u00f6tzowbahn\" between West Berlin-Spandau and East German Hennigsdorf, were disrupted at the border between West Berlin and East Germany on 26 October 1948 and August 1950, respectively.\nTramways and bus routes that connected West Berlin with its East German suburbs and were operated by West Berlin's public transport operator Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe Gesellschaft (\"BVG\" West) ceased operation on 14 October 1950, after West Berlin tram and bus drivers had been repeatedly stopped and arrested by East German police for having western currency on them, considered a crime in the East. The BVG (West) terminated route sections that extended into East Germany, like the southern end of tram line 47 to Sch\u00f6nefeld, the southwestern end of tram line 96 to Kleinmachnow, as well as two bus lines to Glienicke at the Nordbahn, north, and to Falkensee, northwest of West Berlin. The East German section of tram line 96 continued operating with eastern personnel and cars, obliging the eastern passengers \u2013 rarely westerners who needed special permits to enter East Germany \u2013 to change from eastern into western trains crossing the border by foot, until it was closed by the Wall.\nThe Reichsbahn shut down all of its West Berlin terminal stations and redirected its trains to stations in East Berlin, starting with Berlin G\u00f6rlitzer Bahnhof \u2013 closed on 29 April 1951 \u2013 before serving rail traffic with G\u00f6rlitz and the southeast of East Germany. On 28 August 1951, trains usually serving Berlin Lehrter Bahnhof were redirected to stations in East Berlin, while trains from West Germany were redirected to the Western \"Berlin Zoologischer Garten\". The Reichsbahn also closed down both Berlin Anhalter Bahnhof and Berlin Nordbahnhof, on 18 May 1952.\nOn 28 August 1951, the Reichsbahn opened a new connection \u2013 from Spandau via Berlin Jungfernheide station \u2013 for the S-Bahn lines connecting East German suburbs to the west of West Berlin (namely Falkensee, Staaken) with East Berlin, thus circumventing the centre of West Berlin. In June 1953, the Reichsbahn further cut off West Berlin from its East German suburbs by the introduction of additional \"express S-Bahn trains\" (). These routes originated from several East German suburbs bordering West Berlin (such as Falkensee, Potsdam, Oranienburg, Staaken, and Velten), crossing West Berlin non-stop until reaching its destinations in East Berlin. However, the regular S-Bahn connections with West Berlin's East German suburbs, stopping at every Western station, continued. From 17 June to 9 July 1953, East Germany blocked off all traffic between East and West due to the Uprising of 1953 in East Germany.\nFrom 4 October 1953, all S-Bahn trains crossing the border between East Germany and Berlin had to pass a border checkpoint in East Germany. Travellers from East Germany were checked before entering any part of Berlin, to identify individuals intending to escape into West Berlin or smuggling rationed or rare goods into West Berlin. S-Bahn trains were checked at Hoppegarten, Mahlow, and Zepernick in East Germany bordering East Berlin and in Hohen Neuendorf, Potsdam-Griebnitzsee, and Staaken-Albrechtshof in East Germany bordering West Berlin. On 4 June 1954, the \"Bahnhof Hennigsdorf S\u00fcd\" station located next to West Berlin was opened solely for border controls, also to monitor West Berliners entering or leaving East Berlin, which they could still do freely, while they were not allowed to cross into East Germany proper without a special permit.\nIn 1951, the Reichsbahn began construction work on the Berlin outer-circle railway line. This circular line connected all train routes heading for West Berlin and accommodated all domestic GDR traffic, thus directing railway traffic into East Berlin while by-passing West Berlin. Commuters in the East German suburbs around West Berlin now boarded \"Sputnik\" express trains, which took them into East Berlin without crossing any western sectors. With the completion of the outer-circle railway, there was no further need for express S-Bahn trains crossing the West Berlin border and thus their service ended on 4 May 1958, while stopping S-Bahn trains continued service. However, while East Germans could get off in West Berlin, West Berliners needed the hard-to get permits to enter East Germany by S-Bahn. With the construction of the Berlin Wall on 13 August 1961, all remaining railway traffic between West Berlin and its East German suburbs ended. Rail traffic between East and West Berlin was sharply reduced and restricted to a small number of checkpoints under GDR control. East Berliners and East Germans were then unable to freely enter and leave West Berlin. However, international visitors could obtain visas for East Berlin upon crossing one of the checkpoints at the Wall.\nFollowing the policy of d\u00e9tente of the \"Federal Government\" under Chancellor Willy Brandt, West Berliners could again apply for visas to visit East Germany, which were granted more freely than in the period until 1961. On 4 June 1972, West Berlin's public transport operator \"BVG\" could open its first bus line into the East German suburbs since 1950 (line E to Potsdam via \"Checkpoint Bravo\" as it was known to the US military). This route was open only to persons bearing all the necessary East German permits and visas. For visits to East Germany, West Berliners could use four checkpoints along the East German border around West Berlin: The two road transit checkpoints Dreilinden (W)/Drewitz (E) and Berlin-Heiligensee (W)/Stolpe (E) as well as the old transit checkpoint at Heerstra\u00dfe (W)/Staaken (E) and the checkpoint at Waltersdorfer Chaussee (W)/Sch\u00f6nefeld (E), which was also open for travellers boarding international flights at Sch\u00f6nefeld Airport.\nTraffic between East and West Berlin.\nWhile East and West Berlin became formally separate jurisdictions in September 1948, and while there were travel restrictions in all other directions for more than a decade, freedom of movement existed between the western sectors and the eastern sector of the city. However, time and again Soviet and later East German authorities imposed temporary restrictions for certain persons, certain routes, and certain means of transport. Gradually the eastern authorities disconnected and separated the two parts of the city.\nWhile the Soviets blocked all transport to West Berlin (Berlin Blockade between 24 June 1948 to 12 May 1949), they increased food supplies in East Berlin in order to gain the compliance of West Berliners who at that time still had free access to East Berlin. West Berliners buying food in East Berlin were regarded as approving of the Soviet attempt to get rid of the Western Allies in West Berlin. This was seen as support by the communists and as treason by most Westerners. Until that time all over Germany food and other necessary supplies had been available only with ration stamps issued by one's municipality. This was the case in East Berlin until the Communist putsch in Berlin's city government in September 1948 \u2013 the unitary City Council of Greater Berlin () for East and West.\nBy July 1948 a mere 19,000 West Berliners out of a total of almost 2\u00a0million covered their food requirements in East Berlin. Thus, 99% of West Berliners preferred to live on shorter supplies than before the Blockade, to show support for the Western Allies' position. In West Germany rationing of most products ended with the introduction of the Western Deutsche Mark on 21 June 1948. The new currency was also introduced in West Berlin on 24 June and this, at least officially, was the justification for the Soviet Blockade due to which rationing in West Berlin had to continue. However, in the course of the Berlin Air Lift some supplies were increased beyond the pre-Blockade level and therefore rationing of certain goods in West Berlin was stopped.\nWhile West Berliners were officially welcome to buy food in East Berlin, the Soviets tried to prevent them from buying other essential supplies, particularly coal and other fuel. For this reason, on 9 November 1948, they opened checkpoints on 70 streets entering West Berlin and closed the others for horse carriages, lorries and cars, later (16 March 1949) the Soviets erected roadblocks on the closed streets. From 15 November 1948, West Berlin ration stamps were no longer accepted in East Berlin. All the same, the Soviets started a campaign with the slogan \"The smart West Berliner buys at the HO\" (), the HO being the Soviet zone chain of shops. They also opened so-called \"Free Shops\" in the Eastern Sector, offering supplies without ration stamps, but denominated at extremely high prices in Eastern Deutsche Marks. Ordinary East and West Berliners could only afford to buy there if they had income in Western Deutsche Mark and bartered the needed Eastern Deutsche Mark on the spontaneous currency markets, which developed in the British sector at the Zoo station. Their demand and supply determined a barter ratio in favour of the Western Deutsche Mark with more than 2 Eastern Deutsche Marks offered for one Western Deutsche Mark. After the Blockade, when holders of Western Deutsche Marks could buy as much they could afford, up to five and six east marks were offered for one west mark. In the East, however, the Soviets had arbitrarily decreed a rate of 1 for 1 and exchanging at other rates was criminalised.\nOn 12 May 1949, the Blockade ended and all roadblocks and checkpoints between East and West Berlin were removed. The Berlin Airlift, however, continued until 30 September 1949 in order to build up supplies in West Berlin (the so-called Senate Reserve), in readiness for another possible blockade, thus ensuring that an airlift could then be restarted with ease. On 2 May 1949, power stations in East Berlin started again to supply West Berlin with sufficient electricity. Before then, electrical supply had been reduced to just a few hours a day after the normal supplies had been interrupted at the start of the Blockade. However, the Western Allies and the West Berlin City Council decided to be self-sufficient in terms of electricity generation capacity, to be independent of Eastern supplies and not to be held to ransom by the eastern authorities. On 1 December 1949 the new \"power station West\" (, in 1953 renamed after the former Governing Mayor of West Berlin into ) went online and West Berlin's electricity board declared independence from Eastern supplies. However, for a time Eastern electricity continued to be supplied albeit intermittently. Supply was interrupted from 1 July until the end of 1950 and then started again until 4 March 1952, when the East finally switched it off. From then on West Berlin turned into an 'electricity island' within a pan-European electricity grid that had developed from the 1920s, because electricity transfers between East and West Germany never fully ceased.\nIn 1952, West Berliners were restricted entry to East Germany proper by means of a hard-to-obtain East German permit. Free entry to East Berlin remained possible until 1961 and the building of the Wall. Berlin's underground () and Berlin's S-Bahn (a metropolitan public transit network), rebuilt after the war, continued to span all occupation sectors. Many people lived in one half of the city and had family, friends, and jobs in the other. However, the East continuously reduced the means of public transport between East and West, with private cars being a very rare privilege in the East and still a luxury in the West.\nStarting on 15 January 1953 the tram network was interrupted. East Berlin's public transport operator (\"BVG\"-East, \"BVB\" as of 1 January 1969) staffed all trams, whose lines crossed the sectorial border, with women drivers, who were not permitted as drivers by the \"BVG\" (West), West Berlin's public transport operator. Instead of changing the Western rules, so that the Easterly intended interruption of the cross-border tram traffic would not happen, the \"BVG\" (West) insisted on male drivers. Cross-border tram traffic ended on 16 January. In East German propaganda this was a point for the East, arguing that the West did not allow drivers coming with their trams from the East to continue along their line into the West, but remaining silent on the fact that the end of cross-border tram traffic was most welcome to the East. The underground and the S-Bahn networks, except the above-mentioned \"traverse S-Bahn trains\", continued to provide services between East and West Berlin. However, occasionally the East Berlin police \u2013 in the streets and on cross-border trains in East Berlin \u2013 identified suspicious behaviour (such as carrying heavy loads westwards) and watched out for unwelcome Westerners.\nOccasionally, West Germans were banned from entering East Berlin. This was the case between 29 August and 1 September 1960, when ex-prisoners of war and deportees, \"homecomers\" (), from all around West Germany and West Berlin met for a convention in that city. The \"homecomers\" released mostly from a long detention in the Soviet Union were unwelcome in East Berlin. As they could not be recognised through their identification papers, all West Germans were banned from East Berlin during those days. West Berliners were allowed, since the quadripartite Allied status quo provided for their free movement around all four sectors. From 8 September 1960 on, the East subjected all West Germans to apply for a permit before entering East Berlin.\nAs the communist government in the East gained tighter control, and the economic recovery in the West significantly outperformed the East, more than a hundred thousand East Germans and East Berliners left East Germany and East Berlin for the West every year. East Germany closed the borders between East and West Germany and sealed off the border with West Berlin in 1952; but because of the quadripartite Allied status of the city, the -long sectorial border between East and West Berlin remained open.\nTo stop this drain of people defecting, the East German government built the Berlin Wall, thus physically closing off West Berlin from East Berlin and East Germany, on 13 August 1961. All Eastern streets, bridges, paths, windows, doors, gates, and sewers opening to West Berlin were systematically sealed off by walls, concrete barriers, barbed wire, and/or bars. The Wall was directed against the Easterners, who by its construction were no longer allowed to leave the East, except with an Eastern permit, not usually granted.\nWesterners were still granted visas on entering East Berlin. Initially eight street checkpoints were opened, and one checkpoint in the Berlin Friedrichstra\u00dfe railway station, which was reached by one line of the Western underground (today's U 6), two Western S-Bahn lines, one under and one above ground (approximately today's S 2 and S 3, however, lines changed significantly from 1990 onwards), and \"transit trains\" between West Germany and West Berlin started and ended there.\nThe eight street checkpoints were \u2013 from North to South along the Wall \u2013 on Bornholmer Stra\u00dfe, Chausseestra\u00dfe, Invalidenstra\u00dfe, Berlin Friedrichstra\u00dfe station, Friedrichstra\u00dfe (Checkpoint Charlie in US military denomination, since this crossing was to their sector), Heinrich-Heine-Stra\u00dfe, Oberbaumbr\u00fccke, and Sonnenallee.\nWhen the construction of the Wall started after midnight early on 13 August, West Berlin's Governing Mayor Willy Brandt was on a West German federal election campaigning tour in West Germany. Arriving by train in Hanover at 4 am he was informed about the Wall and flew to West Berlin's Tempelhof Central Airport.\nOver the course of the day he protested along with many other West Berliners on Potsdamer Platz and at the Brandenburg Gate. On 14 August, under the pretext that Western demonstrations necessitated it, the East closed the checkpoint at the Brandenburg Gate 'until further notice', a situation that was to last until 22 December 1989, when it was finally reopened.\nOn 26 August 1961, East Germany generally banned West Berliners from entering the Eastern sector. West Germans and other nationals, however, could still get visas on entering East Berlin. Since intra-city phone lines had been cut by the East already in May 1952 (see below) the only remaining way of communication with family or friends on the other side was by mail or at meeting in a motorway restaurant on a \"transit route\", because the \"transit traffic\" remained unaffected throughout.\nOn 18 May 1962 East Germany opened the so-called Tr\u00e4nenpalast checkpoint hall (\"Palace of Tears\") at Berlin Friedrichstra\u00dfe station, where Easterners had to say a sometimes tearful farewell to returning Westerners as well as the few Easterners who had managed to get a permit to visit the West. Until June 1963 the East deepened its border zone around West Berlin in East Germany and East Berlin by clearing existing buildings and vegetation to create an open field of view, sealed off by the Berlin Wall towards the West and a second wall or fence of similar characteristics to the East, observed by armed men in towers, with orders to shoot at escapees.\nFinally, in 1963, West Berliners were again allowed to visit East Berlin. On this occasion a further checkpoint for pedestrians only was opened on the Oberbaumbr\u00fccke. West Berliners were granted visas for a one-day visit between 17 December 1963 and 5 January the following year. 1.2\u00a0million out of a total 1.9\u00a0million West Berliners visited East Berlin during this period. In 1964, 1965, and 1966 East Berlin was opened again to West Berliners, but each time only for a limited period.\nEast Germany assigned different legal statuses to East Germans, East Berliners, West Germans, and West Berliners, as well as citizens from other countries in the world. Until 1990 East Germany designated each Border crossings in East Berlin for certain categories of persons, with only one street checkpoint being open simultaneously for West Berliners and West Germans (Bornholmer Stra\u00dfe) and \"Berlin Friedrichstra\u00dfe railway station\" being open for all travellers.\nOn 9 September 1964, the East German Council of Ministers (government) decided to allow Eastern pensioners to visit family in West Germany or West Berlin. According to the specified regulations valid from 2 November on Eastern pensioners could apply and were usually allowed, to travel into the West to visit relatives once a year for a maximum of four weeks. If pensioners decided not to return, the government did not miss them as manpower, unlike younger Easterners, who were subject to a system of labour and employment, which demanded that almost everybody work in the Eastern command production system.\nOn 2 December 1964 East Germany, always short of hard currency, decreed that every Western visitor had to buy a minimum of 5 Eastern \"Mark der Deutschen Notenbank\" per day (MDN, 1964\u20131968 the official name of the East German mark, to distinguish it from the West Deutsche Mark) at the still held arbitrary compulsory rate of 1:1. The 5 marks had to be spent, as exporting Eastern currency was illegal, which is why importing it after having bargained for it at the currency market at Zoo station was also illegal. Western pensioners and children were spared from the compulsory exchange (officially in , i.e. \"minimum exchange\"). Not long after East Germany held the first cash harvest from the new compulsory exchange rules by allowing West Berliners to visit East Berlin once more for a day during the Christmas season. The following year, 1965, East Germany opened the travelling season for West Berliners on 18 December. In 1966 it opened for a second harvest of Western money between the Easter (10 April) and Pentecost (29 May) holidays and later again at Christmas.\nThe situation only changed fundamentally after 11 December 1971 when, representing the two German states, Egon Bahr from the West and Michael Kohl from the East signed the Transit Agreement. This was followed by a similar agreement for West Berliners, once more allowing regular visits to East Germany and East Berlin.\nAfter ratification of the Agreement and specifying the relevant regulations, West Berliners could apply for the first time again for visas for any chosen date to East Berlin or East Germany from 3 October 1972 onwards. If granted, a one-day-visa entitled West Berliners to travel to the East until 2\u00a0am the following day. The visitors were now spared the visa fee of 5 Western Deutsche Marks, not to be confused with the compulsory exchange amounting to the same sum, but yielding in return 5 Eastern marks. This financial relief did not last long, because on 15 November 1973 East Germany doubled the compulsory exchange to 10 Eastern marks, payable in West German Deutsche Marks at par.\nOne-day visas for East Berlin were now issued in a quickened procedure; visas for longer stays and visas for East Germany proper needed a prior application, which could be a lengthy procedure. To facilitate applications for West Berliners seeking such Eastern visas, the GDR Foreign Ministry was later allowed to open \"Offices for the Affairs of Visits and Travelling\" () in West Berlin, which were not allowed to show any official symbols of East Germany. The Eastern officials working commuted every morning and evening between East and West Berlin. Their uniforms showed no official symbols except the name . They accepted visa applications and handed out confirmed visas issued in the East to the West Berlin applicants. A shed formerly housing one such can be found on Waterlooufer 5\u20137 in Berlin-Kreuzberg, close to Hallesches Tor underground station.\nAnother form of traffic between East and West Berlin was the transfer of West Berlin's sewage into East Berlin and East Germany through the sewer pipes built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The sewage flowed into the East because most of the pre-war sewage treatment facilities, mostly sewage farms, happened to be in the East after the division of the city. Sewer pipes, however, once discovered as a way to flee the East, were blocked by bars. West Berlin paid for the treatment of its sewage in Western Deutsche Marks which were desperately needed by the East German government. Since the methods used in the East did not meet Western standards, West Berlin increased the capacity of modern sewage treatment within its own territory, such that the amount of its sewage treated in the East had been considerably reduced by the time the Wall came down.\nThe situation with refuse was similar. The removal, burning or disposal of the ever-growing amount of West Berlin's rubbish became a costly problem, but here too an agreement was found since West Berlin would pay in Western Deutsche Marks. On 11 December 1974 East Germany and West Berlin's garbage utility company \"BSR\" signed a contract to dispose of refuse on a dump right beside the Wall in East German Gro\u00df-Ziethen (today a part of Sch\u00f6nefeld). An extra checkpoint, solely open for Western bin lorries (garbage trucks), was opened there. Later on, a second dump, further away, was opened in Vorketzin, a part of Ketzin.\nAs for the S-Bahn, operated throughout Berlin by the East German Reichsbahn, the construction of the Wall meant a serious disruption of its integrated network, especially of the Berlin's circular S-Bahn line around all of the Western and Eastern inner city. The lines were separated and those mostly located in West Berlin were continued, but only accessible from West Berlin with all access in East Berlin closed. However, even before the Wall had been built, West Berliners increasingly refrained from using the S-Bahn, since boycotts against it were issued, the argument being that every S-Bahn ticket bought provided the GDR government with valuable Western Deutsche Marks.\nUsage dropped further as the Western public transport operator \"BVG\" (West) offered parallel bus lines and expanded its network of underground lines. After the construction of the Wall, ridership fell so much that running the S-Bahn lines in West Berlin turned into a loss-making exercise: wages and maintenance \u2013 however badly it was carried out \u2013 cost more than income from ticket sales. Finally, the Reichsbahn agreed to surrender operation of the S-Bahn in West Berlin, as had been determined by all Allies in 1945, and on 29 December 1983 the Allies, the Senate of Berlin (West; i.e. the city state government) and the Reichsbahn signed an agreement to change the operator from Reichsbahn to \"BVG\" (West) which took effect on 9 January 1984.\nOn 9 November 1989 East Germany opened the borders for East Germans and East Berliners, who could then freely enter West Berlin. West Berlin itself had never restricted their entry. For West Berliners and West Germans the opening of the border for free entry lasted longer. The regulation concerning one-day-visas on entering the East and the compulsory minimum exchange of 25 Western Deutsche Marks by 1989, continued. However, more checkpoints were opened. Finally, on 22 December 1989, East Germany granted West Berliners and West Germans free entry without charge at the existing checkpoints, demanding only valid papers. Eastern controls were slowly eased into spot checks and finally abolished on 30 June 1990, the day East and West introduced the \"union concerning currency, economy and social security\" ().\nTraffic between different parts of West Berlin crossing the East.\nWhen the Wall was built in 1961, three metro lines starting in northern parts of West Berlin passed through tunnels under the Eastern city centre and ended again in southern parts of West Berlin. The lines concerned were today's underground lines U 6 and U 8 and the S-Bahn line S 2 (today partly also used by other lines). On the sealing off of West Berlin from East Berlin by the Berlin Wall the entrances of the stations on these lines located in East Berlin were shut. However, western trains were allowed to continue to pass through without stopping. Passengers of these trains experienced the empty and barely lit ghost stations where time had stood still since 13 August 1961. West Berlin's public transport operator \"BVG\" (West) paid the east an annual charge in Western Deutsche Marks for its underground lines to use the tunnels under East Berlin. U 6 and S 2 also had one subterranean stop at the Eastern Berlin Friedrichstra\u00dfe railway station, the only station beneath East Berlin where western U Bahn trains were still allowed to stop. Passengers could change there between U 6, S 2 and the elevated S 3 (then starting and ending in Friedrichstra\u00dfe) or for the transit trains to West Germany, buy duty-free tobacco and liquor for Western marks in GDR-run Intershop kiosks, or enter East Berlin through a checkpoint right in the station.\nMedia.\nWest Berlin's primary television and radio stations were operated by Sender Freies Berlin, whose radio broadcasts began in 1953. Due to the regionalised structure of German public broadcasting, SFB had various interregional affiliations with the rest of West Germany, including Nordwestdeutscher Rundfunk's northwest and west German services (1953\u201354), ARD's national radio services (1954\u201390), Norddeutscher Rundfunk's northwest German services (1956\u201390), and Das Erste's national television channels (1958\u201390).\nRundfunk im amerikanischen Sektor was operated in large part by the United States Information Agency as a radio service, and often aired programming aimed at East German listeners. A RIAS television channel was launched in 1988.\nTogether, the two services reached most of East Germany to varying extents thanks to broadcasting from the centre of the rest of East Germany, where watching and listening to them was commonplace, and which inspired at least a handful of Republikflucht escape attempts to West Germany and Denmark.\nSports.\nWest Berlin was represented in West German sports competitions almost from the beginning.\nAssociation football.\nIn men's association football, the first team based in West Berlin to play in the postwar national championship, which at the time was an end-of-season tournament played by the teams that placed best in the interregional Oberligas, was Berliner SV 1892 in the 1949 German football championship. After the foundation of the Bundesliga in 1963, the presence of West Berlin teams from the 1966\u201367 Bundesliga onwards relied on remaining in or being promoted to it, on the same grounds as for West German teams.\nThe most successful West Berlin team was Hertha BSC, who stayed in the Bundesliga consistently throughout the 1970's. Despite never winning any trophies during the Cold War, they were runners-up in the 1974\u201375 Bundesliga, and reached the finals of the DFB-Pokal national cup twice in 1976\u201377 (losing after an initial final draw and resulting replay) and 1978\u201379.\nIce hockey.\nIn men's ice hockey, the most successful West Berlin team in the Eishockey-Bundesliga was Berliner Schlittschuhclub, who won the league in the 1973\u201374 and 1975\u201376 seasons.\nOther sports.\nThe prologue and first two stages of the 1987 Tour de France took place entirely within West Berlin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33171", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33171", "title": "War film", "text": "Film genre depicting wars\nWar film is a film genre concerned with warfare, typically about naval, air, or land battles, with combat scenes central to the drama. It has been strongly associated with the 20th century. The fateful nature of battle scenes means that war films often end with them. Themes explored include combat, survival and escape, camaraderie between soldiers, sacrifice, the futility and inhumanity of battle, the effects of war on society, and the moral and human issues raised by war. War films are often categorized by their milieu, such as the Korean War; the most popular subjects are the Second World War and the American Civil War. The stories told may be fiction, historical drama, or biographical. Critics have noted similarities between the Western and the war film.\nNations such as China, Indonesia, Japan, and Russia have their own traditions of war film, centred on their own revolutionary wars but taking varied forms, from action and historical drama to wartime romance.\nSubgenres, not necessarily distinct, include anti-war, comedy, propaganda, and documentary. There are similarly subgenres of the war film in specific theatres such as the Western Desert of North Africa and the Pacific in the Second World War, Vietnam, or the Soviet\u2013Afghan War; and films set in specific domains of war, such as the infantry, the air, at sea, in submarines or at prisoner of war camps.\nGenre.\nThe war film genre is not necessarily tightly defined: the American Film Institute, for example, speaks of \"films to grapple with the Great War\" without attempting to classify these. However, some directors and critics have offered at least tentative definitions. The director Sam Fuller defined the genre by saying that \"a war film's objective, no matter how personal or emotional, is to make a viewer feel war.\" John Belton identified four narrative elements of the war film within the context of Hollywood production: a) the suspension of civilian morality during times of war, b) primacy of collective goals over individual motivations, c) rivalry between men in predominantly male groups as well as marginalization and objectification of women, and d) depiction of the reintegration of veterans. The fateful nature of battle scenes means that war films often end with them.\nThe film critic Stephen Neale suggests that the genre is for the most part well defined and uncontentious, since war films are simply those about war being waged in the 20th century, with combat scenes central to the drama. However, Neale notes, films set in the American Civil War or the American Indian Wars of the 19th century were called war films in the time before the First World War. The critic Julian Smith argues, on the contrary, that the war film lacks the formal boundaries of a genre like the Western, but that in practice, \"successful and influential\" war films are about modern wars, in particular World War II, with the combination of mobile forces and mass killing. The film scholar Kathryn Kane points out some similarities between the war film genre and the Western. Both genres use opposing concepts like war and peace, civilization and savagery. War films usually frame World War II as a conflict between \"good\" and \"evil\" as represented by the Allied forces and Nazi Germany whereas the Western portrays the conflict between civilized settlers and the savage indigenous peoples. James Clarke notes the similarity between a Western like Sam Peckinpah's \"The Wild Bunch\" and \"war-movie escapades\" like \"The Dirty Dozen\".\nThe film historian Jeanine Basinger states that she began with a preconception of what the war film genre would be, namely that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What I knew in advance was what presumably every member of our culture would know about World War II combat films\u2014that they contained a hero, a group of mixed types [of people], and a military objective of some sort. They take place in the actual combat zones of World War II, against the established enemies, on the ground, the sea, or in the air. They contain many repeated events, such as mail call, all presented visually with appropriate uniforms, equipment, and iconography of battle.\nFurther, Basinger considers \"Bataan\" to provide a definition-by-example of \"the World War II combat film\", in which a diverse and apparently unsuited group of \"hastily assembled volunteers\" hold off a much larger group of the enemy through their \"bravery and tenacity\". She argues that the combat film is not a subgenre but the only genuine kind of war film. Since she notes that there were in fact only five true combat films made during the Second World War, in her view these few films, central to the genre, are outweighed by the many other films that are only just war films. However, other critics such as Russell Earl Shain propose a far broader definition of war film, to include films that deal \"with the roles of civilians, espionage agents, and soldiers in any of the aspects of war (i.e. preparation, cause, prevention, conduct, daily life, and consequences or aftermath.)\" Neale points out that genres overlap, with combat scenes for different purposes in other types of film, and suggests that war films are characterised by combat which \"determines the fate of the principal characters\". This in turn pushes combat scenes to the climactic ends of war films. Not all critics agree, either, that war films must be about 20th-century wars. James Clarke includes Edward Zwick's Oscar-winning \"Glory\" (1990) among the war films he discusses in detail; it is set in the American Civil War, and he lists six other films about that war which he considers \"notable\". The screenwriter and scholar Eric R. Williams identifies war films as one of eleven super-genres in his screenwriters' taxonomy, claiming that all feature-length narrative films can be classified as belonging to one of them.\nThe British military historian Antony Beevor \"despair[s]\" at how film-makers from America and Britain \"play fast and loose with the facts\", yet imply that \"their version is as good as the truth\". For example, he calls the 2000 American film \"U-571\" a \"shameless deception\" for pretending that a US warship had helped to win the Battle of the Atlantic\u2014seven months before America entered the war. He is equally critical of Christopher Nolan's 2017 film \"Dunkirk\" with its unhistorically empty beaches, low-level air combat over the sea, and rescues mainly by the \"little ships\". Beevor feels, however, that Continental European film-makers are often \"far more scrupulous\"; for example, in his view the 2004 German film \"Downfall\" accurately depicted the historical events of Hitler's final days in his Berlin bunker, and he considers the 1965 French film \"The 317th Platoon\", set in Vietnam, \"the greatest war movie ever made\". The 1966 film \"The Battle of Algiers\" is, he argues, a close second.\nHistory.\nAmerican Civil War.\nThe costliest war in U.S. history in terms of American life, this war has been the subject of, or the backdrop to, numerous films, documentaries and mini-series. One of the earliest films using the Civil War as its subject was D.W. Griffith's 1910 silent picture, \"The Fugitive\". Films that have the war as its main subject, or about a certain aspect of the war, include the 1989 film \"Glory\", about the first formal unit of the Union Army during the American Civil War to be made up entirely of Black volunteers. Some films such as \"Gettysburg\" focused on a single battle during the war, or even on a single incident, like the French short film \"La Rivi\u00e8re du Hibou\" (\"An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge\") and Disney's \"The Great Locomotive Chase\" (1956). Others like the 1993 miniseries \"North and South\" spanned the entire breadth of the war. Some films deal with the human aspects of the war, such as \"The Red Badge of Courage\" (1951), or \"Shenandoah\" (1965), on the tragedy that the war inflicted on the civilian population. Ken Burns's \"The Civil War\" is the most-watched documentary in the history of PBS.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War.\nThe first war films come from the Spanish\u2013American War of 1898. Short \"actualities\"\u2014documentary film-clips\u2014included \"Burial of the Maine Victims\", \"Blanket-Tossing of a New Recruit\", and \"Soldiers Washing Dishes\". These non-combat films were accompanied by \"reenactments\" of fighting, such as of Theodore Roosevelt's \"Rough Riders\" in action against the Spanish, staged in the United States.\nFirst World War.\nDuring the First World War, many films were made about life in the war. Topics included prisoners of war, covert operations, and military training. Both the Central Powers and the Allies produced war documentaries. The films were also used as propaganda in neutral countries like the United States. Among these was a film shot on the Eastern Front by official war photographer to the Central Powers, Albert K. Dawson: \"The Battle and Fall of Przemysl\" (1915), depicting the Siege of Przemy\u015bl, disastrous for the Austrians, with incidents reenacted using soldiers as extras.\nThe 1915 Australian film \"Within Our Gates\" (also known as \"Deeds that Won Gallipoli\") by Frank Harvey was described by the \"Motion Picture News\" as \"a really good war story, which is exceptional\".\nThe 1916 British film \"The Battle of the Somme\", by two official cinematographers, Geoffrey Malins and John McDowell, combined documentary and propaganda, seeking to give the public an impression of what trench warfare was like. Much of the film was shot on location at the Western Front in France; it had a powerful emotional impact. It was watched by some 20 million people in Britain in its six weeks of exhibition, making it what the critic Francine Stock called \"one of the most successful films of all time\".\nThe 1925 American film \"The Big Parade\" depicted unglamorous elements of war: the protagonist loses his leg, and his friends are killed. William A. Wellman's \"Wings\" (1927) showed aerial combat during the war and was made in cooperation with the Army Air Corps. It proved a powerful recruiting tool. It became the first film (in any genre) to be awarded an Oscar for best picture. Later films of varied genres that deal with the First World War include David Lean's \"colossal epic\", both war film and biopic \"Lawrence of Arabia\" (1962), shot in the then unfamiliar and exciting 70mm Technicolor, and described by Steven Spielberg as \"maybe the greatest screenplay ever written for the motion-picture medium\"; Richard Attenborough's satirical anti-war musical comedy based on Joan Littlewood's play of the same name, \"Oh! What a Lovely War\" (1969); Spielberg's 2011 war drama \"War Horse\" was based on Michael Morpurgo's children's novel of the same name.\nMany of the films promoted as \"documentaries\" added context to authentic battlefield scenes by staging critical events, and invented episodes and dialog to enhance excitement at the cost of authenticity.\nFinnish Civil War.\nAlthough the 1918 Finnish Civil War between Whites and Reds remained a controversial topic a century later in Finland, many Finnish filmmakers have taken up the subject, often basing their work on a book. In 1957, Toivo S\u00e4rkk\u00e4's \"1918\", based on Jarl Hemmer's play and novel, was screened at the 7th Berlin International Film Festival. Recent films include Lauri T\u00f6rh\u00f6nen's 2007 \"The Border\", and Aku Louhimies's 2008 \"Tears of April\", based on Leena Lander's novel. Perhaps the most famous film about the Finnish Civil War is Edvin Laine's 1968 \"Here, Beneath the North Star\", based on the first two books of V\u00e4in\u00f6 Linna's \"Under the North Star\" trilogy; it describing the civil war from the losing side, Finland's Red Guards.\nSpanish Civil War.\nThe Spanish Civil War has attracted directors from different countries. Sam Wood's \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" (1943), based on Ernest Hemingway's book of the same name, portrays the fated romance between an American played by Gary Cooper and a partisan played by Ingrid Bergman against the backdrop of the civil war. The epic 168-minute film with its landscapes shot in Technicolor and a \"beautiful\" orchestral score was a success both with audiences and with critics. Alain Resnais's \"Guernica\" (1950) uses Picasso's 1937 painting of the same name to protest against war. Carlos Saura's \"La Caza\" (The Hunt, 1966) uses the metaphor of hunting to criticise the aggressiveness of Spanish fascism. It won the Silver Bear for Best Director at the 16th Berlin International Film Festival in 1966. Ken Loach's \"Land and Freedom\" (\"Tierra y Libertad\", 1995), loosely based on George Orwell's \"Homage to Catalonia\", follows a British communist through the war to reveal the painful contradictions within the anti-fascist Republican side.\nKorean War.\nSamuel Fuller's \"The Steel Helmet\" (1951) was made during the Korean War (1950\u20131953). The critic Guy Westwell notes that it questioned the conduct of the war, as did later films like \"The Bridges at Toko-Ri\" (1954) and \"Pork Chop Hill\" (1959). Fuller agreed that all his films were anti-war. No Hollywood films about the Korean War did well at the box office; the historian Lary May suggested in 2001 that they reminded American viewers of \"the only war we have lost\".\nIn 1955, after the fighting, the successful South Korean action film \"Piagol\" about leftist guerrilla atrocities encouraged other film-makers. The 1960s military government punished pro-communist film-makers and gave Grand Bell Awards to films with the strongest anti-communist message. \"The Taebaek Mountains\" (1994) dealt with leftists from the south who fought for the communists, while \"Silver Stallion\" (1991) and \"Spring in My Hometown\" (1998) showed the destructive impact of American military presence on village life. The violent action films \"Shiri\" (1999) and \"Joint Security Area\" (2000) presented North Korea in a favourable light.\nFilms in North Korea were made by government film studios and had clear political messages. The first was \"My Home Village\" (1949), on the liberation of Korea from the Japanese, presented as the work of Kim Il Sung without help from the Americans. Similarly, the country's films about the Korean War show victory without help from the Chinese. The film scholar Johannes Sch\u00f6nherr concludes that the purpose of these films is \"to portray North Korea as a country under siege\", and that since the U.S. and its \"puppet\" South Korea invaded the North once, they would do so again.\nAlgerian War.\nGillo Pontecorvo's dramatic \"The Battle of Algiers\" ((; ; ), 1966) portrayed events in the Algerian War (1954\u20131956). It was shot on location as an Italo-Algerian co-production. It had the black and white newsreel style of Italian neorealism, and even-handedly depicts violence on both sides. It won various awards including Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. It was attacked by French critics and was for five years banned in France as well as \"Jamila, the Algerian\" (1958).\nVietnam War.\nFew films before the late 1970s about the Vietnam War actually depicted combat; exceptions include \"The Green Berets\" (1968). Critics such as Basinger explain that Hollywood avoided the subject because of opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War, making the subject divisive; in addition, the film industry was in crisis, and the army did not wish to assist in making anti-war films.\nFrom the late 1970s, independently financed and produced films showed Hollywood that Vietnam could be treated in film. Successful but very different portrayals of the war in which America had been defeated included Michael Cimino's \"The Deer Hunter\" (1978), and Francis Ford Coppola's \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979). With the shift in American politics to the right in the 1980s, military success could again be shown in films such as Oliver Stone's \"Platoon\" (1986), Stanley Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\" (1987) and John Irvin's \"Hamburger Hill\" (1987).\nThe Vietnamese director Nguy\u1ec5n H\u1ed3ng S\u1ebfn's \"\" (\"C\u00e1nh \u0111\u1ed3ng hoang\", 1979) gives an \"unnerving and compelling .. subjective-camera-eye-view\" of life under helicopter fire in the Mekong Delta during the Vietnam War. The film cuts to an (American) \"helicopter-eye view\", contrasting painfully with the human tenderness seen earlier.\nLater wars.\nDino Mustafi\u0107's \"Remake\" (2003), written by Zlatko Top\u010di\u0107, tells the parallel coming-of-age stories of a father living in Sarajevo during World War II and his son living through the Siege of Sarajevo during the Bosnian War. According to Top\u010di\u0107, the story is based on incidents from his own life.\nThe Iraq War served as the background story of American movies, like \"The Hurt Locker\" from 2008, \"Green Zone\" from 2010, and \"American Sniper\" from 2014.\nThe War in Afghanistan since 2001 was depicted in various movies, among them \"Restrepo\" in 2010 and \"Lone Survivor\" from 2013.\nSecond World War.\nMade by Western Allies.\nThe first popular Allied war films made during the Second World War came from Britain and combined the functions of documentary and propaganda. Films such as \"The Lion Has Wings\" and \"Target for Tonight\" were made under the control of the Films Division of the Ministry of Information. The British film industry began to combine documentary techniques with fictional stories in films like No\u00ebl Coward and David Lean's \"In Which We Serve\" (1942)\u2014\"the most successful British film of the war years\"\u2014\"Millions Like Us\" (1943), and \"The Way Ahead\" (1944).\nIn America, documentaries were produced in various ways: General Marshall commissioned the \"Why We Fight\" propaganda series from Frank Capra; the War Department's Information-Education Division started out making training films for the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy; the Army made its own through the U.S. Signal Corps, including John Huston's \"The Battle of San Pietro\". Hollywood made films with propaganda messages about America's allies, such as \"Mrs. Miniver\" (1942), which portrayed a British family on the home front; \"Edge of Darkness\" (1943) showed Norwegian resistance fighters, and \"The North Star\" (1943) showed the Soviet Union and its Communist Party. Towards the end of the war popular books provided higher quality and more serious stories for films such as \"Guadalcanal Diary\" (1943), Mervyn LeRoy's \"Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo\" (1944), and John Ford's \"They Were Expendable\" (1945).\nThe Soviet Union, too, appreciated the propaganda value of film, to publicise both victories and German atrocities. Ilya Kopalin's documentary \"Moscow Strikes Back\" (, literally \"The rout of the German troops near Moscow\"), was made during the Battle of Moscow between October 1941 and January 1942. It depicted civilians helping to defend the city, the parade in Red Square and Stalin's speech rousing the Russian people to battle, actual fighting, Germans surrendering and dead, and atrocities including murdered children and hanged civilians. It won an Academy Award in 1943 for best documentary. Newsreel cameras were similarly rushed to Stalingrad early in 1943 to record \"the spectacle which greeted the Russian soldiers\"\u2014the starvation of Russian prisoners of war in the Voropovono camp by the German Sixth Army, defeated in the Battle of Stalingrad.\nFeature films made in the west during the war were subject to censorship and were not always realistic in nature. One of the first to attempt to represent violence, and which was praised at the time for \"gritty realism\", was Tay Garnett's \"Bataan\" (1943). The depiction actually remained stylised. Jeanine Basinger gives as an example the \"worst image for stark violence\" when a Japanese soldier beheads an American: the victim shows pain and his lips freeze in a scream, yet no blood spurts and his head does not fall off. Basinger points out that while this is physically unrealistic, psychologically it may not have been. The wartime audience was, she points out, well aware of friends and relatives who had been killed or who had come home wounded.\nMade by Axis powers.\nThe Axis powers similarly made films during the Second World War, for propaganda and other purposes. In Germany, the army high command brought out \"Sieg im Westen\" (\"Victory in the West\", 1941). Other Nazi propaganda films had varied subjects, as with \"Kolberg\" (1945), which depicts stubborn Prussian resistance in the Siege of Kolberg (1807) to the invading French troops under Napoleon. The propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels chose the historical subject as suitable for the worsening situation facing Nazi Germany when it was filmed from October 1943 to August 1944. At over eight million marks, using thousands of soldiers as extras and 100 railway wagonloads of salt to simulate snow, it was the most costly German film made during the war. The actual siege ended with the surrender of the town; in the film, the French generals abandon the siege.\nFor Japan, the war began with the undeclared war and invasion of China in 1937, which the Japanese authorities called \"The China Incident\". The government dispatched a \"pen brigade\" to write and film the action in China with \"humanist values\". Tomotaka Tasaka's \"Mud and Soldiers\" (1939) for instance, shot on location in China, K\u014dzabur\u014d Yoshimura's \"Legend of Tank Commander Nishizumi\", and Sato Takeshi's \"Chocolate and Soldiers\" (1938) show the common Japanese soldier as an individual and as a family man, and even enemy Chinese soldiers are presented as individuals, sometimes fighting bravely. Once war with the United States was declared, the Japanese conflict became known as the Pacific War. Japanese film critics worried that even with Western film techniques, their film output failed to represent native Japanese values. The historian John Dower found that Japanese wartime films had been largely forgotten, as \"losers do not get reruns\", yet they were so subtle and skilful that Frank Capra thought \"Chocolate and Soldiers\" unbeatable. Heroes were typically low-ranking officers, not samurai, calmly devoted to his men and his country. These films did not personalise the enemy and therefore lacked hatred, though Great Britain could figure as the \"cultural enemy\". For Japanese film-makers, war was not a cause but more like a natural disaster, and \"what mattered was not whom one fought but how well\". Asian enemies, especially the Chinese, were often portrayed as redeemable and even possible marriage partners. Japanese wartime films do not glorify war, but present the Japanese state as one great family and the Japanese people as an \"innocent, suffering, self-sacrificing people\". Dower comments that the perversity of this image \"is obvious: it is devoid of any recognition that, at every level, the Japanese also victimized others.\"\nPostwar.\nAccording to Andrew Pulver of \"The Guardian\", the public fascination with war films became an \"obsession\", with over 200 war films produced in each decade of the 1950s and 1960s. War film production in the United Kingdom and United States reached its zenith in the mid-1950s. Its popularity in the United Kingdom was brought on by the critical and commercial success of Charles Frend's \"The Cruel Sea\" (1953). Like others of the period, \"The Cruel Sea\" was based on a bestselling novel, in this case the former naval commander Nicholas Monsarrat's story of the battle of the Atlantic. Others, like \"The Dam Busters\" (1954), with its exciting tale of the inventor Barnes Wallis's unorthodox bouncing bomb and its distinctive theme music, were true stories. \"The Dam Busters\" became the most popular film in Britain in 1955, and remained a favourite as of 2015 with a 100% score on Rotten Tomatoes, though, partly because it celebrated an \"exclusively British [victory]\", it failed in the American market. A large number of war films were made in the 1955\u20131958 period in particular. In 1957 alone, \"Bitter Victory\", \"Count Five and Die\", \"The Enemy Below\", \"Ill Met by Moonlight\", \"Men in War\", \"The One That Got Away\", and \"Seven Thunders\", and the highly successful, critically acclaimed pictures \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\" (which won the Academy Award for Best Picture that year) and \"Paths of Glory\" were released. Some, such as \"Bitter Victory\", focused more on the psychological battle between officers and egotism rather than events during the war. \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\" brought a new complexity to the war picture, with a sense of moral uncertainty surrounding war. By the end of the decade the \"sense of shared achievement\" which had been common in war films \"began to evaporate\", according to Pulver.\nHollywood films in the 1950s and 1960s could display spectacular heroics or self-sacrifice, as in the popular \"Sands of Iwo Jima\" (1949) starring John Wayne. U.S. Marines considered \"Sands of Iwo Jima\" visually authentic, but found Lewis Milestone's \"Battle Cry\" (1955), with its attention to the lives of the men, the more realistic film. The formula for a successful war film consisted, according to Lawrence Suid, of a small group of ethnically diverse men; an unreasonable senior officer; cowards became heroic, or died. Jeanine Basinger suggests that a traditional war film should have a hero, a group, and an objective, and that the group should contain \"an Italian, a Jew, a cynical complainer from Brooklyn, a sharpshooter from the mountains, a midwesterner (nicknamed by his state, 'Iowa' or 'Dakota'), and a character who must be initiated in some way\". Films based on real commando missions, like \"The Gift Horse\" (1952) based on the St. Nazaire Raid, and \"Ill Met by Moonlight\" (1956) based on the capture of the German commander of Crete, inspired fictional adventure films such as \"The Guns of Navarone\" (1961), \"The Train\" (1964), and \"Where Eagles Dare\" (1968). These used the war as a backdrop for spectacular action.\nDarryl F. Zanuck produced the 178 minute documentary drama \"The Longest Day\" (1962), based on the first day of the D-Day landings, achieving commercial success and Oscars. It was followed by large-scale but thoughtful films like Andrei Tarkovsky's \"Ivan's Childhood\" (1962), and quasi-documentary all-star epics filmed in Europe such as \"Battle of the Bulge\" (1965), \"Battle of Britain\" (1969), \"The Battle of Neretva\" (1969), \"Midway\" (1976), and \"A Bridge Too Far\" (1977). In Lawrence Suid's view, \"The Longest Day\" \"served as the model for all subsequent combat spectaculars\". However, its cost also made it the last of the traditional war films, while the controversy around the help given by the U.S. Army and Zanuck's \"disregard for Pentagon relations\" changed the way that Hollywood and the Army collaborated.\nZanuck, by then an executive at 20th Century Fox, set up an American\u2013Japanese co-production for Richard Fleischer's \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" (1970) to depict what \"really happened on December 7, 1941\" in the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. The film, panned by Roger Ebert and \"The New York Times\", was a major success in Japan. Its realistic-looking attack footage was reused in later films such as \"Midway\" (1976), \"The Final Countdown\" (1980), and \"Australia\" (2008). The story was revisited in \"Pearl Harbor\" (2001), described by \"The New York Times\" as a \"noisy, expensive and very long new blockbuster\", with the comment that \"for all its epic pretensions (as if epic were a matter of running time, tumescent music and earnest voice-over pronouncements), the movie works best as a bang-and-boom action picture\".\nSteven Spielberg's \"Saving Private Ryan\" (1998) uses hand-held camera, sound design, staging, and increased audio-visual detail to defamiliarise viewers accustomed to conventional combat films, so as to create what film historian Stuart Bender calls \"reported realism\", whether or not the portrayal is genuinely more realistic. Jeanine Basinger notes that critics experienced it as \"groundbreaking and anti-generic\", with, in James Wolcott's words, a \"desire to bury the cornball, recruiting poster legend of John Wayne: to get it right this time\"; and that combat films have always been \"grounded in the need to help an audience understand and accept war\". Its success revived interest in World War II films. Others tried to portray the reality of the war, as in Joseph Vilsmaier's \"Stalingrad\" (1993), which \"The New York Times\" said \"goes about as far as a movie can go in depicting modern warfare as a stomach-turning form of mass slaughter\".\nMilitary\u2013film industry relations.\nMany war films have been produced with the cooperation of a nation's military forces. Since the Second World War, the United States Navy has provided ships and technical guidance for films such as \"Top Gun\". The U.S. Air Force assisted with \"The Big Lift\", \"Strategic Air Command\" and \"A Gathering of Eagles\", which were filmed on Air Force bases; Air Force personnel appeared in many roles. Critics have argued that the film \"Pearl Harbor\"'s US-biased portrayal of events is a compensation for technical assistance received from the US armed forces, noting that the premiere was held on board a U.S. Navy carrier. In another case, the U.S. Navy objected to elements of \"Crimson Tide\", especially mutiny on board an American naval vessel, so the film was produced without their assistance. The film historian Jonathan Rayner observes that such films \"have also clearly been intended to serve vital propagandist, recruitment and public relations functions\".\nNational traditions.\nChinese.\nThe first Chinese war films were newsreels like \"Battle of Wuhan\" (1911) and \"Battle of Shanghai\" (1913). Still in films such as Xu Xinfu's \"Battle Exploits\" (1925), war featured mainly as background. Only with the Second Sino\u2013Japanese War from 1937 onwards did war film become a serious genre in China, with nationalistic films such as Shi Dongshan's \"Protect Our Land\" (1938). The Chinese Civil War, too, attracted films such as Cheng Yin's \"From Victory to Victory\" (1952). A more humanistic film set in the same period is Xie Jin's The Cradle (1979), while more recent large-scale commercial films include Lu Chuan's \"City of Life and Death\" (2009). Chinese directors have repeatedly attempted to cover the atrocities committed by the Japanese during the Nanjing Massacre (1937\u20131938), with films such as the political melodrama \"Massacre in Nanjing\", Mou Tun Fei's docudrama \"\", and the \"contrived Sino\u2013Japanese romance\" \"Don't Cry, Nanking\". Zhang Yimou's epic Chinese film \"Flowers of War\" (2011), based on Geling Yan's novel, portrays the violent events through the eyes of a 13-year-old girl.\nIndonesian.\nMany Indonesian films deal with the occupation of the archipelago by the Japanese during the Second World War. Teguh Karya's \"Doea Tanda Mata\" (\"Mementos\", literally \"Two Eye Marks\", 1985) covers the limited nationalist resistance to Dutch colonial rule in the 1930s. A third group of films such as \"Enam Djam di Jogja\" (\"Six Hours in Yogyakarta\", 1951) and \"Serangan Fajar\" (\"Attack at Dawn\", 1983) covers the Indonesian war of independence (1945\u20131949). Two other films about the same period portray the Indonesian equivalent of the Chinese Long March: Usmar Ismail's \"Darah dan Doa\" (\"The Long March\", literally \"Blood and Prayer\", 1950) and \"Mereka Kembali\" (\"They Return\", 1975). Each of these films interprets the past from the perspective of its own time.\nThe more recent \"Merdeka\" (Freedom) trilogy (2009\u20132011), starting with \"Merah Putih\" (\"Red and White\", the colours of the flag of the new Indonesia), revisits the campaign for independence through the lives of a diverse group of cadets who become guerillas.\nKarya's \"November 1828\" (1979) looks at Indonesia's struggle for independence through historical drama about the Java or Diponegoro War (1825\u20131830), though the colonial enemy was the same, the Dutch. Deanne Schultz considered it \"a valuable interpretation\" of Indonesian history that \"embodies the best of popular Indonesian cinema\". It was the first Indonesian film to become well known internationally.\nSoviet.\nWar has been the Soviet Union's cinema's major genre, becoming known indeed as the \"cinema front\", and its war films ranged from grim portrayals of atrocities to sentimental and even quietly subversive accounts. Leonid Lukov's popular and \"beautiful\" \"Two Warriors\" (1943) depicted two stereotypical Soviet soldiers, a quiet Russian and an extrovert southerner from Odessa, singing in his dugout.\nThe many Soviet films about the Second World War include both large-scale epics such as Yury Ozerov's \"Battle of Moscow\" (1985) and Mikhail Kalatozov's more psychological \"The Cranes are Flying\" (1957) on the cruel effects of war; it won the 1958 Palme d'Or at Cannes.\nJapanese.\nJapanese directors have made popular films such as \"Submarine I-57 Will Not Surrender\" (1959), \"Battle of Okinawa\" (1971) and \"Japan's Longest Day\" (1967) from a Japanese perspective. These \"generally fail to explain the cause of the war\". In the decades immediately after the Second World War, Japanese films often focused on human tragedy rather than combat, such as \"The Burmese Harp\" (1956) and \"Fires on the Plain\" (1959). From the late 1990s, films started to take a positive view of the war and of Japanese actions. These nationalistic films, including \"Pride\" (1998), \"Merdeka 17805\" (2001), and \"The Truth about Nanjing\" (2007), have emphasized positive traits of the Japanese military and contended that the Japanese were victims of post-war vindictiveness and viciousness. Such films have, however, been subject to protest for revisionism. \"The Eternal Zero\" (2013) narrates the tale of a Zero fighter pilot who is considered a coward by his comrades, as he returns alive from his missions. It broke the record takings for a Japanese live action film, and won the Golden Mulberry at the Udine Far East Film Festival, but was criticised for its nationalistic sympathy with kamikaze pilots.\nSubgenres.\nDocumentary.\nThe wartime authorities in both Britain and America produced a wide variety of documentary films. Their purposes included military training, advice to civilians, and encouragement to maintain security. Since these films often carried messages, they grade into propaganda. Similarly, commercially produced films often combined information, support for the war effort, and a degree of propaganda. Newsreels, ostensibly simply for information, were made in both Allied and Axis countries, and were often dramatised. More recently, in the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Morteza Avini's \"Ravayat-e Fath\" (Chronicles of Victory) television series combined front-line footage with commentary.\nPropaganda.\nSergei Eisenstein's 1938 historical drama \"Alexander Nevsky\" depicts Prince Alexander's defeat of the attempted invasion of the Russian city of Novgorod by the Teutonic Knights. By April 1939 the film had been seen by 23,000,000 people. In 1941 the director and three others were awarded the Stalin Prize for their contributions. The film features a musical score by the classical composer Sergei Prokofiev, considered by artists such as the composer Andr\u00e9 Previn the best ever written for cinema. Russell Merritt, writing in \"Film Quarterly\", describes it as a \"war propaganda film\". A 1978 Mondadori poll placed \"Alexander Nevsky\" among the world's 100 best motion pictures.\nDuring the Second World War, film propaganda was widely used. Kenneth Clark advised the British government that \"If we renounced interest in entertainment as such, we might be deprived of a valuable weapon for getting across our propaganda\"; he suggested using documentaries about the war and the war effort; celebrations of Britishness; and films about British life and character. Michael Powell and Clark agreed on a story about survivors of a U-boat crew, imbued with brutal Nazi ideology, travelling across Canada and meeting various kind, tolerant and intelligent Canadians, to encourage America into the war. The resulting film, \"49th Parallel\" (1941), became the top film at British offices that year. Entertaining films could carry messages about the need for vigilance, too, as in \"Went the Day Well?\" (1942) or the avoidance of \"careless talk\", as in \"The Next of Kin\" (1942).\nIn America, Charlie Chaplin's \"The Great Dictator\" (1940) clearly satirised fascism. Michael Curtiz's \"Casablanca\" (1943) was not simply a romance between the characters played by Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman, but vilified the Nazis and glorified resistance to them. Frank Capra's \"Why We Fight\" series (1942\u20131945) won the 1942 Academy Award for best documentary, though it was designed to \"influence opinion in the U.S. military\".\nDuring the Cold War, \"propaganda played as much of a role in the United States' struggle with the Soviet Union as did the billions of dollars spent on weaponry.\" \"Face to Face with Communism\" (1951) dramatised an imagined invasion of the United States; other films portrayed threats such as communist indoctrination.\nSubmarine.\nSubmarine films have their own particular meanings and conventions, concerned specifically with giving the effect of submarine warfare. A distinctive element in this subgenre is the soundtrack, which attempts to bring home the emotional and dramatic nature of conflict under the sea. For example, in Wolfgang Petersen's 1981 \"Das Boot\", the sound design works together with the hours-long film format to depict lengthy pursuit with depth charges, the ping of sonar, and threatening sounds such as of the propellers of enemy destroyers and torpedoes. Classic films in the genre include \"The Enemy Below\" (1957) and \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" (1958), both based on novels by naval commanders. \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" is a movie full of tension, both with the enemy and between the contrasting personalities of the submarine Commander and his Lieutenant, played by Clark Gable and Burt Lancaster.\nPrisoner of war.\nA popular subgenre of war films in the 1950s and 1960s was the prisoner of war film. The genre was popularised in Britain with major films like Guy Hamilton's \"The Colditz Story\" (1955) and John Sturges's American film \"The Great Escape\" (1963). They told stories of real escapes from German prisoner of war camps such as Stalag Luft III in the Second World War. Despite episodes of danger and human tragedy, these films delight in a continual boyish game of escape and ingenuity, celebrating the courage and the defiant spirit of the prisoners of war, and treating war as fun. David Lean's \"Bridge on the River Kwai\" (1957) was judged best picture at the Oscars; it took the genre from chilly German prisons to the heat of a camp in Thailand. It was the first, too, to use lush colour to bring out the British stiff upper lip of the colonel, played by Alec Guinness in an Oscar-winning performance. The \"definitive\" Oscar-winning prisoner of war film was Billy Wilder's \"Stalag 17\" (1953), while the brief but powerful prison camp scenes of \"The Deer Hunter\" (1978) lend an air of tragedy to the whole of that film.\nComedy.\nCharlie Chaplin's \"Shoulder Arms\" (1918) set a style for war films to come, and was the first comedy about war in film history.\nBritish cinema in the Second World War marked the evacuation of children from London with social comedies such as \"Those Kids from Town\" (1942) where the evacuees go to stay with an earl, while in \"Cottage to Let\" (1941) and \"Went the Day Well?\" (1942) the English countryside is thick with spies. \"Gasbags\" (1941) offered \"zany, irreverent, knockabout\" comedy making fun of everything from barrage balloons to concentration camps. Abbott and Costello's \"Buck Privates\" (1941) was successful in America, leading to many further wartime comedies.\nAnimated.\nWinsor McCay's \"The Sinking of the Lusitania\" (1918) was a silent First World War film. At 12 minutes long, it was the longest animated film made at that time. It was probably the first animated propaganda film to be made; it remains the earliest serious animated drama that has survived. Through World War II, animated propaganda shorts remained influential in American cinema. The Walt Disney Company, working with the American armed forces, produced 400,000 feet of war propaganda films between 1942 and 1945, including \"Der Fuehrer's Face\" (1943) and \"Education for Death\" (1943).\nJapanese anime films from the 1960s onwards addressed national memories of war. \"Akira\" (1988) moves from the atomic destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to apocalyptic visions of global conflict; \"Grave of the Fireflies\" (1988) is elegiac on the effect of war on children. \"Barefoot Gen\" (1983) portrays the bombing of Hiroshima through the eyes of a child, but reviewers consider it a less well made film than \"Grave of the Fireflies\" with \"stomach-churning detail\" bizarrely paired with crude artwork, giving it the look of a \"Saturday morning Warner Brothers cartoon\".\nAnti-war.\nThe anti-war genre began with films about the First World War. Films in the genre are typically revisionist, reflecting on past events and often generically blended. Lewis Milestone's \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" (1930) was unquestionably powerful, and an early anti-war film, portraying a German point of view; it was the first film (in any genre) to win two Oscars, best picture and best director. Andrew Kelly, analysing \"All Quiet on the Western Front\", defined the genre as showing: the brutality of war; the amount of human suffering; the betrayal of men's trust by incompetent officers. War and anti-war films often prove difficult to categorize as they contain many generic ambiguities. While many anti-war films criticize war directly through depictions of grisly combat in past wars, some films such as Penn's \"Alice's Restaurant\" criticized war obliquely by poking fun at such things as the draft board. The number of anti-war films produced in America dipped sharply during the 1950s because of McCarthyism and the Hollywood blacklist. The end of the blacklist and the introduction of the MPAA rating system marked a time of resurgence for films of all type including anti-war films in the States. Robert Eberwein names two films as anti-war classics. The first is Jean Renoir's prisoner of war masterpiece \"La Grande Illusion\" (\"The Grand Illusion\", 1937). Renoir's critique of contemporary politics and ideology celebrates the universal humanity that transcends national and racial boundaries and radical nationalism, suggesting that mankind's common experiences should prevail above political division, and its extension: war. The second is Stanley Kubrick's \"Paths of Glory\" (1957). The critic David Ehrenstein writes that \"Paths of Glory\" established Kubrick as the \"leading commercial filmmaker of his generation\" and a world-class talent. Ehrenstein describes the film as an \"outwardly cool/inwardly passionate protest drama about a disastrous French army maneuver and the court-martial held in its wake\", contrasting it with the \"classic\" \"All Quiet on the Western Front\"'s story of an innocent \"unstrung by the horrors of war\".\nMixed genres.\nComedy gave scope for satire, and post-war film-makers merged comedy and anti-war sentiment in films as varied as \"Stalag 17\" (1953) and \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964). Black comedies like Mike Nichols's \"Catch-22\" (1970), based on Joseph Heller's satirical novel about the Second World War, and Robert Altman's \"M*A*S*H\" (1970), set in Korea, reflected the attitudes of an increasingly sceptical public during the Vietnam War.\nOther genres were combined in Franklin J. Schaffner's \"Patton\" (1970), about real life General George S. Patton, where combat scenes were interleaved with commentary about how he waged war, showing good and bad sides to a command. It and \"MASH\" became the two most profitable war/anti-war films made up to that time, and \"Patton\" won seven Academy Awards.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33172", "revid": "45366078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33172", "title": "Wireless network", "text": "Computer network not fully connected by cables\nA wireless network is a computer network that uses wireless data connections between network nodes. Wireless networking allows homes, telecommunications networks, and business installations to avoid the costly process of introducing cables into a building, or as a connection between various equipment locations. Admin telecommunications networks are generally implemented and administered using radio communication. This implementation takes place at the physical level (layer) of the OSI model network structure.\nExamples of wireless networks include cell phone networks, wireless local area networks (WLANs), wireless sensor networks, satellite communication networks, and terrestrial microwave networks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nWireless networks.\nThe first professional wireless network was developed under the brand ALOHAnet in 1969 at the University of Hawaii and became operational in June 1971. The first commercial wireless network was the WaveLAN product family, developed by NCR in 1986.\nUnderlying technology.\nAdvances in MOSFET (MOS transistor) wireless technology enabled the development of digital wireless networks. The wide adoption of RF CMOS (radio frequency CMOS), power MOSFET and LDMOS (lateral diffused MOS) devices led to the development and proliferation of digital wireless networks by the 1990s, with further advances in MOSFET technology leading to increasing bandwidth in the 2000s (Edholm's law). Most of the essential elements of wireless networks are built from MOSFETs, including the mobile transceivers, base station modules, routers, RF power amplifiers, telecommunication circuits, RF circuits, and radio transceivers, in networks such as 2G, 3G, and 4G.\nTypes of wireless networks.\nWireless PAN.\nWireless personal area networks (WPANs) connect devices within a relatively small area, that is generally within a person's reach. For example, both Bluetooth radio and invisible infrared light provides a WPAN for interconnecting a headset to a laptop. Zigbee also supports WPAN applications. Wi-Fi PANs are becoming commonplace (2010) as equipment designers start to integrate Wi-Fi into a variety of consumer electronic devices. Intel \"My WiFi\" and Windows 7 \"virtual Wi-Fi\" capabilities have made Wi-Fi PANs simpler and easier to set up and configure.\nWireless LAN.\nA wireless local area network (WLAN) links two or more devices over a short distance using a wireless distribution method, usually providing a connection through an access point for internet access. The use of spread-spectrum or OFDM technologies may allow users to move around within a local coverage area, and still remain connected to the network.\nProducts using the IEEE 802.11 WLAN standards are marketed under the Wi-Fi brand name.\nFixed wireless technology implements point-to-point links between computers or networks at two distant locations, often using dedicated microwave or modulated laser light beams over line of sight paths. It is often used in cities to connect networks in two or more buildings without installing a wired link.\nTo connect to Wi-Fi using a mobile device, one can use a device like a wireless router or the private hotspot capability of another mobile device.\nWireless ad hoc network.\nA wireless ad hoc network, also known as a wireless mesh network or mobile ad hoc network (MANET), is a wireless network made up of radio nodes organized in a mesh topology. Each node forwards messages on behalf of the other nodes and each node performs routing. Ad hoc networks can \"self-heal\", automatically re-routing around a node that has lost power. Various network layer protocols are needed to realize ad hoc mobile networks, such as Distance Sequenced Distance Vector routing, Associativity-Based Routing, Ad hoc on-demand distance-vector routing, and Dynamic Source Routing.\nWireless MAN.\nWireless metropolitan area networks are a type of wireless network that connects several wireless LANs.\nWireless WAN.\nWireless wide area networks are wireless networks that typically cover large areas, such as between neighboring towns and cities, or city and suburb. These networks can be used to connect branch offices of business or as a public Internet access system. The wireless connections between access points are usually point to point microwave links using parabolic dishes on the 2.4\u00a0GHz and 5.8\u00a0GHz band, rather than omnidirectional antennas used with smaller networks. A typical system contains base station gateways, access points and wireless bridging relays. Other configurations are mesh systems where each access point acts as a relay also. When combined with renewable energy systems such as photovoltaic solar panels or wind systems they can be stand-alone systems.\nCellular network.\nA cellular network or mobile network is a radio network distributed over land areas called cells, each served by at least one fixed-location transceiver, known as a cell site or base station. In a cellular network, each cell characteristically uses a different set of radio frequencies from all their immediate neighbouring cells to avoid any interference.\nWhen joined these cells provide radio coverage over a wide geographic area. This enables a large number of portable transceivers (e.g., mobile phones, pagers, etc.) to communicate with each other and with fixed transceivers and telephones anywhere in the network, via base stations, even if some of the transceivers are moving through more than one cell during transmission.\nAlthough originally intended for cell phones, with the development of smartphones, cellular telephone networks routinely carry data in addition to telephone conversations:\nPrivate LTE/5G networks.\nPrivate LTE/5G networks use licensed, shared or unlicensed wireless spectrum thanks to LTE or 5G cellular network base stations, small cells and other radio access network (RAN) infrastructure to transmit voice and data to edge devices (smartphones, embedded modules, routers and gateways.\n3GPP defines 5G private networks as non-public networks that typically employ a smaller-scale deployment to meet an organization's needs for reliability, accessibility, and maintainability.\nOpen Source.\nOpen source private networks are based on a collaborative, community-driven software that relies on peer review and production to use, modify and share the source code.\nGlobal area network.\nA global area network (GAN) is a network used for supporting mobile across an arbitrary number of wireless LANs, satellite coverage areas, etc. The key challenge in mobile communications is handing off user communications from one local coverage area to the next. In IEEE Project 802, this involves a succession of terrestrial wireless LANs.\nSpace network.\nSpace networks are networks used for communication between spacecraft, usually in the vicinity of the Earth. The example of this is NASA's Space Network.\nUses.\nSome examples of usage include cellular phones which are part of everyday wireless networks, allowing easy personal communications. Another example, Intercontinental network systems, use radio satellites to communicate across the world. Emergency services such as the police utilize wireless networks to communicate effectively as well. Individuals and businesses use wireless networks to send and share data rapidly, whether it be in a small office building or across the world.\nProperties.\nGeneral.\nIn a general sense, wireless networks offer a vast variety of uses by both business and home users.\n\"Now, the industry accepts a handful of different wireless technologies. Each wireless technology is defined by a standard that describes unique functions at both the Physical and the Data Link layers of the OSI model. These standards differ in their specified signaling methods, geographic ranges, and frequency usages, among other things. Such differences can make certain technologies better suited to home networks and others better suited to network larger organizations.\"\nPerformance.\nEach standard varies in geographical range, thus making one standard more ideal than the next, depending on what it is one is trying to accomplish with a wireless network.\nThe performance of wireless networks satisfies a variety of applications, such as voice and video. The use of this technology also gives room for expansions, such as from 2G to 3G and, 4G and 5G technologies, which stand for the fourth and fifth generation of cell phone mobile communications standards. As wireless networking has become commonplace, sophistication increases through configuration of network hardware and software, and greater capacity to send and receive larger amounts of data, faster, is achieved. Now the wireless network has been running on LTE, which is a 4G mobile communication standard. Users of an LTE network should have data speeds that are 10x faster than a 3G network.\nSpace.\nSpace is another characteristic of wireless networking. Wireless networks offer many advantages when it comes to difficult-to-wire areas trying to communicate such as across a street or river, a warehouse on the other side of the premises or buildings that are physically separated but operate as one. Wireless networks allow users to designate a certain space that the network will be able to communicate with other devices through that network.\nSpace is also created in homes as a result of eliminating clutters of wiring. This technology allows for an alternative to installing physical network mediums such as TPs, coaxes, or fiber-optics, which can also be expensive.\nHome.\nFor homeowners, wireless technology is an effective option compared to Ethernet for sharing printers, scanners, and high-speed Internet connections. WLANs help save the cost of installation of cable mediums, save time from physical installation, and also creates mobility for devices connected to the network.\nWireless networks are simple and require as few as one single wireless access point connected directly to the Internet via a router.\nWireless network elements.\nThe telecommunications network at the physical layer also consists of many interconnected wireline network elements (NEs). These NEs can be stand-alone systems or products that are either supplied by a single manufacturer or are assembled by the service provider (user) or system integrator with parts from several different manufacturers.\nWireless NEs are the products and devices used by a wireless carrier to provide support for the backhaul network as well as a mobile switching center (MSC).\nReliable wireless service depends on the network elements at the physical layer to be protected against all operational environments and applications (see GR-3171, \"Generic Requirements for Network Elements Used in Wireless Networks \u2013 Physical Layer Criteria\").\nWhat are especially important are the NEs that are located on the cell tower to the base station (BS) cabinet. The attachment hardware and the positioning of the antenna and associated closures and cables are required to have adequate strength, robustness, corrosion resistance, and resistance against wind, storms, icing, and other weather conditions. Requirements for individual components, such as hardware, cables, connectors, and closures, shall take into consideration the structure to which they are attached.\nDifficulties.\nInterference.\nCompared to wired systems, wireless networks are frequently subject to electromagnetic interference. This can be caused by other networks or other types of equipment that generate radio waves that are within, or close, to the radio bands used for communication. Interference can degrade the signal or cause the system to fail.\nAbsorption and reflection.\nSome materials cause absorption of electromagnetic waves, preventing it from reaching the receiver. In other cases, particularly with metallic or conductive materials reflection occurs. This can cause dead zones where no reception is available. Aluminium foiled thermal isolation in modern homes can easily reduce indoor mobile signals by 10\u00a0dB frequently leading to complaints about the bad reception of long-distance rural cell signals.\nMultipath fading.\nIn multipath fading two or more different routes taken by the signal, due to reflections, can cause the signal to cancel out each other at certain locations, and to be stronger in other places (upfade).\nHidden node problem.\nThe hidden node problem occurs in some types of network when a node is visible from a wireless access point (AP), but not from other nodes communicating with that AP. This leads to difficulties in medium access control (collisions).\nExposed terminal node problem.\nThe exposed terminal problem is when a node on one network is unable to send because of co-channel interference from a node that is on a different network.\nShared resource problem.\nThe wireless spectrum is a limited resource and shared by all nodes in the range of its transmitters. Bandwidth allocation becomes complex with multiple participating users. Often users are not aware that advertised numbers (e.g., for IEEE 802.11 equipment or LTE networks) are not their capacity, but shared with all other users and thus the individual user rate is far lower. With increasing demand, the capacity crunch is more and more likely to happen. User-in-the-loop (UIL) may be an alternative solution to ever upgrading to newer technologies for over-provisioning.\nCapacity.\nChannel.\nShannon's theorem can describe the maximum data rate of any single wireless link, which relates to the bandwidth in hertz and to the noise on the channel.\nOne can greatly increase channel capacity by using MIMO techniques, where multiple aerials or multiple frequencies can exploit multiple paths to the receiver to achieve much higher throughput \u2013 by a factor of the product of the frequency and aerial diversity at each end.\nUnder Linux, the Central Regulatory Domain Agent (CRDA) controls the setting of channels.\nNetwork.\nThe total network bandwidth depends on how dispersive the medium is (more dispersive medium generally has better total bandwidth because it minimises interference), how many frequencies are available, how noisy those frequencies are, how many aerials are used and whether a directional antenna is in use, whether nodes employ power control and so on.\nCellular wireless networks generally have good capacity, due to their use of directional aerials and their ability to reuse radio channels in non-adjacent cells. Additionally, cells can be made very small using low power transmitters this is used in cities to give network capacity that scales linearly with population density.\nSafety.\nWireless access points are also often close to humans, but the drop off in power over distance is fast, following the inverse-square law.\nThe position of the United Kingdom's Health Protection Agency (HPA) is that \u201c...radio frequency (RF) exposures from WiFi are likely to be lower than those from mobile phones\". It also saw \u201c...no reason why schools and others should not use WiFi equipment\". In October 2007, the HPA launched a new \"systematic\" study into the effects of WiFi networks on behalf of the UK government, in order to calm fears that had appeared in the media in a recent period up to that time\". Dr Michael Clark, of the HPA, says published research on mobile phones and masts does not add up to an indictment of WiFi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33173", "revid": "50507497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33173", "title": "Web browser", "text": "Software used to access websites\nA web browser, often shortened to browser, is an application for accessing websites. When a user requests a web page from a particular website, the browser retrieves its files from a web server and then displays the page on the user's screen. Browsers can also display content stored locally on the user's device.\nBrowsers are used on a range of devices, including desktops, laptops, tablets, smartphones, smartwatches, smart televisions and consoles. As of 2024[ [update]], the most used browsers worldwide are Google Chrome (~66% market share), Safari (~16%), Edge (~6%), Firefox (~3%), Samsung Internet (~2%), and Opera (~2%). As of 2023, an estimated 5.4 billion people had used a browser.\nFunction.\nThe purpose of a web browser is to fetch content and display it on the user's device. This process begins when the user inputs a Uniform Resource Locator (URL), such as \"codice_1\", into the browser's address bar. Virtually all URLs on the Web start with either \"codice_2\" or \"codice_3\" which means they are retrieved with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). For secure mode (HTTPS), the connection between the browser and web server is encrypted, providing a secure and private data transfer. For this reason, a web browser is often referred to as an HTTP client or a user agent. Requisite materials, including text, style sheets, images, and other types of multimedia, are downloaded from the server. Once the materials have been downloaded, the web browser's engine (also known as a layout engine or rendering engine) is responsible for converting those resources into an interactive visual representation of the page on the user's device. Modern web browsers also contain separate JavaScript engines which enable more complex interactive applications inside the browser. A web browser that does not render a graphical user interface is known as a headless browser.\nWeb pages usually contain hyperlinks to other pages and resources. Each link contains a URL, and when it is clicked or tapped, the browser navigates to the new resource. Most browsers use an internal cache of web page resources to improve loading times for subsequent visits to the same page. The cache can store many items, such as large images, so they do not need to be downloaded from the server again. Cached items are usually only stored for as long as the web server stipulates in its HTTP response messages.\nA web browser is not the same thing as a search engine, though the two are often confused. A search engine is a website that provides links to other websites and allows users to search for specific resources using a textual query. However, web browsers are often used to access search engines, and most modern browsers allow users to access a default search engine directly by typing a query into the address bar.\nHistory.\nThe first web browser, called WorldWideWeb, was created in 1990 by Sir Tim Berners-Lee. He then recruited Nicola Pellow to write the Line Mode Browser, which displayed web pages on dumb terminals. The Mosaic web browser was released in April 1993, and was later credited as the first web browser to find mainstream popularity. Its innovative graphical user interface made the World Wide Web easy to navigate and thus more accessible to the average person. This, in turn, sparked the Internet boom of the 1990s, when the Web grew at a very rapid rate. The lead developers of Mosaic then founded the Netscape corporation, which released the Mosaic-influenced Netscape Navigator in 1994. Navigator quickly became the most popular browser.\nMicrosoft debuted Internet Explorer in 1995, leading to a browser war with Netscape. Within a few years, Microsoft gained a dominant position in the browser market for two reasons: it bundled Internet Explorer with its popular Windows operating system and did so as freeware with no restrictions on usage. The market share of Internet Explorer peaked at over 95% in the early 2000s. In 1998, Netscape launched what would become the Mozilla Foundation to create a new browser using the open-source software model. This work evolved into the Firefox browser, first released by Mozilla in 2004. Firefox's market share peaked at 32% in 2010. Apple released its Safari browser in 2003; it remains the dominant browser on Apple devices, though it did not become popular elsewhere.\nGoogle debuted its Chrome browser in 2008, which steadily took market share from Internet Explorer and became the most popular browser in 2012. Chrome has remained dominant ever since. In 2015, Microsoft replaced Internet Explorer with Edge [Legacy] for the Windows 10 release. In 2020, this legacy version was replaced by a new Chromium-based version of Edge.\nSince the early 2000s, browsers have greatly expanded their HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and multimedia capabilities. One reason has been to enable more sophisticated websites, such as web apps. Another factor is the significant increase of broadband connectivity in many parts of the world, enabling people to access data-intensive content, such as streaming HD video on YouTube, that was not possible during the era of dial-up modems.\nStarting in the mid-2020s, browsers with integrated artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities, known as AI browsers, have become increasingly common. This includes both new entrants to the browser market, such as Perplexity Comet and ChatGPT Atlas, and established browsers that added AI features, such as Chrome with the Gemini chatbot and Edge with the Copilot chatbot.\nFeatures.\nThe most popular browsers share many features. They automatically log users' browsing history, unless the users turn off their browsing history or use the non-logging private mode. They also allow users to set bookmarks, customize the browser with extensions, and manage their downloads and passwords. Some provide a sync service and web accessibility features.\nCommon user interface (UI) features:\nWhile mobile browsers have similar UI features as desktop versions, the limitations of the often-smaller touch screens require mobile UIs to be simpler. The difference is significant for users accustomed to keyboard shortcuts. Responsive web design is used to create websites that offer a consistent experience across the desktop and mobile versions of the website and across varying screen sizes. The most popular desktop browsers also have sophisticated web development tools.\nAccess to some web content \u2014 particularly streaming services like Netflix, Disney+, and Spotify \u2014 is restricted by Digital Rights Management (DRM) software. A web browser is able to access DRM-restricted content through the use of a Content Decryption Module (CDM) such as Widevine. As of 2020, the CDMs used by dominant web browsers require browser providers to pay costly license fees, making it unfeasible for most independent open-source browsers to offer access to DRM-restricted content.\nBrowser market.\nGoogle Chrome has been the dominant browser since the mid-2010s and currently has a 66% global market share on all devices. The vast majority of its source code comes from Google's open-source Chromium project; this code is also the basis for many other browsers, including Microsoft Edge, currently in third place with about a 5% share, as well as Samsung Internet and Opera in fifth and sixth places respectively with approximately 2% market share each.\nThe other two browsers in the top four are made from different codebases. Safari, based on Apple's WebKit code, is the second most popular web browser and is dominant on Apple devices, resulting in an 18% global share. Firefox, in fourth place, with about 3% market share, is based on Mozilla's code. Both of these codebases are open-source, so a number of small niche browsers are also made from them.\nThe following table details the top web browsers by market share, as of February, 2025:\nMarket share by type of device.\nPrior to late 2016, the majority of web traffic came from desktop computers. However, since then, mobile devices (smartphones) have represented the majority of web traffic. As of February 2025, mobile devices represent a 62% share of Internet traffic, followed by desktop at 36% and tablet at 2%.\nSecurity.\nWeb browsers are popular targets for hackers, who exploit security holes to steal information, destroy files, and partake in other malicious activities. Browser vendors regularly patch these security holes, so users are strongly encouraged to keep their browser software updated. Other protection measures are antivirus software and being aware of scams.\nPrivacy.\nDuring the course of browsing, cookies received from various websites are stored by the browser. Some of them contain login credentials or site preferences. However, others are used for tracking user behavior over long periods of time, so browsers typically provide a section in the menu for deleting cookies. Some browsers have more proactive protection against cookies and trackers that limit their functionality and ability to track user behaviour. Finer-grained management of cookies usually requires a browser extension. Telemetry data is collected by most popular web browsers, which can usually be opted out of by the user.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33174", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33174", "title": "Wharf", "text": "Shoreside structure where ships dock\nA wharf (pl.\u2009wharves or wharfs), quay ( , also ), staith, or staithe is a structure on the shore of a harbour or on the bank of a river or canal where ships may dock to load and unload cargo or passengers. Such a structure includes one or more berths (mooring locations), and may also include piers, warehouses, or other facilities necessary for handling the ships. Wharves are often considered to be a series of docks at which boats are stationed. A marginal wharf is connected to the shore along its full length.\nOverview.\nA wharf commonly comprises a fixed platform, often on pilings. Commercial ports may have warehouses that serve as interim storage: where it is sufficient a single wharf with a single berth constructed along the land adjacent to the water is normally used; where there is a need for more capacity multiple wharves, or perhaps a single large wharf with multiple berths, will instead be constructed, sometimes projecting over the water. A pier, raised over the water rather than within it, is commonly used for cases where the weight or volume of cargos will be low.\nSmaller and more modern wharves are sometimes built on flotation devices (pontoons) to keep them at the same level as the ship, even during changing tides.\nIn everyday parlance the term \"quay\" (pronounced 'key') is common in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and many other Commonwealth countries, and the Republic of Ireland, and may also refer to neighbourhoods and roadways running along the wayside (for example, Queen's Quay in Toronto and Belfast). The term \"wharf\" is more common in the United States. In some contexts \"wharf\" and \"quay\" may be used to mean pier, berth, or jetty.\nIn old ports such as London (which once had around 1700 wharves) many old wharves have been converted to residential or office use.\nCertain early railways in England referred to goods loading points as \"wharves\". The term was carried over from marine usage. The person who was resident in charge of the wharf was referred to as a \"wharfinger\".\nEtymology.\nWharf.\nThe word \"wharf\" comes from the Old English \"hwearf\", cognate to the Old Dutch word \"werf\", which both evolved to mean \"yard\", an outdoor place where work is done, like a shipyard (Dutch: \"scheepswerf\") or a lumberyard (Dutch: \"houtwerf\"). Originally, \"werf\" or \"werva\" in Old Dutch (\"werf\", \"wer\" in Old Frisian) simply referred to inhabited ground that was not yet built on (similar to \"yard\" in modern English), or alternatively to a \"terp\". This could explain the name Ministry Wharf located at Saunderton, just outside High Wycombe, which is nowhere near any body of water. In support of this explanation is the fact that many places in England with \"wharf\" in their names are in areas with a high Dutch influence, for example the Norfolk broads.\nStaith.\nIn the northeast and east of England the term \"staith\" or \"staithe\" (from the Norse for landing stage) is also used. The two terms have historically had a geographical distinction: those to the north in the Kingdom of Northumbria used the Old English spelling \"staith\", southern sites of the Danelaw took the Danish spelling \"staithe\". Both originally referred to jetties or wharves. In time, the northern coalfields of Northumbria developed coal staiths specifically for loading coal onto ships and these would adopt the \"staith\" spelling as a distinction from simple wharves: for example, Dunston Staiths in Gateshead and Brancaster Staithe in Norfolk. However, the term \"staith\" may also be used to refer only to loading chutes or ramps used for bulk commodities like coal in loading ships and barges.\nQuay.\n\"Quay\", on the other hand, has its origin in the Proto-Celtic language. Before it changed to its current form under influence of the modern French \"quai\", its Middle English spelling was \"key\", \"keye\" or \"caye\". This in turn also came from the Old Norman \"cai\" (Old French / French \"chai\" \"wine cellar\"), meaning originally \"earth bank near a river\", then \"bank built at a port to allow ship docking\". The French term \"quai\" comes, through Picard or Norman-French, from Gaulish \"caio\", ultimately tracing back to the Proto-Celtic \"*kagio-\" \"to encompass, enclose\". Modern cognates include Welsh \"cae\" \"fence, hedge\" and Cornish \"ke\" \"hedge\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33175", "revid": "50843477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33175", "title": "William Blake", "text": "English poet and artist (1757\u20131827)\nWilliam Blake (28 November 1757 \u2013 12 August 1827) was an English poet, painter, and printmaker. Largely unrecognised during his life, Blake has become a seminal figure in the history of the poetry and visual art of the Romantic Age. What he called his \"prophetic works\" were said by 20th-century critic Northrop Frye to form \"what is in proportion to its merits the least read body of poetry in the English language\". While he lived in London his entire life, except for three years spent in Felpham, he produced a diverse and symbolically rich collection of works, which embraced the imagination as \"the body of God\", or \"human existence itself\".\nAlthough Blake was considered mad by contemporaries for his idiosyncratic views, he came to be highly regarded by later critics and readers for his expressiveness and creativity, and for the philosophical and mystical undercurrents within his work. His paintings and poetry have been characterised as part of the Romantic movement and as \"Pre-Romantic\". A theist who preferred his own Marcionite style of theology, he was hostile to the Church of England (indeed, to almost all forms of organised religion), and was influenced by the ideals and ambitions of the French and American Revolutions. Although later he rejected many of these political beliefs, he maintained an amicable relationship with the political activist Thomas Paine; he was also influenced by thinkers such as Emanuel Swedenborg. Despite these known influences, the singularity of Blake's work makes him difficult to classify. The 19th-century scholar William Michael Rossetti characterised him as a \"glorious luminary\", and \"a man not forestalled by predecessors, nor to be classed with contemporaries, nor to be replaced by known or readily surmisable successors\".\nCollaboration with his wife, Catherine Boucher, was instrumental in the creation of many of his books. Boucher worked as a printmaker and colorist for his works. \"For almost forty-five years she was the person who lived and worked most closely with Blake, enabling him to realize numerous projects, impossible without her assistance. Catherine was an artist and printer in her own right,\" writes literary scholar Angus Whitehead.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Blake was born on 28 November 1757 at 28 Broad Street (now Broadwick Street) in Soho, London. He was the third of seven children, two of whom died in infancy. Blake's father, James, was a hosier, who had lived in London. William attended school only long enough to learn reading and writing, leaving at the age of 10, and was otherwise educated at home by his mother Catherine Blake (\"n\u00e9e\" Wright). Even though the Blakes were English Dissenters, William was baptised on 11 December at St James's Church, Piccadilly, London. The Bible was an early and profound influence on Blake, and remained a source of inspiration throughout his life. Blake's childhood, according to him, included mystical religious experiences such as \"beholding God's face pressed against his window, seeing angels among the haystacks, and being visited by the Old Testament prophet Ezekiel.\"\nBlake started engraving copies of drawings of Greek antiquities purchased for him by his father, a practice that was preferred to actual drawing. In these drawings Blake found his first exposure to classical forms through the work of Raphael, Michelangelo, Maarten van Heemskerck and Albrecht D\u00fcrer. The number of prints and bound books that James and Catherine were able to purchase for young William suggests that the Blakes enjoyed, at least for a time, a comfortable wealth. When William was ten years old, his parents knew enough of his headstrong temperament that he was not sent to school but instead enrolled in drawing classes at Henry Pars's drawing school in the Strand. He read avidly on subjects of his own choosing. During this period, Blake made explorations into poetry; his early work displays knowledge of Ben Jonson, Edmund Spenser, and the Psalms.\nApprenticeship.\nOn 4 August 1772, Blake was apprenticed to engraver James Basire of Great Queen Street, at the sum of \u00a352.10, for a term of seven years. At the end of the term, aged 21, he became a professional engraver. No record survives of any serious disagreement or conflict between the two during the period of Blake's apprenticeship, but Peter Ackroyd's biography notes that Blake later added Basire's name to a list of artistic adversaries; and then crossed it out. This aside, Basire's style of line-engraving was of a kind held at the time to be old-fashioned compared to the flashier stipple or mezzotint styles. It has been speculated that Blake's instruction in this outmoded form may have been detrimental to his acquiring work or recognition in later life.\nAfter two years, Basire sent his apprentice to copy images from the Gothic churches in London (perhaps to settle a quarrel between Blake and James Parker, his fellow apprentice). His experiences in Westminster Abbey helped form his artistic style and ideas. The Abbey in his day was decorated with suits of armour, painted funeral effigies and varicoloured waxworks. Ackroyd notes that \"the most immediate [impression] would have been of faded brightness and colour\". This close study of the Gothic (which he saw as the \"living form\") left clear traces in his style. In the long afternoons Blake spent sketching in the Abbey, he was occasionally interrupted by boys from Westminster School, who were allowed in the Abbey. They teased him and one tormented him so much that Blake knocked the boy off a scaffold to the ground, \"upon which he fell with terrific Violence\". After Blake complained to the Dean, the schoolboys' privilege was withdrawn. Blake claimed that he experienced visions in the Abbey. He saw Christ with his Apostles and a great procession of monks and priests, and heard their chant.\nRoyal Academy.\nOn 8 October 1779, Blake became a student at the Royal Academy in Old Somerset House, near the Strand. While the terms of his study required no payment, he was expected to supply his own materials throughout the six-year period. There, he rebelled against what he regarded as the unfinished style of fashionable painters such as Rubens, championed by the school's first president, Joshua Reynolds. Over time, Blake came to detest Reynolds' attitude towards art, especially his pursuit of \"general truth\" and \"general beauty\". Reynolds wrote in his \"Discourses\" that the \"disposition to abstractions, to generalising and classification, is the great glory of the human mind\"; Blake responded, in marginalia to his personal copy, that \"To Generalize is to be an Idiot; To Particularize is the Alone Distinction of Merit\". Blake also disliked Reynolds' apparent humility, which he held to be a form of hypocrisy. Against Reynolds' fashionable oil painting, Blake preferred the Classical precision of his early influences, Michelangelo and Raphael.\nDavid Bindman suggests that Blake's antagonism towards Reynolds arose not so much from the president's opinions (like Blake, Reynolds held history painting to be of greater value than landscape and portraiture), but rather \"against his hypocrisy in not putting his ideals into practice\". Certainly Blake was not averse to exhibiting at the Royal Academy, submitting works on six occasions between 1780 and 1808.\nBlake became a friend of John Flaxman, Thomas Stothard and George Cumberland during his first year at the Royal Academy. They shared radical views, with Stothard and Cumberland joining the Society for Constitutional Information.\nGordon Riots.\nBlake's first biographer, Alexander Gilchrist, records that in June 1780 Blake was walking towards Basire's shop in Great Queen Street when he was swept up by a rampaging mob that stormed Newgate Prison. The mob attacked the prison gates with shovels and pickaxes, set the building ablaze, and released the prisoners inside. Blake was reportedly in the front rank of the mob during the attack. The riots, in response to a parliamentary bill revoking sanctions against Roman Catholicism, became known as the Gordon Riots and provoked a flurry of legislation from the government of George III, and the creation of the first police force.\nMarriage and collaboration with Catherine Boucher.\nIn 1781 William met Catherine Boucher when he was recovering from a relationship that had culminated in a refusal of his marriage proposal. He recounted the story of his heartbreak for Catherine and her parents, after which he asked Catherine: \"Do you pity me?\" When she responded affirmatively, he declared: \"Then I love you\". William married Catherine, who was five years his junior, on 18 August 1782 in St Mary's Church, Battersea. Illiterate, Catherine signed her wedding contract with an X. The original wedding certificate may be viewed at the church, where a commemorative stained-glass window was installed between 1976 and 1982. The marriage was successful and Catherine became William's \"partner in both life and work\", undertaking important roles as an engraver and colourist. According to the Tate Gallery, Catherine mixed and applied his paint colours. One of Catherine Blake's most noted works is the colouring of the cover of the book \"Europe: A Prophecy.\" William Blake's 1863 biographer, Alexander Gilchrist, wrote, \"The poet and his wife did everything in making the book \u2013 writing, designing, printing, engraving \u2013 everything except manufacturing the paper: the very ink, or colour rather, they did make.\" In 2019 Tate Britain's Blake exhibition gave particular focus to Catherine Boucher's role in William Blake's work.\nCareer.\nEarly work.\nAround 1783, Blake's first collection of poems, \"Poetical Sketches\", was printed. In 1784, after his father's death, Blake and former fellow apprentice James Parker opened a print shop. They began working with radical publisher Joseph Johnson. Johnson's house was a meeting-place for some leading English intellectual dissidents of the time: theologian and scientist Joseph Priestley; philosopher Richard Price; artist John Henry Fuseli; early feminist Mary Wollstonecraft; and English-American revolutionary Thomas Paine. Along with William Wordsworth and William Godwin, Blake had great hopes for the French and American revolutions and wore a Phrygian cap in solidarity with the French revolutionaries, but despaired with the rise of Robespierre and the Reign of Terror in France. That same year, Blake composed his unfinished manuscript \"An Island in the Moon\" (1784).\nBlake illustrated \"Original Stories from Real Life\" (2nd edition, 1791) by Mary Wollstonecraft. Although they seem to have shared some views on sexual equality and the institution of marriage, no evidence is known that would prove that they had met. In \"Visions of the Daughters of Albion\" (1793), Blake condemned the cruel absurdity of enforced chastity and marriage without love and defended the right of women to complete self-fulfilment.\nFrom 1790 to 1800, William Blake lived in North Lambeth, London, at 13 Hercules Buildings, Hercules Road. The property was demolished in 1918, but the site is marked with a plaque. A series of 70 mosaics commemorates Blake in the nearby railway tunnels of Waterloo Station. The mosaics largely reproduce illustrations from Blake's illuminated books, \"The Songs of Innocence and of Experience\", \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\", and the prophetic books.\nRelief etching.\nIn 1788, aged 31, Blake experimented with relief etching, a method he used to produce most of his books, paintings, pamphlets and poems. The process is also referred to as illuminated printing, and the finished products as illuminated books or prints. Illuminated printing involved writing the text of the poems on copper plates with pens and brushes, using an acid-resistant medium. Illustrations could appear alongside words in the manner of earlier illuminated manuscripts. He then etched the plates in acid to dissolve the untreated copper and leave the design standing in relief (hence the name).\nThis is a reversal of the usual method of etching, where the lines of the design are exposed to the acid, and the plate printed by the intaglio method. Relief etching (which Blake referred to as \"stereotype\" in \"The Ghost of Abel\") was intended as a means for producing his illuminated books more quickly than via intaglio. Stereotype, a process invented in 1725, consisted of making a metal cast from a wood engraving, but Blake's innovation was, as described above, very different. The pages printed from these plates were hand-coloured in watercolours and stitched together to form a volume. Blake used illuminated printing for most of his well-known works, including \"Songs of Innocence and of Experience\", \"The Book of Thel\", \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\" and \"Jerusalem\".\nEngravings.\nAlthough Blake has become better known for his relief etching, his commercial work largely consisted of intaglio engraving, the standard process of engraving in the 18th century in which the artist incised an image into the copper plate, a complex and laborious process, with plates taking months or years to complete, but as Blake's contemporary, John Boydell, realised, such engraving offered a \"missing link with commerce\", enabling artists to connect with a mass audience and became an immensely important activity by the end of the 18th century.\n\"Europe Supported by Africa and America\" is an engraving by Blake held in the collection of the University of Arizona Museum of Art. The engraving was for a book written by Blake's friend John Gabriel Stedman called \"The Narrative of a Five Years Expedition against the Revolted Negroes of Surinam\" (1796). It depicts three women embracing one another. Black Africa and White Europe hold hands in a gesture of equality, as the barren earth blooms beneath their feet. Europe wears a string of pearls, while her sisters Africa and America are depicted wearing slave bracelets. Some scholars have speculated that the bracelets represent the \"historical fact\" of slavery in Africa and the Americas while the handclasp refer to Stedman's \"ardent wish\": \"we only differ in color, but are certainly all created by the same Hand.\" Others have said it \"expresses the climate of opinion in which the questions of color and slavery were, at that time, being considered, and which Blake's writings reflect.\"\nBlake employed intaglio engraving in his own work, such as for his \"Illustrations of the Book of Job\", completed just before his death. Most critical work has concentrated on Blake's relief etching as a technique because it is the most innovative aspect of his art, but a 2009 study drew attention to Blake's surviving plates, including those for the Book of Job: they demonstrate that he made frequent use of a technique known as \"repoussage\", a means of obliterating mistakes by hammering them out by hitting the back of the plate. Such techniques, typical of engraving work of the time, are very different from the much faster and fluid way of drawing on a plate that Blake employed for his relief etching, and indicates why the engravings took so long to complete.\nLater life.\nBlake's marriage to Catherine was close and devoted until his death. Blake taught Catherine to write, and she helped him colour his printed poems. Gilchrist refers to \"stormy times\" in the early years of the marriage. Some biographers have suggested that Blake tried to bring a concubine into the marriage bed in accordance with the beliefs of the more radical branches of the Swedenborgian Society, but other scholars have dismissed these theories as conjecture.\nIn his Dictionary, Samuel Foster Damon suggests that Catherine may have had a stillborn daughter for which \"The Book of Thel\" is an elegy. That is how he rationalises the Book's unusual ending, but notes that he is speculating.\nFelpham.\nIn 1800, Blake moved to a cottage at Felpham, in Sussex (now West Sussex), to take up a job illustrating the works of William Hayley, a minor poet. It was in this cottage that Blake began \"\" (the title page is dated 1804, but Blake continued to work on it until 1808). The preface to this work includes a poem beginning \"And did those feet in ancient time\", which became the words for the anthem \"Jerusalem\". Over time, Blake began to resent his new patron, believing that Hayley was uninterested in true artistry, and preoccupied with \"the meer drudgery of business\" (E724). Blake's disenchantment with Hayley has been speculated to have influenced \"Milton: a Poem\", in which Blake wrote that \"Corporeal Friends are Spiritual Enemies\". (4:26, E98)\nBlake's trouble with authority came to a head in August 1803, when he was involved in a physical altercation with a soldier, John Schofield. Blake was charged not only with assault, but with uttering seditious and treasonable expressions against the king. Schofield claimed that Blake had exclaimed \"Damn the king. The soldiers are all slaves.\" Blake was cleared in the Chichester assizes of the charges. According to a report in the Sussex county paper, \"[T]he invented character of [the evidence] was ... so obvious that an acquittal resulted\". Schofield was later depicted wearing \"mind forged manacles\" in an illustration to \"Jerusalem The Emanation of the Giant Albion\".\nReturn to London.\nBlake returned to London in 1804 and began to write and illustrate \"Jerusalem\" (1804\u201320), his most ambitious work. Having conceived the idea of portraying the characters in Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\", Blake approached the dealer Robert Cromek, with a view to marketing an engraving. Knowing Blake was too eccentric to produce a popular work, Cromek promptly commissioned Blake's friend Thomas Stothard to execute the concept. When Blake learned he had been cheated, he broke off contact with Stothard. He set up an independent exhibition in his brother's haberdashery shop at 27 Broad Street in Soho. The exhibition was designed to market his own version of the Canterbury illustration (titled \"The Canterbury Pilgrims\"), along with other works. As a result, he wrote his \"Descriptive Catalogue\" (1809), which contains what Anthony Blunt called a \"brilliant analysis\" of Chaucer and is regularly anthologised as a classic of Chaucer criticism. It also contained detailed explanations of his other paintings. The exhibition was very poorly attended, selling none of the temperas or watercolours. Its only review, in \"The Examiner\", was hostile.\nAlso around this time (circa 1808), Blake gave vigorous expression of his views on art in an extensive series of polemical annotations to the \"Discourses\" of Sir Joshua Reynolds, denouncing the Royal Academy as a fraud and proclaiming, \"To Generalize is to be an Idiot\".\nIn 1818, he was introduced by George Cumberland's son to a young artist named John Linnell. A blue plaque commemorates Blake and Linnell at Old Wyldes' at North End, Hampstead. Through Linnell he met Samuel Palmer, who belonged to a group of artists who called themselves the Shoreham Ancients. The group shared Blake's rejection of modern trends and his belief in a spiritual and artistic New Age. Aged 65, Blake began work on illustrations for the \"Book of Job\", later admired by Ruskin, who compared Blake favourably to Rembrandt, and by Vaughan Williams, who based his ballet \"\" on a selection of the illustrations.\nIn later life Blake began to sell a great number of his works, particularly his Bible illustrations, to Thomas Butts, a patron who saw Blake more as a friend than a man whose work held artistic merit; this was typical of the opinions held of Blake throughout his life.\nThe commission for Dante's \"Divine Comedy\" came to Blake in 1826 through Linnell, with the aim of producing a series of engravings. Blake's death in 1827 cut short the enterprise, and only a handful of watercolours were completed, with only seven of the engravings arriving at proof form. Even so, they have earned praise:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he Dante watercolours are among Blake's richest achievements, engaging fully with the problem of illustrating a poem of this complexity. The mastery of watercolour has reached an even higher level than before, and is used to extraordinary effect in differentiating the atmosphere of the three states of being in the poem.\nBlake's illustrations of the poem are not merely accompanying works, but rather seem to critically revise, or furnish commentary on, certain spiritual or moral aspects of the text.\nBecause the project was never completed, Blake's intent may be obscured. Some indicators bolster the impression that Blake's illustrations in their totality would take issue with the text they accompany: in the margin of \"Homer Bearing the Sword and His Companions\", Blake notes, \"Every thing in Dantes Comedia shews That for Tyrannical Purposes he has made This World the Foundation of All &amp; the Goddess Nature &amp; not the Holy Ghost.\" Blake seems to dissent from Dante's admiration of the poetic works of ancient Greece, and from the apparent glee with which Dante allots punishments in Hell (as evidenced by the grim humour of the cantos).\nAt the same time, Blake shared Dante's distrust of materialism and the corruptive nature of power, and clearly relished the opportunity to represent the atmosphere and imagery of Dante's work pictorially. Even as he seemed to be near death, Blake's central preoccupation was his feverish work on the illustrations to Dante's \"Inferno\"; he is said to have spent one of the last shillings he possessed on a pencil to continue sketching.\nFinal years.\nBlake's last years were spent at Fountain Court off the Strand (the property was demolished in the 1880s, when the Savoy Hotel was built). On the day of his death (12 August 1827), Blake worked relentlessly on his Dante series. Eventually, it is reported, he ceased working and turned to his wife, who was in tears by his bedside. Beholding her, Blake is said to have cried, \"Stay Kate! Keep just as you are \u2013 I will draw your portrait \u2013 for you have ever been an angel to me.\" Having completed this portrait (now lost), Blake laid down his tools and began to sing hymns and verses. At six that evening, after promising his wife that he would be with her always, Blake died. Gilchrist reports that a female lodger in the house, present at his expiration, said, \"I have been at the death, not of a man, but of a blessed angel.\"\nGeorge Richmond gives the following account of Blake's death in a letter to Samuel Palmer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He died ... in a most glorious manner. He said He was going to that Country he had all His life wished to see &amp; expressed Himself Happy, hoping for Salvation through Jesus Christ \u2013 Just before he died His Countenance became fair. His eyes Brighten'd and he burst out Singing of the things he saw in Heaven.\nCatherine paid for Blake's funeral with money lent to her by Linnell. Blake's body was buried in a plot shared with others, five days after his death \u2013 on the eve of his 45th wedding anniversary \u2013 at the Dissenter's burial ground in Bunhill Fields, in the City of London area. His parents' bodies were buried in the same graveyard. Present at the ceremonies were Catherine, Edward Calvert, George Richmond, Frederick Tatham and John Linnell. Following Blake's death, Catherine moved into Tatham's house as a housekeeper. She believed she was regularly visited by Blake's spirit. She continued selling his illuminated works and paintings, but entertained no business transaction without first \"consulting Mr. Blake\". On the day of her death, in October 1831, she was as calm and cheerful as her husband, and called out to him \"as if he were only in the next room, to say she was coming to him, and it would not be long now.\"\nOn her death, longtime acquaintance Frederick Tatham took possession of Blake's works and continued selling them. Tatham later joined the fundamentalist Irvingite church and under the influence of conservative members of that church burned manuscripts that he deemed heretical. The exact number of destroyed manuscripts is unknown, but shortly before his death Blake told a friend he had written \"twenty tragedies as long as \"Macbeth\"\", none of which survive. Another acquaintance, William Michael Rossetti, also burned works by Blake that he considered lacking in quality, and John Linnell erased sexual imagery from a number of Blake's drawings. At the same time, some works not intended for publication were preserved by friends, such as his notebook and \"An Island in the Moon\".\nBlake's grave is commemorated by two stones. The first was a stone that reads \"Near by lie the remains of the poet-painter William Blake 1757\u20131827 and his wife Catherine Sophia 1762\u20131831\". The memorial stone is situated approximately away from the actual grave, which was not marked until 12 August 2018. For years since 1965, the exact location of William Blake's grave had been lost and forgotten. The area had been damaged in the Second World War; gravestones were removed and a garden was created. The memorial stone, indicating that the burial sites are \"nearby\", was listed as a Grade II listed structure in 2011. A Portuguese couple, Carol and Lu\u00eds Garrido, rediscovered the exact burial location after 14 years of investigatory work, and the Blake Society organised a permanent memorial slab, which was unveiled at a public ceremony at the site on 12 August 2018. The new stone is inscribed \"Here lies William Blake 1757\u20131827 Poet Artist Prophet\" above a verse from his poem \"Jerusalem\".\nThe Blake Prize for Religious Art was established in his honour in Australia in 1949. In 1957 a memorial to Blake and his wife was erected in Westminster Abbey. Another memorial lies in St James's Church, Piccadilly, where he was baptised.\nAt the time of Blake's death, he had sold fewer than 30 copies of \"Songs of Innocence and of Experience.\"\nOpinions.\nPolitics.\nBlake was not active in any well-established political party. His poetry consistently embodies an attitude of rebellion against the abuse of class power as documented in David Erdman's major study \"\" (1954). Blake was concerned about senseless wars and the blighting effects of the Industrial Revolution. Much of his poetry recounts in symbolic allegory the effects of the French and American revolutions. Erdman claims Blake was disillusioned with the political outcomes of the conflicts, believing they had simply replaced monarchy with irresponsible mercantilism. Erdman also notes Blake was deeply opposed to slavery and believes some of his poems, read primarily as championing \"free love\", had their anti-slavery implications short-changed. A more recent study, \"William Blake: Visionary Anarchist\" by Peter Marshall (1988), classified Blake and his contemporary William Godwin as forerunners of modern anarchism. British Marxist historian E. P. Thompson's last finished work, \"Witness Against the Beast: William Blake and the Moral Law\" (1993), claims to show how far he was inspired by dissident religious ideas rooted in the thinking of the most radical opponents of the monarchy during the English Civil War.\nDevelopment of views.\nBecause Blake's later poetry contains a private mythology with complex symbolism, his late work has been less published than his earlier more accessible work. The Vintage anthology of Blake edited by Patti Smith focuses heavily on the earlier work, as do many critical studies such as \"William Blake\" by D. G. Gillham. \nThe earlier work is primarily rebellious in character and can be seen as a protest against dogmatic religion especially notable in \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\", in which the figure represented by the \"Devil\" is virtually a hero rebelling against an imposter authoritarian deity. In later works, such as \"Milton\" and \"Jerusalem\", Blake carves a distinctive vision of a humanity redeemed by self-sacrifice and forgiveness, while retaining his earlier negative attitude towards what he felt was the rigid and morbid authoritarianism of traditional religion. Not all readers of Blake agree upon how much continuity exists between Blake's earlier and later works.\nPsychoanalyst June Singer has written that Blake's late work displayed a development of the ideas first introduced in his earlier works, namely, the humanitarian goal of achieving personal wholeness of body and spirit. The final section of the expanded edition of her Blake study \"The Unholy Bible\" suggests the later works are the \"Bible of Hell\" promised in \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\". Regarding Blake's final poem, \"Jerusalem\", she writes: \"The promise of the divine in man, made in \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\", is at last fulfilled.\"\nJohn Middleton Murry notes discontinuity between \"Marriage\" and the late works, in that while the early Blake focused on a \"sheer negative opposition between Energy and Reason\", the later Blake emphasised the notions of self-sacrifice and forgiveness as the road to interior wholeness. This renunciation of the sharper dualism of \"Marriage of Heaven and Hell\" is evidenced in particular by the humanisation of the character of Urizen in the later works. Murry characterises the later Blake as having found \"mutual understanding\" and \"mutual forgiveness\".\nReligious views.\nRegarding conventional religion, Blake was a satirist and ironist in his viewpoints which are illustrated and summarised in his poem \"Vala, or The Four Zoas\", one of his uncompleted prophetic books begun in 1797. The demi-mythological and demi-religious main characters of the book are the Four Zoas (Urthona, Urizen, Luvah and Tharmas), who were created by the fall of Albion in Blake's mythology. It consists of nine books, referred to as \"nights\". These outline the interactions of the Zoas, their fallen forms and their Emanations. Blake intended the book to be a summation of his mythic universe. Blake's Four Zoas represent four aspects of the Almighty God, and \"Vala\" is the first work to mention them. In particular, Blake's God/Man union is broken down into the bodily components of Urizen (head), Urthona (loins), Luvah (heart), and Tharmas (unity of the body) with paired Emanations being Ahania (wisdom, from the head), Enitharmon (what can't be attained in nature, from the loins), Vala (nature, from the heart), and Enion (earth mother, from the separation of unity). As connected to Blake's understanding of the divine, the Zoas are the God the Father (Tharmas, sense), the Son of God (Luvah, love), the Holy Ghost (Urthona, imagination), and Satan who was originally of the divine substance (Urizen, reason) and their Emanations represent Sexual Urges (Enion), Nature (Vala), Inspiration (Enitharmon), and Pleasure (Ahania).\nBlake believed that each person had a twofold identity with one half being good and the other evil. In \"Vala\", both the character Orc and The Eternal Man discuss their selves as divided. By the time he was working on his later works, including \"Vala\", Blake felt that he was able to overcome his inner battle but he was concerned about losing his artistic abilities. These thoughts carried over into \"Vala\" as the character Los (imagination) is connected to the image of Christ, and he added a Christian element to his mythic world. In the revised version of \"Vala\", Blake added Christian and Hebrew images and describes how Los experiences a vision of the Lamb of God that regenerates Los's spirit. In opposition to Christ is Urizen and the Synagogue of Satan, who later crucifies Christ. It is from them that Deism is born.\nBlake did not subscribe to the notion of a body distinct from the soul that must submit to the rule of the soul, but sees the body as an extension of the soul, derived from the \"discernment\" of the senses. Thus, the emphasis orthodoxy places upon the denial of bodily urges is a dualistic error born of misapprehension of the relationship between body and soul. Elsewhere, he describes Satan as the \"state of error\", and as beyond salvation.\nBlake opposed the sophistry of theological thought that excuses pain, admits evil and apologises for injustice. He abhorred self-denial, which he associated with religious repression and particularly sexual repression:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nPrudence is a rich ugly old maid courted by Incapacity.\nHe who desires but acts not breeds pestilence. (7.4\u20135, E35)&lt;/poem&gt;\nHe saw the concept of \"sin\" as a trap to bind men's desires (the briars of \"Garden of Love\"), and believed that restraint in obedience to a moral code imposed from the outside was against the spirit of life:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAbstinence sows sand all over\nThe ruddy limbs &amp; flaming hair\nBut Desire Gratified\nPlants fruits &amp; beauty there. (E474)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nHe did not hold with the doctrine of God as Lord, an entity separate from and superior to mankind; this is shown clearly in his words about Jesus Christ: \"He is the only God ... and so am I, and so are you.\" A telling phrase in \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\" is \"men forgot that All deities reside in the human breast\".\nEnlightenment philosophy.\nBlake had a complex relationship with Enlightenment philosophy. His championing of the imagination as the most important element of human existence ran contrary to Enlightenment ideals of rationalism and empiricism. Due to his visionary religious beliefs, he opposed the Newtonian view of the universe. This mindset is reflected in an excerpt from Blake's \"Jerusalem\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI turn my eyes to the Schools &amp; Universities of Europe\nAnd there behold the Loom of Locke whose Woof rages dire\nWashd by the Water-wheels of Newton. black the cloth\nIn heavy wreathes folds over every Nation; cruel Works\nOf many Wheels I view, wheel without wheel, with cogs tyrannic\nMoving by compulsion each other: not as those in Eden: which\nWheel within Wheel in freedom revolve in harmony &amp; peace. (15.14\u201320, E159)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nBlake believed the paintings of Sir Joshua Reynolds, which depict the naturalistic fall of light upon objects, were products entirely of the \"vegetative eye\", and he saw Locke and Newton as \"the true progenitors of Sir Joshua Reynolds' aesthetic\". The popular taste in the England of that time for such paintings was satisfied with mezzotints, prints produced by a process that created an image from thousands of tiny dots upon the page. Blake saw an analogy between this and Newton's particle theory of light. Accordingly, Blake never used the technique, opting rather to develop a method of engraving purely in fluid line, insisting that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a Line or Lineament is not formed by Chance a Line is a Line in its Minutest Subdivision[s] Strait or Crooked It is Itself &amp; Not Intermeasurable with or by any Thing Else Such is Job. (E784)\nIt has been supposed that, despite his opposition to Enlightenment principles, Blake arrived at a linear aesthetic that was in many ways more similar to the Neoclassical engravings of John Flaxman than to the works of the Romantics, with whom he is often classified. However, Blake's relationship with Flaxman seems to have grown more distant after Blake's return from Felpham, and there are surviving letters between Flaxman and Hayley wherein Flaxman speaks ill of Blake's theories of art. Blake further criticised Flaxman's styles and theories of art in his responses to criticism made against his print of Chaucer's Caunterbury Pilgrims in 1810.\nSexuality.\n\"Free Love\".\nSince his death, Blake has been claimed by those of various movements who apply his complex and often elusive use of symbolism and allegory to the issues that concern them. In particular, Blake is sometimes considered (along with Mary Wollstonecraft and her husband William Godwin) a forerunner of the 19th-century \"free love\" movement, a broad reform tradition starting in the 1820s that held that marriage is slavery, and advocated the removal of all state restrictions on sexual activity such as homosexuality, prostitution, and adultery, culminating in the birth control movement of the early 20th century. Blake scholarship was more focused on this theme in the earlier 20th century, although it is still mentioned by the Blake scholar Magnus Ankarsj\u00f6 who moderately challenges this interpretation. The 19th-century \"free love\" movement was not particularly focused on the idea of multiple partners, but did agree with Wollstonecraft that state-sanctioned marriage was \"legal prostitution\" and monopolistic in character. It has somewhat more in common with early feminist movements (particularly with regard to the writings of Mary Wollstonecraft, whom Blake admired).\nBlake was critical of the marriage laws of his day, and generally railed against traditional Christian notions of chastity as a virtue. At a time of tremendous strain in his marriage, in part due to Catherine's apparent inability to bear children, he directly advocated bringing a second wife into the house. His poetry suggests that external demands for marital fidelity reduce love to mere duty rather than authentic affection, and decries jealousy and egotism as a motive for marriage laws. Poems such as \"Why should I be bound to thee, O my lovely Myrtle-tree?\" and \"Earth's Answer\" seem to advocate multiple sexual partners. In his poem \"London\" he speaks of \"the Marriage-Hearse\" plagued by \"the youthful Harlot's curse\", the result alternatively of false Prudence and/or Harlotry. \"Visions of the Daughters of Albion\" is widely (though not universally) read as a tribute to free love since the relationship between Bromion and Oothoon is held together only by laws and not by love. For Blake, law and love are opposed, and he castigates the \"frozen marriage-bed\". In \"Visions\", Blake writes:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nTill she who burns with youth, and knows no fixed lot, is bound\nIn spells of law to one she loathes? and must she drag the chain\nOf life in weary lust? (5.21-3, E49)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn the 19th century, poet and free love advocate Algernon Charles Swinburne wrote a book on Blake drawing attention to the above motifs in which Blake praises \"sacred natural love\" that is not bound by another's possessive jealousy, the latter characterised by Blake as a \"creeping skeleton\". Swinburne notes how Blake's \"Marriage of Heaven and Hell\" condemns the hypocrisy of the \"pale religious letchery\" of advocates of traditional norms. Another 19th-century free love advocate, Edward Carpenter (1844\u20131929), was influenced by Blake's mystical emphasis on energy free from external restrictions.\nIn the early 20th century, Pierre Berger described how Blake's views echo Mary Wollstonecraft's celebration of joyful authentic love rather than love born of duty, the former being the true measure of purity. Irene Langridge notes that \"in Blake's mysterious and unorthodox creed the doctrine of free love was something Blake wanted for the edification of 'the soul'.\" Michael Davis' 1977 book \"William Blake a New Kind of Man\" suggests that Blake thought jealousy separates man from the divine unity, condemning him to a frozen death.\nAs a theological writer, Blake has a sense of human \"fallenness\". S. Foster Damon noted that for Blake the major impediments to a free love society were corrupt human nature, not merely the intolerance of society and the jealousy of men, but the inauthentic hypocritical nature of human communication. Thomas Wright's 1928 book \"Life of William Blake\" (entirely devoted to Blake's doctrine of free love) notes that Blake thinks marriage should \"in practice\" afford the joy of love, but notes that in reality it often does not, as a couple's knowledge of being chained often diminishes their joy. Pierre Berger also analyses Blake's early mythological poems such as \"Ahania\" as declaring marriage laws to be a consequence of the fallenness of humanity, as these are born from pride and jealousy.\nSome scholars have noted that Blake's views on \"free love\" are both qualified and may have undergone shifts and modifications in his late years. Some poems from this period warn of dangers of predatory sexuality such as \"The Sick Rose\". Magnus Ankarsj\u00f6 notes that while the hero of \"Visions of the Daughters of Albion\" is a strong advocate of free love, by the end of the poem she has become more circumspect as her awareness of the dark side of sexuality has grown, crying \"Can this be love which drinks another as a sponge drinks water?\" Ankarsj\u00f6 also notes that a major inspiration to Blake, Mary Wollstonecraft, similarly developed more circumspect views of sexual freedom late in life. In light of Blake's aforementioned sense of human 'fallenness' Ankarsj\u00f6 thinks Blake does \"not\" fully approve of sensual indulgence merely in defiance of law as exemplified by the female character of Leutha, since in the fallen world of experience all love is enchained. Ankarsj\u00f6 records Blake as having supported a commune with some sharing of partners, though David Worrall read \"The Book of Thel\" as a rejection of the proposal to take concubines espoused by some members of the Swedenborgian church.\nBlake's later writings show a renewed interest in Christianity, and although he radically reinterprets Christian morality in a way that embraces sensual pleasure, there is little of the emphasis on sexual libertarianism found in several of his early poems, and there is advocacy of \"self-denial\", though such abnegation must be inspired by love rather than through authoritarian compulsion. Berger (more so than Swinburne) is especially sensitive to a shift in sensibility between the early Blake and the later Blake. Berger believes the young Blake placed too much emphasis on following impulses, and that the older Blake had a better formed ideal of a true love that sacrifices self. Some celebration of mystical sensuality remains in the late poems (most notably in Blake's denial of the virginity of Jesus's mother). However, the late poems also place a greater emphasis on forgiveness, redemption, and emotional authenticity as a foundation for relationships.\nLegacy.\nCreativity.\nNorthrop Frye, commenting on Blake's consistency in strongly held views, notes that Blake himself says that his notes on [Joshua] Reynolds, written at fifty, are 'exactly Similar' to those on Locke and Bacon, written when he was 'very Young'. Even phrases and lines of verse will reappear as much as forty years later. Consistency in maintaining what he believed to be true was itself one of his leading principles ... Consistency, then, foolish or otherwise, is one of Blake's chief preoccupations, just as 'self-contradiction' is always one of his most contemptuous comments.\nBlake abhorred slavery, and believed in racial and sexual equality. Several of his poems and paintings express a notion of universal humanity: \"As all men are alike (tho' infinitely various)\". In one poem, narrated by a black child, white and black bodies alike are described as shaded groves or clouds, which exist only until one learns \"to bear the beams of love\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nWhen I from black and he from white cloud free,\nAnd round the tent of God like lambs we joy:\nI'll shade him from the heat till he can bear,\nTo lean in joy upon our fathers knee.\nAnd then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair,\nAnd be like him and he will then love me. (23-8, E9)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nBlake retained an active interest in social and political events throughout his life, and social and political statements are often present in his mystical symbolism. His views on what he saw as oppression and restriction of rightful freedom extended to the Church. His spiritual beliefs are evident in \"Songs of Experience\" (1794), in which he distinguishes between the Old Testament God, whose restrictions he rejected, and the New Testament God whom he saw as a positive influence.\nVisions.\nFrom a young age, William Blake claimed to have seen visions. The first may have occurred as early as the age of four when, according to one anecdote, the young artist \"saw God\" when God \"put his head to the window\", causing Blake to break into screaming. At the age of eight or ten in Peckham Rye, London, Blake claimed to have seen \"a tree filled with angels, bright angelic wings bespangling every bough like stars.\" According to Blake's Victorian biographer Gilchrist, he returned home and reported the vision and only escaped being thrashed by his father for telling a lie through the intervention of his mother. Though all evidence suggests that his parents were largely supportive, his mother seems to have been especially so, and several of Blake's early drawings and poems decorated the walls of her chamber. On another occasion, Blake watched haymakers at work, and thought he saw angelic figures walking among them.\nBlake claimed to experience visions throughout his life. They were often associated with beautiful religious themes and imagery, and may have inspired him further with spiritual works and pursuits. Certainly, religious concepts and imagery figure centrally in Blake's works. God and Christianity constituted the intellectual centre of his writings, from which he drew inspiration. Blake believed he was personally instructed and encouraged by Archangels to create his artistic works, which he claimed were actively read and enjoyed by the same Archangels. In a letter of condolence to William Hayley, dated 6 May 1800, four days after the death of Hayley's son, Blake wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know that our deceased friends are more really with us than when they were apparent to our mortal part. Thirteen years ago I lost a brother, and with his spirit I converse daily and hourly in the spirit, and see him in my remembrance, in the region of my imagination. I hear his advice, and even now write from his dictate.\nIn a letter to John Flaxman, dated 21 September 1800, Blake wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The town of] Felpham is a sweet place for Study, because it is more spiritual than London. Heaven opens here on all sides her golden Gates; her windows are not obstructed by vapours; voices of Celestial inhabitants are more distinctly heard, &amp; their forms more distinctly seen; &amp; my Cottage is also a Shadow of their houses. My Wife &amp; Sister are both well, courting Neptune for an embrace... I am more famed in Heaven for my works than I could well conceive. In my Brain are studies &amp; Chambers filled with books &amp; pictures of old, which I wrote &amp; painted in ages of Eternity before my mortal life; &amp; those works are the delight &amp; Study of Archangels. (E710)\nIn a letter to Thomas Butts, dated 25 April 1803, Blake wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now I may say to you, what perhaps I should not dare to say to anyone else: That I can alone carry on my visionary studies in London unannoy'd, &amp; that I may converse with my friends in Eternity, See Visions, Dream Dreams &amp; prophecy &amp; speak Parables unobserv'd &amp; at liberty from the Doubts of other Mortals; perhaps Doubts proceeding from Kindness, but Doubts are always pernicious, Especially when we Doubt our Friends.\nIn \"A Vision of the Last Judgement\" Blake wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Error is Created Truth is Eternal Error or Creation will be Burned Up &amp; then &amp; not till then Truth or Eternity will appear It is Burnt up the Moment Men cease to behold it I assert for My self that I do not behold the Outward Creation &amp; that to me it is hindrance &amp; not Action it is as the Dirt upon my feet No part of Me. What it will be Questiond When the Sun rises do you not see a round Disk of fire somewhat like a Guinea O no no I see an Innumerable company of the Heavenly host crying Holy Holy Holy is the Lord God Almighty I question not my Corporeal or Vegetative Eye any more than I would Question a Window concerning a Sight I look thro it &amp; not with it. (E565-6)\nDespite seeing angels and God, Blake has also claimed to have seen Satan on the staircase of his South Molton Street home in London.\nAware of Blake's visions, William Wordsworth commented, \"There was no doubt that this poor man was mad, but there is something in the madness of this man which interests me more than the sanity of Lord Byron and Walter Scott.\" In a more deferential vein, John William Cousins wrote in \"A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature\" that Blake was \"a truly pious and loving soul, neglected and misunderstood by the world, but appreciated by an elect few\", who \"led a cheerful and contented life of poverty illumined by visions and celestial inspirations\". Blake's sanity was called into question as recently as the publication of the 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", whose entry on Blake comments that \"the question whether Blake was or was not mad seems likely to remain in dispute, but there can be no doubt whatever that he was at different periods of his life under the influence of illusions for which there are no outward facts to account, and that much of what he wrote is so far wanting in the quality of sanity as to be without a logical coherence\".\nCultural influence.\nBlake's work was neglected for a generation after his death and almost forgotten by the time Alexander Gilchrist began work on his biography in the 1860s. The publication of the \"Life of William Blake\" rapidly transformed Blake's reputation, in particular as he was taken up by Pre-Raphaelites and associated figures, in particular Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Algernon Charles Swinburne. In the 20th century, however, Blake's work was fully appreciated and his influence increased. Important early and mid-20th-century scholars involved in enhancing Blake's standing in literary and artistic circles included S. Foster Damon, Geoffrey Keynes, Northrop Frye and David V. Erdman.\nWhile Blake had a significant role in the art and poetry of figures such as Rossetti, it was during the Modernist period that this work began to influence a wider set of writers and artists. William Butler Yeats, who edited an edition of Blake's collected works in 1893, drew on him for poetic and philosophical ideas, while British surrealist art in particular drew on Blake's conceptions of non-mimetic, visionary practice in the painting of artists such as Paul Nash and Graham Sutherland. \nHis poetry came into use by a number of British classical composers, who set his works. The earliest such work known is Doyne Bell's setting of the poem \"Can I see another's woe\", from \"Songs of Innocence and of Experience\", published in 1876. Notable settings are by Benjamin Britten and Ralph Vaughan Williams, and John Tavener set several of Blake's poems, including \"The Lamb\" (as the 1982 work \"The Lamb\") and \"The Tyger\".\nMany such as June Singer have argued that Blake's thoughts on human nature greatly anticipate and parallel the thinking of the psychoanalyst Carl Jung. In Jung's own words: \"Blake [is] a tantalizing study, since he compiled a lot of half or undigested knowledge in his fantasies. According to my ideas they are an artistic production rather than an authentic representation of unconscious processes.\" Similarly, Diana Hume George claimed that Blake can be seen as a precursor to the ideas of Sigmund Freud.\nBlake had an enormous influence on the beat poets of the 1950s and the counterculture of the 1960s, frequently being cited by such seminal figures as beat poet Allen Ginsberg, songwriters Bob Dylan, Richard Ashcroft, Jim Morrison, Van Morrison, Bruce Dickinson, and English writer Aldous Huxley. The Pulitzer-winning composer William Bolcom set \"Songs of Innocence and of Experience\" to music, with different poems set to different styles of music, \"from modern techniques to Broadway to Country/Western\" and reggae.\nMuch of the central conceit of Philip Pullman's fantasy trilogy \"His Dark Materials\" is rooted in the world of Blake's \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\". Blake also features as a relatively significant character in Brian Catling's fantasy novel \"The Erstwhile\", where his visions of angelic beings are figured into the story. Canadian music composer Kathleen Yearwood is one of many contemporary musicians that have set Blake's poems to music. After World War II, Blake's role in popular culture came to the fore in a variety of areas such as popular music, film, and the graphic novel, leading Edward Larrissy to assert that \"Blake is the Romantic writer who has exerted the most powerful influence on the twentieth century.\"\nExhibitions.\nMajor recent exhibitions focusing on William Blake include:\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArchives.\nDigital editions and research"}
{"id": "33176", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33176", "title": "Demon dialing", "text": "Use of computers to repeatedly enter telephone numbers; typically to hack into modems\nIn the computer hacking scene of the 1980s, demon dialing was a technique by which a computer was used to repeatedly dial a number (usually to a crowded modem pool) in an attempt to gain access immediately after another user had hung up. The expansion of accessible internet service provider connectivity since that time has rendered the practice more or less obsolete.\nA similar technique was sometimes used to get the first call for prizes in radio \"call-in\" shows, thus leading to the adoption of random \"fifth caller,\" \"seventeenth caller\" etc. by radio stations to circumvent this practice.\nThe term \"demon dialing\" derives from the Demon Dialer product from Zoom Telephonics, Inc., a telephone device produced in the 1980s which repeatedly dialed busy telephone numbers under control of an extension phone. The emergence of affordable consumer telephony devices with advanced features such as last number redial and preprogrammed numbers paralleled phone industry deregulation and the Breakup of the Bell System in the early 1980s. While Speed dial technology had been invented nearly a decade earlier by Bell Labs, it did not become a consumer product until deregulation. Previously, connecting non-AT&amp;T handsets was generally prohibited and most phones were leased devices (similar to residential broadband routers). By putting its functionally in a line-connected appliance rather than a handset, the Demon Dialer device could be configured to provide speed dialing to all extensions within a residence through touch tone control.\n\"Demon dialing\" was popularized by the movie \"WarGames\", which demonstrates the hacking technique (the technique eventually evolves into a technique called phreaking). After giving the program an area code and 3 digit prefix, the program then serially dialed every phone number in that prefix in order, recording which phone numbers were answered by a computer modem. Soon after, most likely because it was popularized by the movie, serial dialing was outlawed. Hackers got around this by simply randomizing the order the program dialed all the numbers. Later the terms \"demon dialing\" and \"war dialing\" became synonymous.\nSimilar technologies.\nAutomatic redial is essentially exactly the same thing, but for modems, and included in most telecommunications programs that use modems, including all variants of Dial-up networking ever included in the Windows operating system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33177", "revid": "13377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33177", "title": "War driving", "text": ""}
{"id": "33178", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33178", "title": "White supremacy", "text": "Belief in the superiority of white people\nWhite supremacy is the belief that white people are superior to those of other races. The belief favors the maintenance and defense of any power and privilege held by white people. White supremacy has roots in the now-discredited doctrine of scientific racism and was a key justification for European colonialism.\nAs a political ideology, it imposes and maintains cultural, social, political, historical or institutional domination by white people and non-white supporters. In the past, this ideology had been put into effect through socioeconomic and legal structures such as the Atlantic slave trade, European colonial labor and social practices, the Scramble for Africa, Jim Crow laws in the United States, the activities of the Native Land Court in New Zealand, the White Australia policies from the 1890s to the mid-1970s, and apartheid in South Africa. This ideology is also today present among neo-Confederates.\nWhite supremacy underlies a spectrum of contemporary movements including white nationalism, white separatism, neo-Nazism, and the Christian Identity movement. In the United States, white supremacy is primarily associated with Aryan Nations, White Aryan Resistance, and the Ku Klux Klan. The Proud Boys are considered an implicitly white supremacist organization, despite denying their association with white supremacy. In recent years, websites such as Twitter (known as X since July 2023), Reddit, and Stormfront, have contributed to an increased activity and interest in white supremacy.\nNot all white-supremacist organizations have the same objectives, and while some may uphold a Nordicist ideal of whiteness, others are more broadly white supremacist, including members of Southern European and Eastern European descent. Different groups of white supremacists identify various racial, ethnic, religious, and other enemies, most commonly those of Sub-Saharan African ancestry, Indigenous peoples, people of Asian descent, multiracial people, MENA people, Jews, Muslims, and LGBTQ+ people.\nIn academic usage, particularly in critical race theory or intersectionality, \"white supremacy\" also refers to a social system in which white people enjoy structural advantages (privilege) over other ethnic groups, on both a collective and individual level, despite formal legal equality.\nThe theory of white adjacency posits that some groups of non-White people are more closely aligned with White people than others, which affords them some degree of white privilege.\nHistory.\nWhite supremacy has ideological foundations that date back to 18th-century scientific racism, the predominant paradigm of human variation that shaped international relations and racial policy from the latter part of the Age of Enlightenment until the late 20th century.\nUnited States.\nEarly history.\nWhite supremacy was dominant in the United States both before and after the American Civil War, and it persisted for decades after the Reconstruction era. The Virginia Slave Codes of 1705 socially segregated white colonists from black enslaved persons, making them disparate groups and hindering their ability to unite. Unity of the commoners was a perceived fear of the Virginia aristocracy, who wished to prevent repeated events such as Bacon's Rebellion, occurring 29 years prior. Prior to the Civil War, many wealthy white Americans owned slaves; they tried to justify their economic exploitation of black people by creating a \"scientific\" theory of white superiority and black inferiority. One such slave owner, future president Thomas Jefferson, wrote in 1785 that blacks were \"inferior to the whites in the endowments of body and mind.\" In the antebellum South, four million slaves were denied freedom. The outbreak of the Civil War saw the desire to uphold white supremacy being cited as a cause for state secession and the formation of the Confederate States of America. In an 1890 editorial about Native Americans and the American Indian Wars, author L. Frank Baum wrote: \"The Whites, by law of conquest, by justice of civilization, are masters of the American continent, and the best safety of the frontier settlements will be secured by the total annihilation of the few remaining Indians.\"\nThe Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only. In some parts of the United States, many people who were considered non-white were disenfranchised, barred from government office, and prevented from holding most government jobs well into the second half of the 20th century. Professor Leland T. Saito of the University of Southern California writes: \"Throughout the history of the United States, race has been used by whites for legitimizing and creating difference and social, economic and political exclusion.\"\n20th century.\nThe denial of social and political freedom to minorities continued into the mid-20th century, resulting in the civil rights movement. The movement was spurred by the lynching of Emmett Till, a 14-year-old boy. David Jackson writes it was the image of the \"murdered child's ravaged body, that forced the world to reckon with the brutality of American racism.\"\nSociologist Stephen Klineberg has stated that U.S. immigration laws prior to 1965 clearly \"declared that Northern Europeans are a superior subspecies of the white race\". The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 opened entry to the U.S. to non-Germanic groups, and significantly altered the demographic mix in the U.S. as a result. With 38 U.S. states having banned interracial marriage through anti-miscegenation laws, the last 16 states had such laws in place until 1967 when they were invalidated by the Supreme Court of the United States' decision in \"Loving v. Virginia\". These mid-century gains had a major impact on white Americans' political views; segregation and white racial superiority, which had been publicly endorsed in the 1940s, became minority views within the white community by the mid-1970s, and continued to decline in 1990s' polls to a single-digit percentage. For sociologist Howard Winant, these shifts marked the end of \"monolithic white supremacy\" in the United States.\nAfter the mid-1960s, white supremacy remained an important ideology to the American far-right. According to Kathleen Belew, a historian of race and racism in the United States, white militancy shifted after the Vietnam War from supporting the existing racial order to a more radical position (self-described as \"white power\" or \"white nationalism\") committed to overthrowing the United States government and establishing a white homeland. Such anti-government militia organizations are one of three major strands of violent right-wing movements in the United States, with white-supremacist groups (such as the Ku Klux Klan, neo-Nazi organizations, and racist skinheads) and a religious fundamentalist movement (such as Christian Identity) being the other two.\n21st century.\nThe presidential campaign of Donald Trump led to a surge of interest in white supremacy and white nationalism in the United States, bringing increased media attention and new members to their movement; his campaign enjoyed their widespread support.\nSome academics argue that the outcome of the 2016 United States presidential election, and the many controversies which surrounded it, reflect the ongoing influence of white supremacy in the United States. Educators, literary theorists, and other political experts have raised similar questions, connecting the scapegoating of disenfranchised populations to white superiority.\nBritish Commonwealth.\nThere has been debate whether Winston Churchill, who was voted \"the greatest ever Briton\" in 2002, was \"a racist and white supremacist\". In the context of rejecting the Arab wish to stop Jewish immigration to Palestine, he said:\nI do not admit that the dog in the manger has the final right to the manger, though he may have lain there for a very long time. I do not admit that right. I do not admit for instance that a great wrong has been done to the Red Indians of America or the black people of Australia. I do not admit that a wrong has been done to those people by the fact that a stronger race, a higher-grade race or at any rate a more worldly-wise race ... has come in and taken their place.\"\nBritish historian Richard Toye, author of \"Churchill's Empire\", concluded that \"Churchill did think that white people were superior.\"\nSouth Africa.\nA number of Southern African nations experienced severe racial tension and conflict during global decolonization, particularly as white Africans of European ancestry fought to protect their preferential social and political status. Racial segregation in South Africa began in colonial times under the Dutch Empire. It continued when the British took over the Cape of Good Hope in 1795. Apartheid was introduced as an officially structured policy by the Afrikaner-dominated National Party after the general election of 1948. Apartheid's legislation divided inhabitants into four racial groups \u2013 \"black\", \"white\", \"coloured\", and \"Indian\", with coloured divided into several sub-classifications. In 1970, the Afrikaner-run government abolished non-white political representation, and starting that year black people were deprived of South African citizenship. South Africa abolished apartheid in 1991.\nRhodesia.\nIn Rhodesia a predominantly white government issued its own unilateral declaration of independence from the United Kingdom in 1965 during an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to avoid majority rule. Following the Rhodesian Bush War which was fought by African nationalists, Rhodesian prime minister Ian Smith acceded to biracial political representation in 1978 and the state achieved recognition from the United Kingdom as Zimbabwe in 1980.\nGermany.\nNazism promoted the idea of a superior Germanic people or Aryan race in Germany during the early 20th century. Notions of white supremacy and Aryan racial superiority were combined in the 19th century, with white supremacists maintaining the belief that white people were members of an Aryan \"master race\" that was superior to other races, particularly the Jews, who were described as the \"Semitic race\", Slavs, and Gypsies, who they associated with \"cultural sterility\". Arthur de Gobineau, a French racial theorist and aristocrat, blamed the fall of the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\" in France on racial degeneracy caused by racial intermixing, which he argued had destroyed the \"purity\" of the Nordic or Germanic race. Gobineau's theories, which attracted a strong following in Germany, emphasized the existence of an irreconcilable polarity between Aryan or Germanic peoples and Jewish culture.\nAs the Nazi Party's chief racial theorist, Alfred Rosenberg oversaw the construction of a human racial \"ladder\" that justified Hitler's racial and ethnic policies. Rosenberg promoted the Nordic theory, which regarded Nordics as the \"master race\", superior to all others, including other Aryans (Indo-Europeans). Rosenberg got the racial term \"Untermensch\" from the title of Klansman Lothrop Stoddard's 1922 book \"The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man\". It was later adopted by the Nazis from that book's German version \"Der Kulturumsturz: Die Drohung des Untermenschen\" (1925). Rosenberg was the leading Nazi who attributed the concept of the East-European \"under man\" to Stoddard. An advocate of the U.S. immigration laws that favored Northern Europeans, Stoddard wrote primarily on the alleged dangers posed by \"colored\" peoples to white civilization, and wrote \"The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-Supremacy\" in 1920. In establishing a restrictive entry system for Germany in 1925, Hitler wrote of his admiration for America's immigration laws: \"The American Union categorically refuses the immigration of physically unhealthy elements, and simply excludes the immigration of certain races.\"\nGerman praise for America's institutional racism, previously found in Hitler's \"Mein Kampf\", was continuous throughout the early 1930s. Nazi lawyers were advocates of the use of American models. Race-based U.S. citizenship and anti-miscegenation laws directly inspired the Nazis' two principal Nuremberg racial laws\u2014the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law. To preserve the Aryan or Nordic race, the Nazis introduced the Nuremberg Laws in 1935, which forbade sexual relations and marriages between Germans and Jews, and later between Germans and Romani and Slavs. The Nazis used the Mendelian inheritance theory to argue that social traits were innate, claiming that there was a racial nature associated with certain general traits, such as inventiveness or criminal behavior.\nAccording to the 2012 annual report of Germany's interior intelligence service, the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, at the time there were 26,000 right-wing extremists living in Germany, including 6,000 neo-Nazis.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nFifty-one people died from two consecutive terrorist attacks at the Al Noor Mosque and the Linwood Islamic Centre by an Australian white supremacist carried out on March 15, 2019. The terrorist attacks have been described by Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern as \"One of New Zealand's darkest days\". On August 27, 2020, the shooter was sentenced to life without parole.\nIn 2016, there was a rise in debate over the appropriateness of the naming of Massey University in Palmerston North after William Massey, whom many historians and critics have described as a white supremacist. Lecturer Steve Elers was a leading proponent of the idea that Massey was an avowed white supremacist, given Massey \"made several anti-Chinese racist statements in the public domain\" and intensified the New Zealand head tax. In 1921, Massey wrote in the \"Evening Post:\" \"New Zealanders are probably the purest Anglo-Saxon population in the British Empire. Nature intended New Zealand to be a white man's country, and it must be kept as such. The strain of Polynesian will be no detriment\". This is one of many quotes attributed to him regarded as being openly racist.\nIdeologies and movements.\nSupporters of Nordicism consider the \"Nordic peoples\" to be a superior race. By the early 19th century, white supremacy was attached to emerging theories of racial hierarchy. The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer attributed cultural primacy to the white race:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The highest civilization and culture, apart from the ancient Hindus and Egyptians, are found exclusively among the white races; and even with many dark peoples, the ruling caste or race is fairer in colour than the rest and has, therefore, evidently immigrated, for example, the Brahmins, the Incas, and the rulers of the South Sea Islands. All this is due to the fact that necessity is the mother of invention because those tribes that emigrated early to the north, and there gradually became white, had to develop all their intellectual powers and invent and perfect all the arts in their struggle with need, want and misery, which in their many forms were brought about by the climate.\nThe eugenicist Madison Grant argued in his 1916 book, \"The Passing of the Great Race\", that the Nordic race had been responsible for most of humanity's great achievements, and that admixture was \"race suicide\". In this book, Europeans who are not of Germanic origin but have Nordic characteristics such as blonde/red hair and blue/green/gray eyes, were considered to be a Nordic admixture and suitable for Aryanization.\nIn the United States, the groups most associated with the white-supremacist movement are the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), Aryan Nations, and the White American Resistance movement, all of which are also considered to be antisemitic. The Proud Boys, despite claiming non-association with white supremacy, have been described in academic contexts as being such. Many white-supremacist groups are based on the concept of preserving genetic purity, and do not focus solely on discrimination based on skin color. The KKK's reasons for supporting racial segregation are not primarily based on religious ideals, but some Klan groups are openly Protestant. The 1915 silent drama film \"The Birth of a Nation\" followed the rising racial, economic, political, and geographic tensions leading up to the Emancipation Proclamation and the Southern Reconstruction era that was the genesis of the Ku Klux Klan.\nNazi Germany promulgated white supremacy based on the belief that the Aryan race, or the Germans, were the \"master race\". It was combined with a eugenics programme that aimed for racial hygiene through compulsory sterilization of sick individuals and extermination of \"Untermenschen\" (\"subhumans\"): Slavs, Jews and Romani, which eventually culminated in the Holocaust.\nChristian Identity is another movement closely tied to white supremacy. Some white supremacists identify themselves as Odinists, although many Odinists reject white supremacy. Some white-supremacist groups, such as the South African Boeremag, conflate elements of Christianity and Odinism. Creativity (formerly known as \"The World Church of the Creator\") is atheistic and it denounces Christianity and other theistic religions. Aside from this, its ideology is similar to that of many Christian Identity groups because it believes in the antisemitic conspiracy theory that there is a \"Jewish conspiracy\" in control of governments, the banking industry and the media. Matthew F. Hale, founder of the World Church of the Creator, has published articles stating that all races other than white are \"mud races\", which is what the group's religion teaches.\nThe white-supremacist ideology has become associated with a racist faction of the skinhead subculture, despite the fact that when the skinhead culture first developed in the United Kingdom in the late 1960s, it was heavily influenced by black fashions and music, especially Jamaican reggae and ska, and African American soul music.\nWhite-supremacist recruitment activities are primarily conducted at a grassroots level as well as on the Internet. Widespread access to the Internet has led to a dramatic increase in white-supremacist websites. The Internet provides a venue for open expression of white-supremacist ideas at little social cost because people who post the information are able to remain anonymous.\nWhite separatism.\nWhite separatism is a political and social movement that seeks the separation of white people from people of other races and ethnicities. This may include the establishment of a white ethnostate by removing non-whites from existing communities or by forming new communities elsewhere.\nMost modern researchers do not view white separatism as distinct from white-supremacist beliefs. The Anti-Defamation League defines white separatism as \"a form of white supremacy\"; the Southern Poverty Law Center defines both white nationalism and white separatism as \"ideologies based on white supremacy.\" Facebook has banned content that is openly white nationalist or white separatist because \"white nationalism and white separatism cannot be meaningfully separated from white supremacy and organized hate groups\".\nUse of the term to self-identify has been criticized as a dishonest rhetorical ploy. The Anti-Defamation League argues that white supremacists use the phrase because they believe it has fewer negative connotations than the term \"white supremacist\".\nDobratz and Shanks-Meile reported that adherents usually reject marriage \"outside the white race\". They argued for the existence of \"a distinction between the white supremacist's desire to dominate (as in apartheid, slavery, or segregation) and complete separation by race\". They argued that this is a matter of pragmatism, because, while many white supremacists are also white separatists, contemporary white separatists reject the view that returning to a system of segregation is possible or desirable in the United States.\nAcademic use of the term.\nThe term \"white supremacy\" is used in some academic studies of racial power to denote a system of structural or societal racism which privileges white people over others, regardless of the presence or the absence of racial hatred. According to this definition, white racial advantages occur at both a collective and an individual level (\"ceteris paribus\", i. e., when individuals are compared that do not differ relevantly except in ethnicity). Legal scholar Frances Lee Ansley explains this definition as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis and similar definitions have been adopted or proposed by Charles W. Mills, bell hooks, David Gillborn, Jessie Daniels, and Neely Fuller Jr, and they are widely used in critical race theory and intersectional feminism. Some anti-racist educators, such as Betita Martinez and the Challenging White Supremacy workshop, also use the term in this way. The term expresses historic continuities between a pre\u2013civil rights movement era of open white supremacy and the current racial power structure of the United States. It also expresses the visceral impact of structural racism through \"provocative and brutal\" language that characterizes racism as \"nefarious, global, systemic, and constant\". Academic users of the term sometimes prefer it to \"racism\" because it allows for a distinction to be drawn between racist feelings and white racial advantage or privilege. John McWhorter, a specialist in language and race relations, explains the gradual replacement of \"racism\" by \"white supremacy\" by the fact that \"potent terms need refreshment, especially when heavily used\", drawing a parallel with the replacement of \"chauvinist\" by \"sexist\".\nOther intellectuals have criticized the term's recent rise in popularity among leftist activists as counterproductive. John McWhorter has described the use of \"white supremacy\" as straying from its commonly accepted meaning to encompass less extreme issues, thereby cheapening the term and potentially derailing productive discussion. Political columnist Kevin Drum attributes the term's growing popularity to frequent use by Ta-Nehisi Coates, describing it as a \"terrible fad\" that fails to convey nuance. He claims that the term should be reserved for those who are trying to promote the idea that whites are inherently superior to blacks and not used to characterize less blatantly racist beliefs or actions. The academic use of the term to refer to systemic racism has been criticized by Conor Friedersdorf for the confusion that it creates for the general public, inasmuch as it differs from the more common dictionary definition; he argues that it is likely to alienate those that it hopes to convince.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33180", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33180", "title": "W", "text": "Twenty-third letter of the Latin alphabet\nW, or w, is the twenty-third letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"double-u\", plural \"double-ues\".\nName.\nThe name 'double-u' reflects stages in the letter's evolution when it was considered two of the same letter, a double U.\nSome speakers shorten the name \"double u\" into \"dub-u\" or just \"dub\"; for example, University of Wisconsin, University of Washington, University of Wyoming, University of Waterloo, University of the Western Cape and University of Western Australia are all known colloquially as \"U Dub\", and the automobile company Volkswagen, abbreviated \"VW\", is sometimes pronounced \"V-Dub\". The fact that many website URLs require a \"www.\" prefix has been influential in promoting these shortened pronunciations.\nIn other West Germanic languages, its name is monosyllabic: German , Dutch . In Polish is called \"wu\" (as \"v\" and \"u\"). In many languages, its name literally means \"double v\": Portuguese \"duplo v\u00ea\", Spanish \"doble ve\" (though it can be spelled \"uve doble\"), French \"double v\u00e9\", Icelandic \"tv\u00f6falt vaff\", Czech \"dvojit\u00e9 v\u00e9\", Estonian \"kaksisvee\", Finnish \"kaksois-vee\", etc.\nHistory.\nThe classical Latin alphabet, from which the modern European alphabets derived, did not have the \"W\" character. The \"W\" sounds were represented by the Latin letter \"V\" (at the time, not yet distinct from \"U\").\nThe sounds (spelled \u27e8V\u27e9) and (spelled \u27e8B\u27e9) of Classical Latin developed into the voiced bilabial fricative between vowels in Early Medieval Latin. Therefore, \u27e8V\u27e9 no longer adequately represented the voiced labial-velar approximant sound of Germanic phonology.\nThe Germanic phoneme was, therefore, written as \u27e8VV\u27e9 or \u27e8uu\u27e9 (\u27e8u\u27e9 and \u27e8v\u27e9 becoming distinct only by the Early Modern period) by the earliest writers of Old English and Old High German, in the 7th or 8th centuries. Gothic (not Latin-based), by contrast, had simply used a letter based on the Greek \u03a5 for the same sound in the 4th century. The digraph \u27e8VV\u27e9/\u27e8uu\u27e9 was also used in Medieval Latin to represent Germanic names, including Gothic ones like Wamba.\nIt is from this \u27e8uu\u27e9 digraph that the modern name \"double U\" derives. The digraph was commonly used in the spelling of Old High German but only in the earliest texts in Old English, where the sound soon came to be represented by borrowing the rune \u27e8\u16b9\u27e9, adapted as the Latin letter wynn: \u27e8\u01bf\u27e9. In early Middle English, following the 11th-century Norman Conquest, \u27e8uu\u27e9 regained popularity; by 1300, it had taken wynn's place in common use.\nScribal realisation of the digraph could look like a pair of Vs whose branches crossed in the middle: both forms (separate and crossed) appear, for instance, in the \"running text\" (in Latin) of the Bayeux tapestry in proper names such as EDVVARDVS and VVILLELMVS (or the same with crossed Vs). Another realisation (common in roundhand, kurrent and blackletter) takes the form of an \u27e8n\u27e9 whose rightmost branch curved around, as in a cursive \u27e8v\u27e9 (viz. formula_1) It was used up to the nineteenth century in Britain and continues to be familiar in Germany.\nThus, the shift from the digraph \u27e8VV\u27e9 to the distinct ligature \u27e8W\u27e9 was gradual and was only apparent in abecedaria, explicit listings of all individual letters. It was probably considered a separate letter by the 14th century in both Middle English and Middle German orthography. However, it remained an outsider, not really considered part of the Latin alphabet proper, as expressed by Valentin Ickelshamer in the 16th century, who complained that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Poor \"w\" is so infamous and unknown that many barely know either its name or its shape, not those who aspire to being Latinists, as they have no need of it, nor do the Germans, not even the schoolmasters, know what to do with it or how to call it; some call it \"we\", [... others] call it \"uu\", [...] the Swabians call it \"auwawau\"\nIn Middle High German (and possibly already in late Old High German), the West Germanic phoneme became realized as ; this is why, today, the German \u27e8w\u27e9 represents that sound.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nEnglish uses \u27e8w\u27e9 to represent . There are also a number of words beginning with a written \u27e8w\u27e9 that is silent in most dialects before a (pronounced) \u27e8r\u27e9, remaining from usage in Old English in which the \u27e8w\u27e9 was pronounced: \"wreak\", \"wrap\", \"wreck\", \"wrench\", \"wroth\", \"wrinkle\", etc. Certain dialects of Scottish English still distinguish this digraph. \u27e8w\u27e9 represents a vowel sound, , in the word pwn, and in the Welsh loanwords \"cwm\" and \"crwth\", it retains the Welsh pronunciation, . \u27e8w\u27e9 is also used in digraphs: \u27e8aw\u27e9 , \u27e8ew\u27e9 , \u27e8ow\u27e9 , wherein it is usually an orthographic allograph of \u27e8u\u27e9 in final positions. It is the fifteenth most frequently used letter in the English language, with a frequency of about 2.56% in words.\nOther languages.\nIn Europe languages with \u27e8w\u27e9 in native words are in a central-western European zone between Cornwall and Poland: English, German, Low German, Dutch, Frisian, Welsh, Cornish, Breton, Walloon, Polish, Kashubian, Sorbian, Wymysorys, Resian and Scandinavian dialects. German, Polish, Wymysorys and Kashubian use it for the voiced labiodental fricative (with Polish, related Kashubian and Wymysorys using \u0141 for , except in conservative and some eastern Polish speech, where \u0141 still represents the dark L sound.), and Dutch uses it for . Unlike its use in other languages, the letter is used in Welsh and Cornish to represent the vowel as well as the related approximant consonant .\nThe following languages historically used \u27e8w\u27e9 for in native words, but later replaced it by \u27e8v\u27e9: Swedish, Finnish, Czech, Slovak, Latvian, Lithuanian, Estonian, Ukrainian \u0141atynka and Belarusian \u0141acinka. It is also used in modern systems of Romanization of Belarusian for the letter \u27e8\u045e\u27e9, for example in the BGN/PCGN system, in contrast to the letter \u27e8\u016d\u27e9, which is used in the Instruction on transliteration of Belarusian geographical names with letters of Latin script.\nIn Swedish and Finnish, traces of this old usage may still be found in proper names. In Hungarian remains in some aristocratic surnames, e.g. Wessel\u00e9nyi.\nModern German dialects generally have only or for West Germanic , but or is still heard allophonically for \u27e8w\u27e9, especially in the clusters \u27e8schw\u27e9, \u27e8zw\u27e9, and \u27e8qu\u27e9. Some Bavarian dialects preserve a \"light\" initial , such as in \"wuoz\" (Standard German \"wei\u00df\" '[I] know'). The Classical Latin is heard in the Southern German greeting \"Servus\" ('hello' or 'goodbye').\nIn Dutch, \u27e8w\u27e9 became a labiodental approximant (with the exception of words with -\u27e8eeuw\u27e9, which have , or other diphthongs containing -\u27e8uw\u27e9). In many Dutch-speaking areas, such as Flanders and Suriname, the pronunciation (or in some areas a pronunciation, e.g. Belgian-Dutch \"water\" \"water\", \"wit\" \"white\", \"eeuw\" \"century\", etc.) is used at all times.\nIn Finnish, \u27e8w\u27e9 is sometimes seen as a variant of \u27e8v\u27e9 and not a separate letter, but it is a part of the official alphabet. It is, however, recognized and maintained in the spelling of some old names, reflecting an earlier German spelling standard, and in some modern loan words. In all cases, it is pronounced . The title of the first edition of the \"Kalevala\" was spelled \"Kalewala\".\nIn Danish, Norwegian and Swedish, \u27e8w\u27e9 is named double-v and not double-u. In these languages, the letter only exists in old names, loanwords and foreign words. (Foreign words are distinguished from loanwords by having a significantly lower level of integration in the language.) It is usually pronounced , but in some words of English origin, it may be pronounced . The letter was officially introduced in the Danish and Swedish alphabets as late as 1980 and 2006, respectively, despite having been in use for much longer. It had been recognized since the conception of modern Norwegian with the earliest official orthography rules of 1907. \u27e8W\u27e9 was earlier seen as a variant of \u27e8v\u27e9, and \u27e8w\u27e9 as a letter (double-v) is still commonly replaced by \u27e8v\u27e9 in speech (e.g. \"WC\" being pronounced as \"VC\", \"www\" as \"VVV\", \"WHO\" as \"VHO\", etc.). The two letters were sorted as equals before \u27e8w\u27e9 was officially recognized, and that practice is still recommended when sorting names in Sweden. In modern slang, some native speakers may pronounce \u27e8w\u27e9 more closely to the origin of the loanword than the official pronunciation.\nMultiple dialects of Swedish and Danish use the sound, however. In Denmark, notably in Jutland, the northern half uses it extensively in traditional dialect, and in multiple places in Sweden. It is used in southern Swedish; for example, the words \"wesp\" (wisp) and \"wann\" (water) are traditionally used in Halland. In northern and western Sweden, there are also dialects with . Elfdalian is a good example, which is one of many dialects where the Old Norse difference between v () and f ( or ) is preserved. Thus, \"warg\" from Old Norse \"vargr\", but \"\u00e5v\u00e5\" from Old Norse \"hafa\".\nIn the alphabets of most modern Romance languages, \u27e8w\u27e9 is used mostly in foreign names and words recently borrowed (Italian \"il watt\", Spanish \"el kiwi\"). In Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese, is a non-syllabic variant of , spelled \u27e8u\u27e9. In French, \u27e8w\u27e9 is also used mostly in foreign names and words recently borrowed such as \"wagon\" or \"week\"(\"-\")\"end\", but in the first case it is pronounced (because of its German origin; except in Belgium, where it is pronounced [w]) and in the second . In most northern French dialects, the former \u27e8w\u27e9 turned finally to \u27e8v\u27e9, but still exists as a remnant in the place-names of Romance Flanders, Picardie, Artois, Champagne, Romance Lorraine and sometimes elsewhere (Normandy, \u00cele-de-France), and in the surnames from the same regions. Walloon as it sounds conserves the \u27e8w\u27e9 pronounced . The digraph \u27e8ou\u27e9 is used to render \u27e8w\u27e9 in rare French words such as \"ouest\" \"west\" and to spell Arabic names transliterated \"-wi\" in English, but \"-oui\" in French (compare Arabic surname Badawi / Badaoui). In all these languages, as in Scandinavian languages mentioned above, the letter is named \"double v\" (French , Spanish ) though in Belgium the name is also used.\nIn Indonesian, the letter \"w\" is called \"w\u00e9\". The letter names in Indonesian are always the same with the sounds they produce, especially the consonants.\nThe Japanese language uses \"W\", pronounced \"daburu\", as an ideogram meaning \"double\". It is also used in internet slang to indicate laughter (like LOL), derived from the word \"warau\" (\u7b11\u3046, meaning \"to laugh\").\nIn Italian, while the letter \u27e8w\u27e9 is not considered part of the standard Italian alphabet, the character is often used in place of \"Viva\" (hooray for...), generally in the form in which the branches of the Vs cross in the middle, at least in handwriting (in fact, it could be considered a monogram). The same symbol written upside down indicates \"abbasso\" (down with...).\nIn the Kokborok language, \u27e8w\u27e9 represents the open-mid back rounded vowel .\nIn Turkey, the use of the \u27e8w\u27e9 was banned between 1928 and 2013 which was a problem for the Kurdish population in Turkey as the \u27e8w\u27e9 was a letter of the Kurdish alphabet. The use of the letter \u27e8w\u27e9 in the word Newroz, the Kurdish new year, was forbidden, and names which included the letter were not able to be used. In 2008, a court in Gaziantep reasoned the use of the letter \u27e8w\u27e9 would incite civil unrest.\nIn Vietnamese, \u27e8w\u27e9 is called ' or (lit.\u2009'double V'), from the French '. It is not included in the standard Vietnamese alphabet, but it is often used as a substitute for \"qu-\" in literary dialect and very informal writing. It's also commonly used for abbreviating \"\u01af\" in formal documents, for example \"Trung \u01af\u01a1ng\" is abbreviated as TW even in official documents and document ID number, derived from the Vietnamese Telex input method that usually interpret a single \"w\" into Vietnamese character \"\u01b0\".\n\"W\" is the 24th letter in the Modern Filipino Alphabet and has its English name. However, in the old Filipino alphabet, Abakada, it was the 19th letter and had the name \"wah\".[]\nIn Washo, lower-case \u27e8w\u27e9 represents a typical sound, while upper-case \u27e8W\u27e9 represents a voiceless w sound, like the difference between English \"weather\" and \"whether\" for those who maintain the distinction.\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8\u27e9 is used for the voiced labial-velar approximant.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33183", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33183", "title": "Woman", "text": "Female adult human\nA woman is an adult female human. Before adulthood, a female child or adolescent is referred to as a girl.\nTypically, women inherit a pair of X chromosomes, one from each parent. Sex differentiation of the female fetus is governed by the lack of a present functioning \"SRY\" gene on either one of the respective sex chromosomes. Female anatomy is distinguished from male anatomy by the female reproductive system, which includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, vagina, and vulva. A woman generally has a wider pelvis, broader hips, and larger breasts than a man. These characteristics can facilitate pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding. Women typically have less facial and other body hair, have a higher body fat composition, and are on average shorter and less muscular than men. Women are at greater risk of certain diseases like breast cancer, and at lower risk of other diseases like lung cancer.\nTransgender women were assigned male at birth. Some women are intersex, meaning they have unusual sex characteristics (chromosomes, genitalia or internal sex organs), such as trisomy X or vaginal atresia.\nThroughout human history, patriarchal gender roles have often limited women's opportunities. With restrictions loosening during the 20th century in many societies, women have gained wider access to careers and education. Violence against women is primarily committed by men. Some women are denied reproductive rights and denied legal rights on the basis of sex. Many religions and governments stipulate certain rules for women. Feminist movements aim to achieve gender equality.\nEtymology.\nThe spelling of \"woman\" in English has progressed over the past millennium from to \"w\u012bmmann\" to \"wumman\", and finally, the modern spelling \"woman\". In Old English, had the gender-neutral meaning of 'human', akin to the Modern 'person' or 'someone'. The word for 'woman' was or (lit.\u2009'woman-person') whereas 'man' was or (from 'weapon; penis'). However, following the Norman Conquest, \"man\" began to mean 'male human', and by the late 13th century it had largely replaced . The consonants and in coalesced into the modern \"woman\", while narrowed to specifically mean a married woman ('wife').\nIt is a popular misconception that the term \"woman\" is etymologically connected to \"womb\". \"Womb\" derives from the Old English word meaning 'belly, uterus' (cognate to the modern German colloquial term \"\" from Old High German for 'belly, paunch, lap').\nTerminology.\nThe word \"woman\" can be used generally, to mean any female human, or specifically, to mean an adult female human as contrasted with \"girl\". The word \"girl\" originally meant \"young person of either sex\" in English; it was only around the beginning of the 16th century that it came to mean specifically a \"female\" child. The term \"girl\" is sometimes used colloquially to refer to a young or unmarried woman; however, during the early 1970s, feminists challenged such use because the use of the word to refer to a fully grown woman may cause offense. In particular, previously common terms such as \"office girl\" are no longer widely used. Conversely, in certain cultures which link family honor with female virginity, the word \"girl\" (or its equivalent in other languages) is still used to refer to a never-married woman; in this sense it is used in a fashion roughly analogous to the more-or-less obsolete English \"maid\" or \"maiden\".\nThe social sciences' views on what it means to be a woman have changed significantly since the early 20th century as women gained more rights and greater representation in the workforce, with scholarship in the 1970s moving toward a focus on the sex\u2013gender distinction and social construction of gender.\nDifferent countries have different laws, but age 18 is frequently considered the age of majority (the age at which a person is legally considered an adult). Menarche, the onset of menstruation, occurs on average at age 12\u201313. Many cultures have rites of passage to symbolize a girl's coming of age, such as bat mitzvah in Judaism, or a custom of a special celebration for a certain birthday (generally between 12 and 21), like the quincea\u00f1era of Latin America.\nAlternative spellings of woman, such as \"womyn\" and \"wimmin\" have been used in feminist contexts, especially since the 1970s.\nBiology.\nGenetic characteristics.\nTypically, the cells of female humans contain two X chromosomes, while the cells of male humans have an X and a Y chromosome. During early fetal development, all embryos have phenotypically female genitalia up until week 6 or 7, when a male embryo's gonads differentiate into testes due to the action of the \"SRY\" gene on the Y chromosome. Sex differentiation proceeds in female humans in a way that is independent of gonadal hormones. Because humans inherit mitochondrial DNA only from the mother's ovum, genealogical researchers can trace maternal lineage far back in time.\nPuberty, menstruation and menopause.\nFemale puberty triggers many bodily changes. In response to chemical signals from the pituitary gland, the ovaries secrete hormones that stimulate maturation of the body, including increased height and weight, body hair growth, breast development and menarche (the onset of menstruation). Most girls go through menarche between ages 12\u201313.\nMenstruation is a monthly hormonal cycle that involves the shedding of the lining of the uterus. Blood and tissue exit through the vagina. Menstrual cycles may be irregular at first, and usually become more regular by a woman's 20s. Most women are able to perform all their daily activities during menstruation, though some women experience symptoms ranging from uncomfortable to disabling or are prohibited from regular activity by strong social stigma.\nThe changes of puberty typically enable sexual reproduction. Pregnancy generally requires fertilization of a woman's egg cells with a man's sperm cells. Humans are similar to other large mammals in that they usually give birth to a single offspring per pregnancy, but are unusual in being altricial, meaning young are undeveloped at time of birth and require the aid of their parents or guardians to fully mature. Sometimes humans have multiple births, most commonly twins.\nUsually between ages 49\u201352, a woman reaches menopause, the time when menstrual periods\u00a0stop permanently, and they are no longer\u00a0able to bear children. Symptoms of menopause include hot flashes, night sweats, headaches, and more; both lifestyle changes and medications can help to mitigate these symptoms.\nMorphological and physiological characteristics.\nIn terms of biology, the female sex organs are involved in the reproductive system, whereas the secondary sex characteristics are involved in breastfeeding children and attracting a mate. Humans are placental mammals, which means the mother carries the fetus in the uterus and the placenta facilitates the exchange of nutrients and waste between the mother and fetus.\nThe internal female sex organs consist of:\nThe vulva (external female genitalia) consists of the clitoris, labia majora, labia minora and vestibule. The vestibule is where the vaginal and urethral openings are located.\nThe mammary glands are hypothesized to have evolved from apocrine-like glands to produce milk, a nutritious secretion that is the most distinctive characteristic of mammals, along with live birth. In mature women, the breast is generally more prominent than in most other mammals; this prominence, not necessary for milk production, is thought to be at least partially the result of sexual selection.\nEstrogens, which are primary female sex hormones, have a significant impact on a female's body shape. They are produced in both men and women, but their levels are significantly higher in women, especially in those of reproductive age. Besides other functions, estrogens promote the development of female secondary sexual characteristics, such as breasts and hips. As a result of estrogens, during puberty, girls develop breasts and their hips widen. Working against estrogen, the presence of testosterone in a pubescent female inhibits breast development and promotes muscle and facial hair development.\nCirculatory system.\nWomen have lower hematocrit (the volume percentage of red blood cells in blood) than men; this is due to lower testosterone, which stimulates the production of erythropoietin by the kidney. The normal hematocrit level for a woman is 36% to 48% (for men, 41% to 50%). The normal level of hemoglobin (an oxygen-transport protein found in red blood cells) for women is 12.0 to 15.5 g/dL (for men, 13.5 to 17.5 g/dL).\nWomen's hearts have finer-grained textures in the muscle compared to men's hearts, and the heart muscle's overall shape and surface area also differs to men's when controlling for body size and age. In addition, women's hearts age more slowly compared to men's hearts.\nSex distribution.\nGirls are born slightly less frequently than boys (the ratio is around 1:1.05). Out of the total human population in 2015, there were 1018 men for every 1000 women.\nIntersex women.\nIntersex women have an intersex condition, usually defined as those born with ambiguous genitalia, atypical chromosomes, or atypical gonads. Most individuals with ambiguous genitalia are assigned female at birth, and most intersex women are cisgender. The medical practices to assign binary female to intersex youth is often controversial.\nSome intersex conditions are associated with typical rates of female gender identity, while others are associated with substantially higher rates of gender transition compared to the general population.\nFor example, women with CAIS showed no psychological differences from non-intersex women, including in gender identity or orientation. Women with other intersex conditions, such as 5alpha-RD-2 or 17beta-HSD-3, showed increased rates of gender transition to live as men.\nGender.\nMost cultures use a gender binary by which women are of one of two genders, the others being men; other cultures have a third gender. \n\"Femininity\" (also called \"womanliness\" or \"girlishness\") is a set of attributes, behaviors, and roles generally associated with women and girls. Different people have held femininity to be socially constructed, biologically influenced, or on some point in the spectrum between \"nature\" and \"nurture\". It is distinct from the definition of the biological female sex, as both men and women can exhibit feminine traits.\nMost women are cisgender, meaning their female sex assignment at birth corresponds with their female gender identity. Some women are transgender, meaning they were assigned male at birth. Trans women may experience gender dysphoria, the distress brought upon by the discrepancy between a person's gender identity and their sex assigned at birth. Gender dysphoria may be treated with gender-affirming care, which may include social or medical transition. Social transition may involve changes such as adopting a new name, hairstyle, clothing, and pronoun associated with the individual's affirmed female gender identity. A major component of medical transition for trans women is feminizing hormone therapy, which causes the development of female secondary sex characteristics (such as breasts, redistribution of body fat, and lower waist\u2013hip ratio). Medical transition may also involve gender-affirming surgery, and a trans woman may undergo one or more feminizing procedures which result in anatomy that is typically gendered female.\nHealth.\nFactors that specifically affect the health of women in comparison with men are most evident in those related to reproduction, but sex differences have been identified from the molecular to the behavioral scale. Some of these differences are subtle and difficult to explain, partly due to the fact that it is difficult to separate the health effects of inherent biological factors from the effects of the surrounding environment they exist in. Sex chromosomes and hormones, as well as sex-specific lifestyles, metabolism, immune system function, and sensitivity to environmental factors are believed to contribute to sex differences in health at the levels of physiology, perception, and cognition. Women can have distinct responses to drugs and thresholds for diagnostic parameters.\nThe medical practice dealing with female reproduction and reproductive organs is called gynaecology (etymologically, \"science of women\").\nDisease Risk.\nWomen have higher rates of some diseases, such as osteoporosis, auto-immune diseases, Alzheimer's, and breast cancer. \nWomen have lower rates of other diseases, such as lung cancer, Parkinson's, chronic liver disease, hypertension, diabetes, and HIV/AIDS.\nSome female-specific diseases include endometriosis. PCOS, and gynecologic cancers such as uterine or cervical cancer.\nMaternal mortality.\nMaternal mortality or maternal death is defined by WHO as \"the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management but not from accidental or incidental causes.\" \nBetween 2000 and 2023, the rate of maternal mortality dropped by 40% worldwide. In 2023, around 260,000 women died from complications of pregnancy, delivery, or abortion. Over 90% of maternal mortality deaths occurred in low-income or lower-middle income countries, with sub-Saharan African and South Asian women accounting for 87% of the deaths. Most of these deaths were preventable. Maternal mortality can be reduced by ensuring pregnant women have adequate healthcare access, administering medications for preeclampsia and hemorrhage, and using good sanitation practices during delivery.\nLife expectancy.\nThe life expectancy for women is generally longer than men's. This advantage begins from birth, with newborn girls more likely to survive the first year than boys. Worldwide, women live six to eight years longer than men. However, this varies by place and situation. For example, discrimination against women has lowered female life expectancy in some parts of Asia so that men there live longer than women.\nThe difference in life expectancy are believed to be partly due to biological advantages and partly due to gendered behavioral differences between men and women. On average, women are less likely to engage in unhealthy behaviors like smoking and alcohol use, and consequently have fewer preventable premature deaths from such causes.\nIn some developed countries, the life expectancy is evening out. This is believed to caused both by worse health behaviors among women, especially an increased rate of smoking tobacco by women, and improved health among men, such as less cardiovascular disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) writes that it is \"important to note that the extra years of life for women are not always lived in good health.\"\nThe fact that humans live a significant amount past reproductive age is unusual for mammals. Many elderly women contribute to the care of grandchildren and other family members, and many biologists believe that the extended human lifespan is evolutionarily driven by kin selection, though other theories have also been proposed.\nReproductive rights.\nReproductive rights are legal rights and freedoms relating to reproduction and reproductive health. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics has stated that:\n... the human rights of women include their right to have control over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination and violence. Equal relationships between women and men in matters of sexual relations and reproduction, including full respect for the integrity of the person, require mutual respect, consent and shared responsibility for sexual behavior and its consequences.\nThe World Health Organization reports that based on data from 2010 to 2014, 56 million induced abortions occurred worldwide each year (25% of all pregnancies). Of those, about 25\u00a0million were considered as unsafe. The WHO reports that in developed regions about 30 women die for every 100,000 unsafe abortions and that number rises to 220 deaths per 100,000 unsafe abortions in developing regions and 520 deaths per 100,000 unsafe abortions in sub-Saharan Africa. The WHO ascribes these deaths to:\nHistory.\nThe earliest women whose names are known include:\nThe glyph (\u2640) for the planet and Roman goddess Venus, or Aphrodite in Greek, is the symbol used to represent the female sex. In ancient alchemy, the Venus symbol stood for copper and was associated with femininity.\nCulture and gender roles.\nIn recent history, gender roles have changed greatly. At some earlier points in history, children's occupational aspirations starting at a young age differed according to gender. Traditionally, middle class women were involved in domestic tasks emphasizing child care. For poorer women, economic necessity compelled them to seek employment outside the home even if individual poor women may have preferred domestic tasks. Many of the occupations that were available to them were lower in pay than those available to men.\nAs changes in the labor market for women came about, availability of employment changed from only \"dirty\", long hour factory jobs to \"cleaner\", more respectable office jobs where more education was demanded. Married women's participation in the U.S. labor force rose from 5.6\u20136% in 1900 to 23.8% in 1923.\nIn the 1970s, many female academics, including scientists, avoided having children. Throughout the 1980s, institutions tried to equalize conditions for men and women in the workplace. Even so, the inequalities at home hampered women's opportunities: professional women were still generally considered responsible for domestic labor and child care, which limited the time and energy they could devote to their careers. Until the early 20th century, U.S. women's colleges required their women faculty members to remain single, on the grounds that a woman could not carry on two full-time professions at once. According to Schiebinger, \"Being a scientist and a wife and a mother is a burden in society that expects women more often than men to put family ahead of career.\" (p.\u00a093).\nMovements advocate equality of opportunity for both sexes and equal rights irrespective of gender. Through a combination of economic changes and the efforts of the feminist movement, in recent decades women in many societies have gained access to careers beyond the traditional homemaker. Despite these advances, modern women in Western society still face challenges in the workplace as well as with the topics of education, violence, health care, politics, and motherhood, and others. Sexism can be a main concern and barrier for women almost anywhere, though its forms, perception, and gravity vary between societies and social classes.\nThe Gender Parity Index in school enrollment varies by country. The gender gaps in mathematics and reading show girls tend to have higher reading skills. The gender pay gap varies between countries and age groups.\nViolence against women.\nThe UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women defines \"violence against women\" as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.\nIt identifies three forms of such violence: that which occurs \"in the family\", that which occurs \"within the general community\", and that which is perpetrated or condoned \"by the State\". It also states that \"violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men and women\".\nViolence against women remains a widespread problem, fueled, especially outside the West, by patriarchal social values, lack of adequate laws, and lack of enforcement of existing laws. Social norms that exist in many parts of the world hinder progress towards protecting women from violence. For example, according to surveys by UNICEF, the percentage of women aged 15\u201349 who think that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under certain circumstances is as high as 90% in Afghanistan and Jordan, 87% in Mali, 86% in Guinea and Timor-Leste, 81% in Laos, and 80% in the Central African Republic. A 2010 survey conducted by the Pew Research Center found that stoning as a punishment for adultery was supported by 82% of respondents in Egypt and Pakistan, 70% in Jordan, 56% Nigeria, and 42% in Indonesia.\nSpecific forms of violence that affect women include female genital mutilation, sex trafficking, forced prostitution, forced marriage, rape, sexual harassment, honor killings, acid throwing, and dowry related violence. Laws and policies on violence against women vary by jurisdiction. In the European Union, sexual harassment and human trafficking are subject to directives. Governments can be complicit in violence against women, such as when stoning is used as a legal punishment, mostly for women accused of adultery.\nThere have also been many forms of violence against women which have been prevalent historically, notably the burning of witches, the sacrifice of widows (such as sati) and foot binding. The prosecution of women accused of witchcraft has a long tradition; for example, during the early modern period (between the 15th and 18th centuries), witch trials were common in Europe and in the European colonies in North America. Today, there remain regions of the world (such as parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, rural North India, and Papua New Guinea) where belief in witchcraft is held by many people, and women accused of being witches are subjected to serious violence. In addition, there are also countries which have criminal legislation against the practice of witchcraft. In Saudi Arabia, witchcraft remains a crime punishable by death, and in 2011 the country beheaded a woman for 'witchcraft and sorcery'.\nIt is also the case that certain forms of violence against women have been recognized as criminal offences only during recent decades, and are not universally prohibited, in that many countries continue to allow them. This is especially the case with marital rape. In the Western World, there has been a trend towards ensuring gender equality within marriage and prosecuting domestic violence, but in many parts of the world women still lose significant legal rights when entering a marriage.\nSexual violence against women greatly increases during times of war and armed conflict, during military occupation, or ethnic conflicts; most often in the form of war rape and sexual slavery. Contemporary examples of sexual violence during war include rape during the Armenian genocide, rape during the Bangladesh Liberation War, rape in the Bosnian War, rape during the Rwandan genocide, and rape during Second Congo War. In Colombia, the armed conflict has also resulted in increased sexual violence against women. The most recent case was the sexual jihad done by ISIL where 5000\u20137000 Yazidi and Christian girls and children were sold into sexual slavery during the genocide and rape of Yazidi and Christian women, some of whom jumped to their death from Mount Sinjar, as described in a witness statement.\nFertility and family life.\nThe total fertility rate (TFR)\u00a0\u2013 the average number of children born to a woman over her lifetime\u00a0\u2013 differs significantly between different regions of the world. In 2016, the highest estimated TFR was in Niger (6.62 children born per woman) and the lowest in Singapore (0.82 children/woman). While most Sub-Saharan African countries have a high TFR, which creates problems due to lack of resources and contributes to overpopulation, most Western countries currently experience a sub replacement fertility rate which may lead to population ageing and population decline.\nIn many parts of the world, there has been a change in family structure over the past few decades. For instance, in the West, there has been a trend of moving away from living arrangements that include the extended family to those which only consist of the nuclear family. There has also been a trend to move from marital fertility to non-marital fertility. Children born outside marriage may be born to cohabiting couples or to single women. While births outside marriage are common and fully accepted in some parts of the world, in other places they are highly stigmatized, with unmarried mothers facing ostracism, including violence from family members, and in extreme cases even honor killings. In addition, sex outside marriage remains illegal in many countries (such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Mauritania, United Arab Emirates, Sudan, and Yemen).\nThe social role of the mother differs between cultures. In many parts of the world, women with dependent children are expected to stay at home and dedicate all their energy to child raising, while in other places mothers most often return to paid work (see working mother and stay-at-home mother).\nEducation.\nSingle-sex education has traditionally been dominant and is still highly relevant. Universal education, meaning state-provided primary and secondary education independent of gender, is not yet a global norm, even if it is assumed in most developed countries. In some Western countries, women have surpassed men at many levels of education. For example, in the United States in 2005/2006, women earned 62% of associate degrees, 58% of bachelor's degrees, 60% of master's degrees, and 50% of doctorates.\nIn 2020, 87% of the world's women were literate, compared to 90% of men; at the same time, only 59% of women in sub-Saharan Africa were literate. The educational gender gap in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries has been reduced over the last 30 years. Younger women today are far more likely to have completed a tertiary qualification: in 19 of the 30 OECD countries, more than twice as many women aged 25 to 34 have completed tertiary education than have women aged 55 to 64. In 21 of 27 OECD countries with comparable data, the number of women graduating from university-level programmes is equal to or exceeds that of men. 15-year-old girls tend to show much higher expectations for their careers than boys of the same age.\nWhile women account for more than half of university graduates in several OECD countries, they receive only 30% of tertiary degrees granted in science and engineering fields, and women account for only 25% to 35% of researchers in most OECD countries.\nResearch shows that while women are studying at prestigious universities at the same rate as men they are not being given the same chance to join the faculty. Sociologist Harriet Zuckerman has observed that the more prestigious an institute is, the more difficult and time-consuming it will be for women to obtain a faculty position there. In 1989, Harvard University tenured its first woman in chemistry, Cynthia Friend, and in 1992 its first woman in physics, Melissa Franklin. She also observed that women were more likely to hold their first professional positions as instructors and lecturers while men are more likely to work first in tenure positions. According to Smith and Tang, as of 1989, 65% of men and only 40% of women held tenured positions and only 29% of all scientists and engineers employed as assistant professors in four-year colleges and universities were women. Women show a drop in self-esteem in the first year of college. In the Soviet Union, 40% of chemistry PhDs went to women in the 1960s.\nIn 1992, women earned 9% of the PhDs awarded in engineering, but only one percent of those women became professors. In 1995, 11% of professors in science and engineering were women. In relation, only 311 deans of engineering schools were women, which is less than 1% of the total. Even in psychology, a degree in which women earn the majority of PhDs, they hold a significant amount of fewer tenured positions, roughly 19% in 1994.\nGovernment and politics.\n Women are underrepresented in government in most countries. In January 2019, the global average of women in national assemblies was 24.3%. \nSuffrage is the civil right to vote, and women's suffrage movements have a long historic timeline. As an early example, in districts of Friesland, in the Netherlands, women began voting in 1689. On the other end of the spectrum, in Kuwait women gained the right to vote in 2005, and in Saudi Arabia women gained the right to vote in 2015. Organizations that fought for women's right to vote in different countries are numerous, from Switzerland's Association internationale des femmes (which was formed in 1868) to Liechtenstein's Komit\u00e9e f\u00fcr das Frauenstimmrecht (founded in 1969). As of 2025, the Vatican City only allows women to vote in limited lay capacity, and other countries such as Afghanistan lack functional democracies entirely.\nScience, literature and art.\nScience and medicine.\nWomen have historically had access to practice midwifery, obstetrics and gynecology. In Europe, prior to the 18th century, caring for pregnant women was undertaken by other women. However, from the mid-18th century onwards, society began to require rigorous formal education to practice medicine. Since women were prohibited from higher education, women's reproductive healthcare was transferred to male practitioners.\nEarly women in other scientific fields include Hypatia (b. 350-370 CE), a mathematician and astronomer who edited the \"Almagest\".\nLiterature.\nThe earliest author known by name was an Akkadian woman named Enheduanna, who wrote in the 23rd century BCE. Ghosha, an Indian composer of hymns in the Rigveda, was active around 1500-900 BCE. The first recorded female Chinese poet was Duchess Mu of Xu, who wrote in the 7th century BCE. The Tale of Genji, one of the earliest novel-like works and sometimes called \"the first novel\", was written by the Japanese Murasaki Shikibu in the 11th century CE. \nIn Western society, writing was generally considered acceptable for upper-class women. However, achieving success as a female writer in a male-dominated world could be very difficult; as a result, some women writers adopted male pen names (e.g. George Sand, George Eliot, Currer Bell, Ellis Bell, Acton Bell, and Vernon Lee). This has continued into more modern times, with 20th-century writers such as Andre Norton and James Tiptree Jr adopting male pseudonyms, and some authors such as J.K. Rowling and Harper Lee adopting purposefully unisex pen names.\nMusic.\nWomen have been composers, songwriters, instrumental performers, singers, conductors, music scholars, music educators, music critics/music journalists and other musical professions. There are music movements, events and genres related to women, women's issues and feminism. In the 2010s, while women comprise a significant proportion of popular music and classical music singers, and a significant proportion of songwriters (many of them being singer-songwriters), there are few women record producers, rock critics and rock instrumentalists. Although there have been a huge number of women composers in classical music, from the Medieval period to the present day, women composers are significantly underrepresented in the commonly performed classical music repertoire, music history textbooks and music encyclopedias; for example, in the \"Concise Oxford History of Music\", Clara Schumann is one of the only female composers who is mentioned.\nWomen comprise a significant proportion of instrumental soloists in classical music and the percentage of women in orchestras is increasing. A 2015 article on concerto soloists in major Canadian orchestras, however, indicated that 84% of the soloists with the Montreal Symphony Orchestra were men. In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the top-ranked Vienna Philharmonic orchestra. Women are less common as instrumental players in popular music genres such as rock and heavy metal, although there have been a number of notable female instrumentalists and all-female bands. Women are particularly underrepresented in extreme metal genres. Women are also underrepresented in orchestral conducting, music criticism/music journalism, music producing, and sound engineering. While women were discouraged from composing in the 19th century, and there are few women musicologists, women became involved in music education \"... to such a degree that women dominated [this field] during the later half of the 19th century and well into the 20th century.\"\nAccording to Jessica Duchen, a music writer for London's \"The Independent\", women musicians in classical music are \"... too often judged for their appearances, rather than their talent\" and they face pressure \"... to look sexy onstage and in photos.\" Duchen states that while \"[t]here are women musicians who refuse to play on their looks, ... the ones who do tend to be more materially successful.\"\nAccording to the UK's Radio 3 editor, Edwina Wolstencroft, the classical music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles, but women are much less likely to have positions of authority, such as being the leader of an orchestra. In popular music, while there are many women singers recording songs, there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers, the individuals who direct and manage the recording process.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33185", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33185", "title": "WikiWeb", "text": ""}
{"id": "33186", "revid": "10728040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33186", "title": "Waffen-SS", "text": "Military branch of the SS (1933\u20131945)\nThe (; lit.\u2009'Armed SS') was the combat branch of the Nazi Party's paramilitary \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) organisation. Its formations included men from Nazi Germany, along with volunteers and conscripts from both German-occupied Europe and unoccupied lands. With the start of World War II, tactical control was exercised by the (OKW, \"High Command of the Armed Forces\"), with some units being subordinated to the (lit.\u2009'Command Staff Reich Leader-SS') directly under Heinrich Himmler's control. It was disbanded in May 1945.\nThe grew from three regiments to over 38 divisions during World War II. Combining combat and police functions, it served alongside the German Army (\"Heer\"), \"Ordnungspolizei\" (Order Police), and other security units. Originally, it was under the control of the (SS operational command office) beneath Himmler.\nInitially, in keeping with the racial policy of Nazi Germany, membership was open only to people of Germanic origin (so-called \"Aryan ancestry\"). The rules were partially relaxed in 1940, and after the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, Nazi propaganda claimed that the war was a \"European crusade against Bolshevism\" and subsequently units consisting largely or solely of foreign volunteers and conscripts were also raised. These units were made up of men mainly from among the nationals of Nazi-occupied Europe. Despite relaxation of the rules, the was still based on the racist ideology of Nazism, and ethnic Poles (who were viewed as subhumans) were specifically barred from the formations.\nThe were involved in numerous atrocities. It was declared a criminal organisation by the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg in 1946, due to its involvement in the Holocaust, the Porajmos, and numerous war crimes and crimes against the civilian population, including torture, human experimentation, kidnapping of children, mass rape, child sexual abuse and mass murder. Therefore members, with the exception of conscripts, who comprised about one-third of the membership, were denied many of the rights afforded to military veterans. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigins (1929\u201339).\nThe origins of the \"Waffen-SS\" can be traced back to the selection of a group of 120 SS men on 17 March 1933 by Sepp Dietrich to form the \"Sonderkommando\" Berlin. By November 1933 the formation had 800 men, and at a commemorative ceremony in Munich for the tenth anniversary of the failed Beer Hall Putsch the regiment swore allegiance to Adolf Hitler. The oaths pledged were \"Pledging loyalty to him alone\" and \"Obedience unto death\". The formation was given the title (transl.\u2009Bodyguard Regiment) \"Adolf Hitler\" (LAH). On 13 April 1934, by order of Himmler, the regiment became known as the \"Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler\" (LSSAH).\nThe demonstrated their loyalty to Hitler in 1934 during the \"Night of the Long Knives\", when the Nazi regime carried out a series of political murders and the purge of the (SA). Led by one of Hitler's oldest comrades, Ernst R\u00f6hm, the SA was seen as a threat by Hitler to his newly gained political power. Hitler also wanted to appease leaders of the \"Reichswehr\" (the Weimar Republic's armed forces) and conservatives of the country, people whose support Hitler needed to solidify his position. When Hitler decided to act against the SA, the SS was put in charge of killing R\u00f6hm and the other high-ranking SA officers. The Night of the Long Knives occurred between 30 June and 2 July 1934, claiming up to 200 victims and murdering almost the entire SA leadership, effectively ending its power. This action was largely carried out by SS personnel (including the ) and the Gestapo.\nIn September 1934, Hitler authorised the formation of the paramilitary wing of the Nazi Party and approved the formation of the (SS-VT), a special service troop under Hitler's overall command. The SS-VT had to depend on the German Army for its supply of weapons and military training, and its local draft boards responsible for assigning conscripts to the different branches of the \"Wehrmacht\" to meet quotas set by the German High Command ( or OKW in German); the SS was given the lowest priority for recruits.\nEven with the difficulties presented by the quota system, Heinrich Himmler formed two new SS regiments, the and , which together with the and a communications unit made up the SS-VT. At the same time Himmler established two SS-Junker Schools (SS officer training camps) that, under the direction of former Lieutenant General Paul Hausser, prepared future SS leaders. In addition to military training, the courses aimed to instill a proper ideological worldview, with antisemitism being the main tenet. Instructors such as Matthias Kleinheisterkamp, or future war criminals, such as Franz Magill of the notorious SS Cavalry Brigade were of questionable competence.\nIn 1934, Himmler set stringent requirements for recruits. They were to be German nationals who could prove their Aryan ancestry back to 1800, unmarried, and without a criminal record. A four-year commitment was required for the SS-VT and LSSAH. Recruits had to be between the ages of 17 and 23, at least tall ( for the LSSAH). Concentration camp guards had to make a one-year commitment, be between the ages of 16 and 23, and at least tall. All recruits were required to have 20/20 eyesight, no dental fillings, and to provide a medical certificate. By 1938, the height restrictions were relaxed, up to six dental fillings were permitted, and eyeglasses for astigmatism and mild vision correction were allowed. Once the war commenced, the physical requirements were no longer strictly enforced, and any recruit who could pass a basic medical exam was considered for service. Members of the SS could be of any religion except Judaism, but atheists were not allowed according to Himmler in 1937. Hitler expounded on the attitude he wanted during a talk in the Wolf's Lair: \"I have six divisions of SS composed of men absolutely indifferent in matters of religion. It doesn't prevent them from going to their deaths with serenity in their souls.\"\nHistorian Bernd Wegner found in his study of officers that a large majority of the senior officers corps of the were from an upper-middle-class background and would have been considered for commissioning by traditional standards. Among later generals, approximately six out of ten had a \"university entrance qualification (Abitur), and no less than one-fifth a university degree\".\nHausser became the Inspector of the SS-VT in 1936. In this role, Hausser was in charge of the troops' military and ideological training but did not have command authority. The decision on deployment of the troops remained in Himmler's hands. This aligned with Hitler's intentions to maintain these troops exclusively at his disposal, \"neither [a part] of the army, nor of the police\", according to Hitler's order of 17 August 1938.\nOn 17 August 1938, Hitler declared that the SS-VT would have a role in domestic as well as foreign affairs, which transformed this growing armed force into the rival that the army had feared. He decreed that service in the SS-VT qualified to fulfill military service obligations, although service in the (SS-TV) would not. Some units of the SS-TV would, in the case of war, be used as reserves for the SS-VT, which did not have its own reserves. For all its training, the SS-VT was untested in combat. In 1938, a battalion of the was chosen to accompany the army troops in occupying Austria during the \"Anschluss\", and the three regiments of the SS-VT participated in the occupation of the Sudetenland that same year in October. In both actions no resistance was met.\nRecruiting ethnic Germans from other countries began in April 1940, and units consisting of non-Germanic recruits were formed beginning in 1942. Non-Germanic units were not considered to be part of the SS, which still maintained its racial criteria, but rather were considered to be foreign nationals serving under the command of the SS. As a general rule, an \"SS Division\" was made up of Germans or other Germanic peoples, while a \"Division of the SS\" was made up of non-Germanic volunteers and conscripts.\nWorld War II.\n1939.\nInvasion of Poland.\nHimmler's military formations at the outbreak of the war comprised several subgroups that would become the basis of the \"Waffen-SS\":\nIn August 1939, Hitler placed the and the SS-VT under the operational control of the Army High Command (OKH). Himmler retained command of the for employment behind the advancing combat units in what were euphemistically called \"special tasks of a police nature\".\nIn spite of the swift military victory over Poland in September 1939, the regular army felt that the performance of the SS-VT left much to be desired; its units took unnecessary risks and had a higher casualty rate than the army. They also stated that the SS-VT was poorly trained and its officers unsuitable for combat command. As an example, the OKW noted that the had to be rescued by an army regiment after becoming surrounded by the Poles at Pabianice. In its defence, the SS insisted that it had been hampered by having to fight piecemeal instead of as one formation, and was improperly equipped by the army to carry out its objectives. Himmler insisted that the SS-VT should be allowed to fight in its own formations under its own commanders, while the OKW tried to have the SS-VT disbanded altogether. Hitler was unwilling to upset either the army or Himmler, and chose a third path. He ordered that the SS-VT form its own divisions but that the divisions would be under army command. Hitler resisted integrating the \"Waffen-SS\" into the army, as it was intended to remain the armed wing of the party and to become an elite police force once the war was won.\nDuring the invasion, numerous war crimes were committed against the Polish people. The became notorious for torching villages without military justification. Members of the also committed atrocities in numerous towns, including the murder of 50 Polish Jews in B\u0142onie and the massacre of 200 civilians, including children, who were machine gunned in Z\u0142oczew. Shootings also took place in Boles\u0142awiec, Torzeniec, Goworowo, M\u0142awa, and W\u0142oc\u0142awek. Eicke's SS-TV field forces were not military. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their military capabilities were employed instead in terrorizing the civilian population through acts that included hunting down straggling Polish soldiers, confiscating agricultural produce and livestock, and torturing and murdering large numbers of Polish political leaders, aristocrats, businessmen, priests, intellectuals, and Jews.\nHis troops were called on to carry out \"police and security measures\" in the rear areas. What these measures involved is demonstrated by the record of \"SS Totenkopf Standarte \"Brandenburg\"\". It arrived in W\u0142oc\u0142awek on 22 September 1939 and embarked on a four-day \"Jewish action\" that included the burning of synagogues and the execution en-masse of the leaders of the Jewish community. On 29 September the \"Standarte\" travelled to Bydgoszcz to conduct an \"intelligentsia action\".\nFirst divisions.\nIn October 1939, the \"Deutschland\", \"Germania\", and \"Der F\u00fchrer\" regiments were reorganised into the \"SS-Verf\u00fcgungs-Division\". The remained independent and was increased in strength to a reinforced motorised regiment. Hitler authorised the creation of two new divisions: the SS \"Totenkopf\" Division, formed from militarised \"Standarten\" of the \"SS-Totenkopfverb\u00e4nde\", and the Polizei Division, formed from members of the national police force. Almost overnight the force that the OKW had tried to disband had increased from 18,000 to over 100,000 men. Hitler next authorised the creation of four motorised artillery battalions in March 1940, one for each division and the . The OKW was supposed to supply these new battalions with artillery, but was reluctant to hand over guns from its own arsenal. The weapons arrived only slowly and, by the time of the Battle of France, only the battalion was up to strength.\n1940.\nFrance and the Netherlands.\nThe three SS divisions and the spent the winter of 1939 and the spring of 1940 training and preparing for the coming war in the west. In May, they moved to the front, and the was attached to the army's 227th Infantry Division. The \"Der F\u00fchrer\" Regiment was detached from the SS-VT Division and attached to the 207th Infantry Division. The SS-VT Division minus \"Der F\u00fchrer\" was concentrated near M\u00fcnster awaiting the invasion of the Netherlands. The SS \"Totenkopf\" and Polizei Divisions were held in reserve.\nOn 10 May, the overcame Dutch border guards to spearhead the German advance of X Corps into the Netherlands, north of the rivers towards the Dutch Grebbe Line and subsequently the Amsterdam region. The neighbouring \"Der F\u00fchrer\" Regiment advanced towards the Grebbe Line in the sector of the Grebbeberg with as a follow-up objective the city of Utrecht. The Battle of the Grebbeberg lasted three days and took a toll on \"Der F\u00fchrer\". On 11 May, the SS-VT Division crossed into the Netherlands south of the rivers and headed towards Breda. It fought a series of skirmishes before \"Germania\" advanced into the Dutch province of Zeeland on 14 May. The rest of the SS-VT Division joined the northern front against the forces in Antwerp. On the same day, the entered Rotterdam. After the surrender of Rotterdam, the left for The Hague, which they reached on 15 May, capturing 3,500 Dutch soldiers as prisoners of war.\nIn France, the SS \"Totenkopf\" Division was involved in the only Allied tank counterattack in the Battle of France. On 21 May, units of the 1st Army Tank Brigade, supported by the 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division, took part in the Battle of Arras. The SS \"Totenkopf\", on the southern flank of the 7th Panzer Division, was overrun, finding their standard anti-tank gun, the 3.7 cm PaK 36, was no match for the British Matilda II tank.\nAfter the Dutch surrender, the moved south to France on 24 May. Becoming part of the XIX Panzer Corps under the command of General Heinz Guderian, they took up a position 15 miles south west of Dunkirk along the line of the Aa Canal, facing the Allied defensive line near Watten. A patrol from the SS-VT Division crossed the canal at Saint-Venant, but was destroyed by British armour. A larger force from the SS-VT Division then crossed the canal and formed a bridgehead at Saint-Venant; 30 miles from Dunkirk. That night the OKW ordered the advance to halt, with the British Expeditionary Force trapped. The paused for the night. However, on the following day, in defiance of Hitler's orders, Dietrich ordered his 3rd Battalion to cross the canal and take the heights beyond, where British artillery observers were putting the regiment at risk. They assaulted the heights and drove the observers off. Instead of being censured for his act of defiance, Dietrich was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross. On that same day, British forces attacked Saint-Venant, forcing the SS-VT Division to retreat.\nOn 26 May, the German advance resumed. On 27 May, the \"Deutschland\" Regiment of the SS-VT Division reached the Allied defensive line on the Leie River at Merville. They forced a bridgehead across the river and waited for the SS \"Totenkopf\" Division to arrive to cover their flank. What arrived first was a unit of British tanks, which penetrated their position. The SS-VT managed to hold on against the British tank force, which got to within 15 feet of commander Felix Steiner's position. Only the arrival of the \"Totenkopf\" \"Panzerj\u00e4ger\" platoon saved the \"Deutschland\" Regiment from being destroyed and their bridgehead lost.\nThat same day, as the SS \"Totenkopf\" Division advanced near Merville, they encountered stubborn resistance from British Army units, which slowed their advance. The SS \"Totenkopf\" 4 Company, then committed the Le Paradis massacre, where 97 captured men of the 2nd Battalion, Royal Norfolk Regiment were machine gunned after surrendering, with survivors finished off with bayonets. Only two men survived.\nBy 28 May, the had taken the village of Wormhout, only ten miles from Dunkirk. After their surrender, soldiers from the 2nd Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment, along with some other units (including French soldiers), were taken to a barn in \"La Plaine au Bois\" near Wormhout and Esquelbecq. It was there that troops of the 's 2nd Battalion committed the Wormhoudt massacre, where 81 British and French prisoners of war were murdered.\nBy 30 May, the British were cornered at Dunkirk, and the SS divisions continued the advance into France. The reached Saint-\u00c9tienne, 250 miles south of Paris, and had advanced further into France than any other unit. By the next day, the fighting was all but over. German forces arrived in Paris unopposed on 14 June and France formally surrendered on 25 June. Hitler expressed his pleasure with the performance of the in the Netherlands and France, telling them, \"Henceforth it will be an honour for you, who bear my name, to lead every German attack.\"\n1940 expansion and naming.\nOn 19 July 1940, Hitler gave a speech to the \"Reichstag\", where he gave a summary of the western campaign and praised the German forces involved. He used the term \"Waffen-SS\" when describing the units of the LSSAH and SS-VT that took part. From that day forward, the term \"Waffen-SS\" became the official designation for the SS combat formations. Himmler gained approval for the \"Waffen-SS\" to form its own high command, the \"Kommandoamt der Waffen-SS\" within the \"SS F\u00fchrungshauptamt\", which was created in August 1940. It received command of the SS-VT (the and the \"Verf\u00fcgungs-Division\", renamed \"Reich\") and the armed SS-TV regiments (the \"Totenkopf\" Division together with several independent \"Totenkopf-Standarten\").\nIn 1940, SS chief of staff Gottlob Berger approached Himmler with a plan to recruit volunteers in the conquered territories from the ethnic German and Germanic populations. At first, Hitler had doubts about recruiting foreigners, but he was persuaded by Himmler and Berger. He gave approval for a new division to be formed from foreign nationals with German officers. By June 1940, Danish and Norwegian volunteers had formed the SS Regiment \"Nordland\", with Dutch and Flemish volunteers forming the SS Regiment \"Westland\". The two regiments, together with \"Germania\" (transferred from the \"Reich\" Division), formed the SS Division \"Wiking\". A sufficient number of volunteers came forward requiring the SS to open a new training camp just for foreign volunteers at Sennheim in Alsace-Lorraine.\n1941.\nAt the beginning of the new year, the \"Polizei\" Division was brought under FHA administration, although it would not be formally merged into the \"Waffen-SS\" until 1942. At the same time, the \"Totenkopf-Standarten\", aside from the three constituting the TK-Division, lost their Death's Head designation and insignia and were reclassified \"SS-Infanterie-\" (or \"Kavallerie-\") \"Regimente\". The 11th Regiment was transferred into the \"Reich\" Division to replace \"Germania\"; the remainder were grouped into three independent brigades and a battle group in Norway.\nBy the spring of 1941, the \"Waffen-SS\" consisted of the equivalent of six or seven divisions: the \"Reich\", \"Totenkopf\", \"Polizei\", and \"Wiking\" Divisions and \"Kampfgruppe\" (later Division) \"Nord\", and the , 1st SS Infantry, 2nd SS Infantry, and SS Cavalry Brigades.\nBalkans.\nIn March 1941, a major Italian counterattack against Greek forces failed, and Germany came to the aid of its ally. Operation Marita began on 6 April 1941, with German troops invading Greece through Bulgaria and Yugoslavia in an effort to secure its southern flank.\n\"Reich\" was ordered to leave France and head for Romania, and the was ordered to Bulgaria. The , attached to the XL Panzer Corps, advanced west then south from Bulgaria into the mountains, and by 9 April had reached Prilep in Yugoslavia, 30 miles from the Greek border. Further north the \"Reich\" Division, with the XLI Panzer Corps, crossed the Romanian border and advanced on Belgrade, the Yugoslav capital. Fritz Klingenberg, a company commander in the \"Reich\", led his men into Belgrade, where a small group in the vanguard accepted the surrender of the city on 13 April. A few days later the Royal Yugoslav Army surrendered.\nThe had now crossed into Greece, and on 10 April engaged the 6th Australian Division in the Battle of the Klidi Pass. For 48 hours they fought for control of the heights, often engaging in hand-to-hand combat, eventually gaining control with the capture of Height 997, which opened the pass and allowed the German Army to advance into the Greek interior. This victory gained praise from the OKW: in the order of the day they were commended for their \"unshakable offensive spirit\" and told that \"the present victory signifies for the a new and imperishable page of honour in its history.\"\nThe continued the advance on 13 May. When the Reconnaissance Battalion under the command of Kurt Meyer came under heavy fire from the Greek Army defending the Klisura Pass, they broke through the defenders and captured 1,000 prisoners of war at the cost of only six dead and nine wounded. The next day, Meyer captured Kastoria and took another 11,000 prisoners of war. By 20 May, the had cut off the retreating Greek Army at Metsovo and accepted the surrender of the Greek Epirus-Macedonian Army. As a reward, the was nominally redesignated as a full motorised division, although few additional elements had been added by the start of the Soviet campaign and the \"division\" remained effectively a reinforced brigade.\nSoviet Union.\nOperation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union, started on 22 June 1941, and all the \"Waffen-SS\" formations participated (including the \"Reich\" Division, which was formally renamed to \"Das Reich\" by the fall of 1941).\nSS Division Nord, which was in northern Finland, took part in Operation Arctic Fox with the Finnish Army and fought at the battle of Salla, where against strong Soviet forces they suffered 300 killed and 400 wounded in the first two days of the invasion. Thick forests and heavy smoke from forest fires disoriented the troops and the division's units completely fell apart. By the end of 1941, \"Nord\" had suffered severe casualties. Over the winter of 1941\u201342 it received replacements from the general pool of \"Waffen-SS\" recruits, who were supposedly younger and better trained than the SS men of the original formation, which had been drawn largely from \"Totenkopfstandarten\" of Nazi concentration camp guards.\nThe rest of the \"Waffen-SS\" divisions and brigades fared better. The \"Totenkopf\" and \"Polizei\" divisions were attached to Army Group North, with the mission to advance through the Baltic states and on to Leningrad. The \"Das Reich\" Division was with Army Group Centre and headed towards Moscow. The and \"Wiking\" Divisions were with Army Group South, heading for Ukraine and the city of Kiev.\nThe invasion of the Soviet Union proceeded well at first, but the cost to the \"Waffen-SS\" was extreme: by late October, the was at half strength due to enemy action and dysentery that swept through the ranks. \"Das Reich\" lost 60% of its strength and was still to take part in the Battle of Moscow. The unit was later decimated in the following Soviet offensive. The \"Der F\u00fchrer\" Regiment was reduced to 35 men out of the 2,000 that had started the campaign in June. Altogether, the \"Waffen-SS\" had suffered 43,000 casualties.\nWhile the and the SS divisions were fighting in the front line, behind the lines it was a different story. The 1st SS Infantry and 2nd SS Infantry Brigades, which had been formed from surplus concentration camp guards of the SS-TV, and the SS Cavalry Brigade moved into the Soviet Union behind the advancing armies. At first, they fought Soviet partisans and cut off units of the Red Army in the rear of Army Group South, capturing 7,000 prisoners of war, but from mid-August 1941 until late 1942 they were assigned to the Reich Security Main Office headed by Reinhard Heydrich. The brigades were now used for rear area security and policing, and were no longer under army or \"Waffen-SS\" command. In the autumn of 1941, they left the anti-partisan role to other units and actively took part in the Holocaust. While assisting the \"Einsatzgruppen\", they participated in the extermination of the Jewish population of the Soviet Union, forming firing parties when required. The three brigades were responsible for the murder of tens of thousands by the end of 1941.\nBecause it was more mobile and better able to carry out large-scale operations, the SS Cavalry Brigade had 2 regiments with a strength of 3500 men and played a pivotal role in the transition to the wholesale extermination of the Jewish population. In the summer of 1941, Himmler assigned Hermann Fegelein to be in charge of both regiments. On 19 July 1941, Himmler assigned Fegelein's regiments to the general command of HSSPF Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski for the \"systematic combing\" of the Pripyat swamps, an operation designed to round up and exterminate Jews, partisans, and civilians in that area of the Byelorussian SSR.\nFegelein split the territory to be covered into two sections divided by the Pripyat River, with the 1st Regiment taking the northern half and the 2nd Regiment the south. The regiments worked their way from east to west through their assigned territory, and filed daily reports on the number of people killed and taken prisoner. By 1 August, 1st SS Cavalry Regiment under the command of Gustav Lombard was responsible for the death of 800 people; by 6 August, this total had reached 3,000 \"Jews and partisans\". Throughout the following weeks, the regiment's personnel under Lombard's command murdered an estimated 11,000 Jews and more than 400 dispersed soldiers of the Red Army. Thus Fegelein's units were among the first in the Holocaust to wipe out entire Jewish communities. Fegelein's final operational report dated 18 September 1941, states that they killed 14,178 Jews, 1,001 partisans, 699 Red Army soldiers, with 830 prisoners taken and losses of 17 dead, 36 wounded, and 3 missing. Historian Henning Pieper estimates the actual number of Jews killed was closer to 23,700.\n1942.\n1942 expansion.\nIn 1942, the \"Waffen-SS\" was further expanded and a new division was entered on the rolls in March. By the second half of 1942, an increasing number of foreigners, many of whom were not volunteers, began entering the ranks. The 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division \"Prinz Eugen\" was recruited from \"Volksdeutsche\" (ethnic Germans) drafted under threat of punishment by the local German leadership from Croatia, Serbia, Hungary, and Romania and used for anti-partisan operations in the Balkans. Himmler approved the introduction of formal compulsory service for the \"Volksdeutsche\" in German-occupied Serbia. Another new division was formed at the same time, when the SS Cavalry Brigade was used as the cadre in the formation of the 8th SS Cavalry Division \"Florian Geyer\".\n\"Panzergrenadier\" divisions.\nThe front line divisions of the \"Waffen-SS\" that had suffered losses through the winter of 1941\u20131942 and during the Soviet counter-offensive were withdrawn to France to recover and be reformed as \"Panzergrenadier\" divisions. Due to the efforts of Himmler and Hausser, the new commander of the SS Panzer Corps, the three SS \"Panzergrenadier\" divisions , \"Das Reich\", and \"Totenkopf\" were to be formed with a full regiment of tanks rather than only a battalion. This meant that the SS \"Panzergrenadier\" divisions were full-strength Panzer divisions in all but name. They each received nine Tiger tanks, which were formed into the heavy panzer companies.\nDemyansk Pocket.\nThe Soviet offensive of January 1942 trapped a number of German divisions in the Demyansk Pocket between February and April 1942; the 3rd SS \"Totenkopf\" Division was one of the divisions encircled by the Red Army. The Red Army liberated Demyansk on 1 March 1943 with the retreat of German troops. \"For his excellence in command and the particularly fierce fighting of the \"Totenkopf\"\", Eicke was awarded Oak Leaves to the Knight's Cross on 20 May 1942.\n1943.\n1943 expansion.\nThe \"Waffen-SS\" expanded further in 1943: in February the 9th SS Panzer Division \"Hohenstaufen\" and its sister division, the 10th SS Panzer Division \"Frundsberg\", were formed in France. They were followed in July by the 11th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division \"Nordland\" created from Norwegian and Danish volunteers. September saw the formation of the 12th SS Panzer Division \"Hitlerjugend\" using volunteers from the Hitler Youth. Himmler and Berger successfully appealed to Hitler to form a Bosnian Muslim division, and the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS \"Handschar\" (1st Croatian), the first non-Germanic division, was formed, to fight Josip Broz Tito's Yugoslav Partisans. This was followed by the 14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Galician) formed from volunteers from Galicia in western Ukraine. The 15th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Latvian) was created in 1943, using compulsory military service in the \"Ostland\". The final new division of 1943 was the 16th SS Panzergrenadier Division \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\", which was created using the \"Sturmbrigade Reichsf\u00fchrer SS\" as a cadre. By the end of the year, the \"Waffen-SS\" had increased in size from eight divisions and some brigades to 16 divisions. By 1943 the \"Waffen-SS\" could no longer claim to be an \"elite\" fighting force. Recruitment and conscription based on \"numerical over qualitative expansion\" took place, with many of the \"foreign\" units being good for only rear-guard duty.\nKharkov.\nOn the Eastern Front, the Germans suffered a devastating defeat when the 6th Army was destroyed during the Battle of Stalingrad. Hitler ordered the SS Panzer Corps back to the Eastern Front for a counter-attack with the city of Kharkov as its objective. The SS Panzer Corps was in full retreat on 19 February, having been attacked by the Soviet 6th Army, when they received the order to counter-attack. Disobeying Hitler's order to \"stand fast and fight to the death\", Hausser withdrew in front of the Red Army. During Field Marshal Erich von Manstein's counteroffensive, the SS Panzer Corps, without support from the \"Luftwaffe\" or neighbouring German formations, broke through the Soviet line and advanced on Kharkov. Despite orders to encircle Kharkov from the north, the SS Panzer Corps directly attacked in the Third Battle of Kharkov on 11 March. This led to four days of house-to-house fighting before Kharkov was recaptured by the \"Leibstandarte\" Division on 15 March. Two days later, the Germans recaptured Belgorod, creating the salient that, in July 1943, led to the Battle of Kursk. The German offensive cost the Red Army an estimated 70,000 casualties but the house-to-house fighting in Kharkov was particularly bloody for the SS Panzer Corps, which lost approximately 44% of its strength by the time operations ended in late March.\nWarsaw Ghetto uprising.\nThe Warsaw Ghetto Uprising was a Jewish insurgency that arose within the Warsaw Ghetto from 19 April to 16 May, an effort to prevent the transportation of the remaining population of the ghetto to Treblinka extermination camp. Units involved from the \"Waffen-SS\" were 821 \"Waffen-SS\" \"Panzergrenadiers\" from five reserve and training battalions and one cavalry reserve and training battalion.\nKursk.\nFor the Battle of Kursk, the SS Panzer Corps was renamed the II SS Panzer Corps and was part of the 4th Panzer Army. The II SS Panzer Corps spearheaded the attack through the Soviet defences. The attack penetrated to a depth of and was then stopped by the Soviet 1st Tank Army.\nThe Soviet reserves had been sent south to defend against a German attack by the III Panzer Corps. With the loss of their reserves, any hope they may have had of dealing a major defeat to the II SS Panzer Corps ended. But the German advances now failed \u2013 despite appalling losses, the Soviet tank armies held the line and prevented the II SS Panzer Corps from making the expected breakthrough.\nThe failure to break through the Soviet tactical zone and the need to break off the assault by the German 9th Army on the northern shoulder of the Kursk salient due to Operation Kutuzov contributed to Hitler's decision to halt the offensive. A parallel attack by the Red Army against the new 6th Army on the Mius river south of Kharkov necessitated the withdrawal of reserve forces held to exploit any success on the southern shoulder of Kursk. The OKW also had to draw on some German troops from the Eastern Front to bolster the Mediterranean theatre following the Allied invasion of Sicily. On 17 July, Hitler called off the operation and ordered a withdrawal. The Soviet Union was not beaten, and the strategic initiative had swung to the Red Army. The Germans were forced onto the defensive as the Red Army began the liberation of Western Russia.\nItaly.\nThe was thereafter sent to Italy to help stabilise the situation there following the disposal of Benito Mussolini by the Badoglio government and the Allied invasion of Sicily, which marked the beginning of the Italian campaign. The division left behind its armour and equipment, which was given to the \"Das Reich\" and \"Totenkopf\" Divisions. After the Italian surrender and collapse of 8 September 1943, the was ordered to begin disarming nearby Italian units. It also had the task of guarding vital road and rail junctions in the north of Italy and was involved in several skirmishes with partisans. This went smoothly, with the exception of a brief skirmish with Italian troops stationed in Parma on 9 September. By 19 September, all Italian forces in the Po River plain had been disarmed, but the OKW received reports that elements of the Italian 4th Army were regrouping in Piedmont, near the French border. Joachim Peiper's mechanised 3rd Battalion, 2nd SS \"Panzergrenadier\" Regiment, was sent to disarm these units. On arriving in the province of Cuneo, Peiper was met by an Italian officer who warned that his forces would attack unless Peiper's unit vacated the province immediately. After Peiper refused, the Italians attacked. Peiper's battalion defeated the Italians, and subsequently shelled and burnt down the village of Boves, killing at least 34 civilians. Peiper's battalion then disarmed the remaining Italian forces in the area.\nWhile the was operating in the north, the 16th SS \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\" Division sent a small battlegroup to contain the Anzio landings in January 1944. In March, the bulk of the 1st \"Italienische Freiwilligen Sturmbrigade\" (or \"Brigata d'Assalto, Volontari\" in Italian) was sent to the Anzio beachhead, where they fought alongside their German allies, receiving favourable reports and taking heavy losses. In recognition of their performance, Himmler declared the unit to be fully integrated into the \"Waffen-SS\".\n1944.\n1944 expansion.\nThe \"Waffen-SS\" expanded again during 1944. January saw the formation of the 19th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Latvian), formed from the two SS infantry brigades as cadre with Latvian conscripts. The 20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Estonian) was formed via general conscription in February 1944, around a cadre from the 3rd Estonian SS Volunteer Brigade. The 21st Waffen Mountain Division of the SS \"Skanderbeg\" (1st Albanian) was formed in March 1944 from Albanian and Kosovan volunteers, which as with other \"eastern formations\" were intended for use against \"irregular forces\". A second \"Waffen-SS\" cavalry division followed in April 1944, the 22nd SS Volunteer Cavalry Division \"Maria Theresia\". The bulk of the troops were Hungarian Army \"Volksdeutsche\" conscripts transferred to the \"Waffen-SS\" following an agreement between Germany and Hungary. The 23rd SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division \"Nederland\" followed, formed from the 4th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Brigade \"Nederland\", but it was never more than a large brigade. The 24th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS \"Karstj\u00e4ger\" was another division that was never more than brigade size, consisting mainly of ethnic German volunteers from Italy and Yugoslavia, along with volunteers from Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, and Ukraine. They were primarily involved in fighting partisans in the Kras region of the Alps on the frontiers of Slovenia, Italy, and Austria, the mountainous terrain requiring specialised mountain troops and equipment. Two Hungarian divisions followed: the 25th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS \"Hunyadi\" (1st Hungarian) and the 26th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Hungarian). These were formed under the authority of the Hungarian defence minister, at the request of Himmler. One regiment from the Hungarian Army was ordered to join, but they mostly consisted of Hungarian and Romanian volunteers.\nThe SS Division \"Langemarck\" was formed next in October 1944, from Flemish volunteers added to the 6th SS Volunteer Assault Brigade \"Langemarck\", but again it was nothing more than a large brigade. The 5th SS Volunteer Assault Brigade \"Wallonien\" was also upgraded to the SS Division \"Wallonien\", but it too was never more than a large brigade. Plans to convert the Kaminski Brigade into the 29th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS RONA (1st Russian) were dropped after the execution of their commander, Bronislav Kaminski; instead the Waffen Grenadier Brigade of SS (Italian no. 1) became the 29th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Italian). The 30th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Russian) was formed from the \"Schutzmannschaft-Brigade Siegling\". The final new division of late 1944 was the 31st SS Volunteer Grenadier Division, formed from Hungarians and conscripted \"Volksdeutsche\".\nIn November 1944 the 1st Cossack Division, originally mustered by the German Army in 1943, was taken over by the \"Waffen-SS\". The \"SS F\u00fchrungshauptamt\" reorganised the division and used further Cossack combat units from the army and the \"Ordnungspolizei\" to form a 2nd Cossack Division. Both divisions were placed under the command of the XV SS Cossack Cavalry Corps on 1 February 1945. With the transfer of the 5th Volunteer \"Cossack-Stamm-Regiment\" from the \"Freiwilligen-Stamm-Division\" on the same day the takeover of the Cossack units by the \"Waffen-SS\" was complete.\nKorsun-Cherkassy Pocket.\nThe Korsun-Cherkassy Pocket was formed in January 1944 when units of the 8th Army withdrew to the Panther-Wotan Line, a defensive position along the Dnieper River in Ukraine. Two army corps were left holding a salient into the Soviet lines extending some . The Red Army's 1st and 2nd Ukrainian Fronts encircled the pocket. Trapped in the pocket were a total of six German divisions, including the 5th SS \"Wiking\" Division, with the attached 5th SS Volunteer Assault Brigade \"Wallonien\", and the Estonian SS Battalion \"Narwa\". The Germans broke out in coordination with other German forces from the outside, including the 1st SS Panzer Division . Roughly two out of every three encircled men successfully escaped the pocket.\nRaid on Drvar.\nThe Raid on Drvar, codenamed Operation \"R\u00f6sselsprung\", was an attack by the \"Waffen-SS\" and \"Luftwaffe\" on the command structure of the Yugoslav partisans. Their objective was the elimination of the partisan-controlled Supreme Headquarters and the capture of Tito. The offensive took place in April and May 1944. The \"Waffen-SS\" units involved were the 500th SS Parachute Battalion and the 7th SS \"Prinz Eugen\" Division.\nThe assault started when a small group parachuted into Drvar to secure landing grounds for the following glider force. The 500th SS Parachute Battalion fought their way to Tito's cave headquarters and exchanged heavy gunfire resulting in numerous casualties on both sides. By the time German forces had penetrated into the cave, Tito had already escaped. At the end of the battle, only 200 men of the 500th SS Parachute Battalion remained unwounded.\nBaltic states.\nIn Estonia, the Battle of Narva started in February. The battle can be divided into two phases: the Battle for Narva Bridgehead from February to July and the Battle of Tannenberg Line from July to September. A number of volunteer and conscript \"Waffen-SS\" units from Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Estonia fought in Narva. The units were all part of the III SS (Germanic) Panzer Corps in Army Group North, which consisted of the 11th SS Panzergrenadier Division \"Nordland\", the 4th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Brigade \"Nederland\", the 5th SS Volunteer Assault Brigade \"Wallonien\", the 6th SS Volunteer Assault Brigade \"Langemarck\", and the conscript 20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Estonian), under the command of \"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Felix Steiner.\nAlso in Army Group North was the VI SS Corps, which consisted of the 15th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Latvian) and the 19th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Latvian). Latvian \"Waffen SS\" and German Army units held out in the Courland Pocket until the end of the war.\nNormandy.\nOperation Overlord, the Allied \"D-Day\" landings in Normandy, took place on 6 June 1944. In preparation for the expected landings, the I SS Panzer Corps was moved to Septeuil to the west of Paris in April 1944. The corps had the 1st SS Panzer Division \"Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler\", the 12th SS Panzer Division \"Hitlerjugend\", and the 17th SS Panzergrenadier \"G\u00f6tz von Berlichingen\" Divisions, along with the army's Panzer-Lehr-Division assigned to it. The corps was to form a part of General Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg's Panzer Group West, the Western theatre's armoured reserve. The corps was restructured on 4 July 1944 and only the 1st SS and the 12th SS \"Hitlerjugend\" Divisions remained on strength.\nAfter the landings, the first \"Waffen-SS\" unit in action was the 12th SS \"Hitlerjugend\" Division, which arrived at the invasion front on 7 June, in the Caen area. That same day they committed the Ardenne Abbey massacre against Canadian Army prisoners of war. The next unit to arrive was the 17th SS Division \"G\u00f6tz von Berlichingen\" on 11 June, which came into contact with the US 101st Airborne Division. The 101st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion arrived next to protect the left wing of the I SS Panzer Corps. The 1st SS Division arrived towards the end of the month with lead elements becoming embroiled in the British offensive Operation Epsom.\nThe only other \"Waffen-SS\" unit in France at this time was the 2nd SS Panzer Division \"Das Reich\", in Montauban, north of Toulouse. They were ordered north to the landing beaches and on 9 June were responsible for the Tulle massacre, where 99 men were murdered. The next day, they reached the village of Oradour-sur-Glane where they massacred 642 civilians including 247 children.\nThe II SS Panzer Corps, consisting of the 9th SS \"Hohenstaufen\" and 10th SS \"Frundsberg\" Panzer Divisions and the 102nd SS Heavy Panzer Battalion, was transferred from the Eastern Front to spearhead an offensive to destroy the Allied beachhead. However, the British launched Operation Epsom and the two divisions were fed piecemeal into the battle, and launched several counterattacks over the following days.\nWithout any further reinforcements in men or materiel, the \"Waffen-SS\" divisions could not stop the Allied advance. Both the 1st SS and 2nd SS Panzer Divisions took part in the failed Operation L\u00fcttich in early August. The end came in mid August when the German Army was encircled and trapped in the Falaise pocket, including the 1st SS, 10th SS, 12th SS, and 17th SS Divisions, while the 2nd SS and 9th SS Panzer Divisions were ordered to attack Hill 262 from the outside in order to keep the gap open. By 22 August, the Falaise pocket had been closed, and all German forces west of the Allied lines were either dead or in captivity. In the fighting around Hill 262 alone, casualties totalled 2,000 killed and 5,000 taken prisoner. The 12th SS Panzer Division \"Hitlerjugend\" had lost 94 per cent of its armour, nearly all of its artillery, and 70 per cent of its vehicles. The division had close to 20,000 men and 150 tanks before the campaign started, and was now reduced to just 300 men and 10 tanks.\nWith the German Army in full retreat, two further \"Waffen-SS\" formations entered the battle in France, the SS Panzergrenadier Brigade 49 and the SS Panzergrenadier Brigade 51. Both had been formed in June 1944 from staff and students at the SS Junker Schools. They were stationed in Denmark to allow the garrison there to move into France, but were brought forward at the beginning of August to the area south and east of Paris. Both brigades were tasked to hold crossings over the Seine River allowing the army to retreat. Eventually, they were forced back and then withdrew, the surviving troops being incorporated into the 17th SS Division.\nGreece.\nWhile the bulk of the \"Waffen-SS\" was now on the Eastern Front or in Normandy, the 4th SS Polizei Panzergrenadier Division was stationed in Greece on internal security duties and anti-partisan operations. On 10 June, they committed the Distomo massacre, when over a period of two hours they went door to door and massacred Greek civilians, reportedly in revenge for a Greek resistance attack. In total, 218 men, women, and children were murdered. According to survivors, the SS forces \"bayoneted babies in their cribs, stabbed pregnant women, and beheaded the village priest.\"\nItaly.\nOn the Italian Front, the 16th SS Panzergrenadier Division \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\", conducting anti-partisan operations, is remembered more for the atrocities it perpetrated than its fighting ability; the division committed the Sant'Anna di Stazzema massacre in August 1944 and the Marzabotto massacre between September and October 1944.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, the 6th SS Mountain Division \"Nord\" had held its lines during the Soviet summer offensive until it was ordered to withdraw from Finland upon the conclusion of an armistice between Finland and the Soviet Union in September 1944. It then formed the rear guard for the three German corps withdrawing from Finland in Operation Birch, and from September to November 1944 marched 1,600 kilometres to Mo i Rana, Norway, where it entrained for the southern end of the country, crossing the Skagerrak to Denmark.\nArnhem and Operation Market Garden.\nIn early September 1944, the II SS Panzer Corps (comprising the 9th and 10th SS Panzer Divisions) was pulled out of the line and sent to the Arnhem area in the Netherlands. Upon arrival, they began the task of refitting, and the majority of the remaining armoured vehicles were loaded onto trains in preparation for transport to repair depots in Germany. On 17 September 1944, the Allies launched Operation Market Garden, and the British 1st Airborne Division was dropped in Oosterbeek, to the west of Arnhem. Realizing the threat, Wilhelm Bittrich, commander of the II SS Panzer Corps, ordered the \"Hohenstaufen\" and \"Frundsberg\" divisions to ready themselves for combat. Also in the area was the Training and Reserve Battalion of the 16th SS Division. The Allied airborne operation was a failure, and Arnhem was not liberated until 14 April 1945.\nWarsaw Uprising.\nAt the other end of Europe, the \"Waffen-SS\" was dealing with the Warsaw Uprising. Between August and October 1944, the SS-Sonderregiment Dirlewanger (recruited from probationary troops, common criminals and the mentally ill throughout Germany), which included the Azerbaijani Legion (part of the \"Ostlegionen\"), and the SS Assault Brigade RONA (Russian National Liberation Army), which was made up of anti-Soviet Russian, Belarusian, and Ukrainian collaborators, were both sent to Warsaw to put down the uprising. During the battle, the SS-Sonderregiment Dirlewanger behaved atrociously, raping, looting, and killing citizens regardless of whether they belonged to the Polish resistance or not; the unit's commander SS-\"Oberf\u00fchrer\" Oskar Dirlewanger encouraged their excesses. The unit's behaviour was reportedly so bestial and indiscriminate that Himmler was forced to send a battalion of SS military police to ensure the \"Dirlewanger\" convicts did not turn their aggressions against the leadership of the brigade or other nearby German units. At the same time, they were encouraged by Himmler to terrorise freely, take no prisoners, and generally indulge their perverse tendencies. Favoured tactics during the siege, particularly of the SS-Sonderregiment Dirlewanger, included the ubiquitous gang rape of female Poles, both women and children; playing \"bayonet catch\" with live babies; and torturing captives to death by hacking off their arms, dousing them with gasoline, and setting them alight to run armless and flaming down the street. The Police unit under Reinefarth that followed SS-Sonderregiment Dirlewanger committed almost non-stop atrocities during this period, in particular the Wola massacre.\nThe other unit, the Kaminski Brigade, was tasked with clearing the Ochota district in Warsaw that was defended by members of the Polish Home Army. Their attack was planned for the morning of 5 August, but when the time came, the Kaminski Brigade could not be found; after some searching by the SS military police, members of the unit were found looting abandoned houses in the rear of the German column. Later, thousands of Polish civilians were killed during the events known as the Ochota massacre; many victims were also raped. In the following weeks, the unit was moved south to the Wola district, but it fared no better in combat there than it did in Ochota; in one incident, a sub-unit of the Kaminski Brigade advanced to loot a captured building on the front line, but was subsequently cut off from the rest of the SS formation and wiped out by the Poles. Following the fiasco, Waffen-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\" Bronislav Vladislavovich Kaminski, the unit's commander, was called to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a to attend an SS leadership conference. He never arrived; official Nazi sources blamed Polish partisans for an alleged ambush that killed the RONA commander. But, according to various other sources, he was arrested and tried by the SS, or simply shot on spot by the Gestapo. The behaviour of the Kaminski Brigade during the battle was an embarrassment even to the SS, and the alleged rape and murder of two German Strength Through Joy girls may have played a part in the eventual execution of the brigade's commander.\nVistula River line.\nIn late August 1944, the 5th SS Panzer Division \"Wiking\" was ordered back to Modlin on the Vistula River line near Warsaw, where it was to join the newly formed Army Group Vistula. Fighting alongside the \"Luftwaffe\"'s 1st Fallschirm-Panzer Division \"Hermann G\u00f6ring\", they were faced against the Soviet 3rd Tank Corps. The advent of the Warsaw Uprising brought the Soviet offensive to a halt, and relative peace fell on the front line. The division remained in the Modlin area, grouped with the 3th SS Panzer Division \"Totenkopf\" in the IV SS Panzer Corps. Heavy defensive battles around Modlin followed for the rest of the year.\nThe Ardennes Offensive (popularly known as the \"Battle of the Bulge\"), between 16 December 1944 and 25 January 1945, was a major German offensive through the forested Ardennes mountains region of Belgium. The \"Waffen-SS\" units included the 6th Panzer Army under Sepp Dietrich. Created on 26 October 1944, it incorporated the I SS Panzer Corps (the 1st and 12th SS Panzer Divisions along with the 101st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion). It also had the II SS Panzer Corps (the 2nd and 9th SS Panzer Divisions). Another unit involved was Otto Skorzeny's SS Panzer Brigade 150.\nThe purpose of the attack was to split the British and American line in half, capture Antwerp, and encircle and destroy four Allied armies, forcing the Western Allies to negotiate a peace treaty on terms favourable to the Axis Powers. However, advancing through the forests and wooded hills of the Ardennes proved difficult in the winter weather. Initially, the Germans made good progress in the northern end of its advance. However, they ran into unexpectedly strong resistance by the US 2nd and 99th Infantry Divisions. By 23 December, weather conditions started improving, allowing the Allied air forces, which had been grounded, to attack. In increasingly difficult conditions, the German advance slowed. The attack was ultimately a failure. Despite the efforts of the \"Waffen-SS\" and the German Army, fuel shortages, stiff American resistance, including in and around the town of Bastogne, and Allied air-assaults on German supply columns proved too much, costing the Germans 700 tanks and most of their remaining mobile forces in the west. Hitler's failed counteroffensive had used most of Germany's remaining reserves of manpower and materiel, which could not be replaced.\nDuring the battle, \"Kampfgruppe Peiper\", part of the Division, left a path of destruction, which included \"Waffen-SS\" soldiers massacring American POWs, raping Belgian women, and looting and murdering unarmed Belgian civilians. It is infamous for the Malmedy massacre, in which approximately 90 unarmed American prisoners of war were murdered on 17 December 1944. Also during this battle, 3./SS-PzAA1 LSSAH captured and shot eleven African-American soldiers from the US 333rd Field Artillery Battalion in the hamlet of Wereth. Their remains were found by Allied troops two months later. The soldiers had their fingers cut off and legs broken, and one was shot while trying to bandage a comrade's wounds.\nSiege of Budapest.\nIn late December 1944, Axis forces, including the IX SS Mountain Corps, defending Budapest, were encircled in the Siege of Budapest. The IV SS Panzer Corps (the 3rd and 5th SS Panzer Divisions) was ordered south to join General Hermann Balck's 6th Army (Army Group Balck), which was mustering for a relief effort code named Operation Konrad.\nAs a part of Operation Konrad I, the IV SS Panzer Corps was committed to action on 1 January 1945, near Tata, with the advance columns of the \"Wiking\" Division slamming into the Soviet 4th Guards Army. A heavy battle ensued, with the \"Wiking\" and \"Totenkopf\" Division destroying many of the Soviet tanks. In three days their panzer spearheads had driven 45 kilometres, over half the distance from the start point to Budapest. The Red Army manoeuvred forces to block the advance, halting them at Bicske, from Budapest. Two further attacks, Operations Konrad II and III, also failed.\nThe Hungarian Third Army was besieged in Budapest along with the IX SS Mountain Corps (the 8th and 22nd SS Cavalry Divisions). The siege lasted from 29 December 1944 until the city surrendered unconditionally on 13 February 1945. Only 170 men of the 22nd SS Cavalry Division \"Maria Theresa\" made it back to the German lines.\n1945.\n1945 expansion.\nThe \"Waffen-SS\" continued to expand in 1945. January saw the 32nd SS Volunteer Grenadier Division \"30 Januar\" formed from the remnants of other units and staff from the SS Junker Schools. In February, the Waffen Grenadier Brigade of the SS \"Charlemagne\" was upgraded to a division and became known as the 33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS \"Charlemagne\" (1st French). At this time, it had a strength of 7,340 men. The SS Volunteer Grenadier Brigade \"Landstorm Nederland\" was upgraded to the 34th SS Volunteer Grenadier Division \"Landstorm Nederland\". The second SS police division followed when the 35th SS-Police Grenadier Division was formed from SS police units that had been transferred to the \"Waffen-SS\". The Dirlewanger Brigade was reformed as the 36th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS. As there was now a real shortage of \"Waffen-SS\" volunteers and conscripts, units from the army were attached to bring it up to strength. The third SS cavalry division, the 37th SS Volunteer Cavalry Division \"L\u00fctzow\", was formed from the remnants of the 8th and 22nd SS Cavalry Divisions, which had both been virtually destroyed. The last \"Waffen-SS\" division was the 38th SS Grenadier Division \"Nibelungen\", which was formed from students and staff from the SS Junker Schools, but consisted of only around 6,000 men, the strength of a normal brigade.\nOperation Nordwind.\nOperation Nordwind was the last major German offensive on the Western Front. It began on 1 January 1945 in Alsace and Lorraine in northeastern France, and it ended on 25 January. The initial attack was conducted by three corps of the 1st Army. By 15 January, at least 17 German divisions (including units in the Colmar Pocket) were engaged, including the XIII SS Army Corps (the 17th and 38th SS Divisions) and the 6th and 10th SS Panzer Divisions. At the same time, the \"Luftwaffe\" mounted a large offensive over the skies of France. Some 240 fighters were lost and just as many pilots. It was the 'last gasp' attempt for the \"Luftwaffe\" to take back air supremacy from the Western Allies.\nOperation Solstice.\nOperation Solstice, or the \"Stargard Tank Battle\" (February 1945) was one of the last armoured offensive operations on the Eastern Front. It was a limited counterattack by the three Corps of the 11th SS Panzer Army, which was being assembled in Pomerania, against the spearheads of the Soviet 1st Belorussian Front. Originally planned as a major offensive, it was executed as a more limited attack. It was repulsed by the Red Army, but helped to convince the Soviet High Command to postpone the planned attack on Berlin.\nInitially, the attack achieved a total surprise, reaching the banks of the Ina River and, on 17 January, Arnswalde. Strong Soviet counterattacks halted the advance, and the operation was called off. The III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps, was pulled back to the Stargard and Stettin on the northern Oder River.\nEast Pomeranian Offensive.\nThe East Pomeranian Offensive lasted from 24 February to 4 April, in Pomerania and West Prussia. The \"Waffen-SS\" units involved were the 11th SS \"Nordland\", 20th SS \"Estonian\", 23rd SS \"Nederland\", 27th SS \"Langemark\", and 28th SS \"Wallonien\" Divisions all in the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps and the X SS Corps, which did not command any SS units.\nIn March 1945, the X SS Corps was encircled by the 1st Guards Tank Army, 3rd Shock Army, and First Polish Army in the area of Dramburg. This pocket was destroyed by the Red Army on 7 March 1945. On 8 March 1945, the Soviets announced the capture of General Krappe and 8,000 men of the corps.\nOperation Spring Awakening.\nAfter the Ardennes offensive failed, in Hitler's estimation, the Nagykanizsa oilfields southwest of Lake Balaton were the most strategically valuable reserves on the Eastern Front. The SS divisions were pulled out and refitted in Germany in preparation for Operation Spring Awakening (\"Fr\u00fchlingserwachsen\"). Hitler ordered Dietrich's 6th Panzer Army to take the lead and move to Hungary in order to protect the oilfields and refineries there. The 6th Panzer Army was made up of the I SS Panzer Corps (the 1st and 12th SS Panzer Divisions) and the II SS Panzer Corps (the 2nd and 10th SS Panzer Divisions). Also present but not part of the 6th Panzer Army was the IV SS Panzer Corps (the 3rd and 5th SS Panzer Divisions).\nThis final German offensive in the east began on 6 March. The German forces attacked near Lake Balaton with the 6th Panzer Army advancing northwards towards Budapest and the 2nd Panzer Army moving eastwards and south. Dietrich's army made \"good progress\" at first, but as they drew near the Danube, the combination of the muddy terrain and strong resistance by the Soviets ground them to a halt. The overwhelming numerical superiority of the Red Army made any defence impossible, yet Hitler somehow had believed victory was attainable.\nAfter Operation Spring Awakening, the 6th Panzer Army withdrew towards Vienna and was involved what became known as the Vienna Offensive. The only major force to face the attacking Red Army was the II SS Panzer Corps (the 2nd and 3rd SS Panzer Divisions), under the command of Wilhelm Bittrich, along with \"ad hoc\" forces made up of garrison and anti-aircraft units. Vienna fell to the Soviets on 13 April. Bittrich's II SS Panzer Corps had pulled out to the west that evening to avoid encirclement. The LSSAH retreated westward with less than 1,600 men and 16 tanks remaining.\nThis failure is famous for the \"armband order\" that followed. The order was issued to Dietrich by Hitler, who claimed that the troops, and more importantly, the 1st SS Division , \"did not fight as the situation demanded\". As a mark of disgrace, the \"Waffen-SS\" units involved in the battle were ordered to remove their distinctive cuff titles. Dietrich did not relay the order to his troops.\nBerlin.\nArmy Group Vistula was formed in 1945 to protect Berlin from the advancing Red Army. It fought in the Battle of the Seelow Heights (16\u201319 April) and the Battle of Halbe (21 April \u2013 1 May), both part of the Battle of Berlin. The \"Waffen-SS\" was represented by the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps.\nOn 23 April, SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\" Wilhelm Mohnke was appointed by Hitler as Battle Commander for the centre government district (Zitadelle sector), which included the Reich Chancellery and the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\". Mohnke's command post was in the bunkers under the Reich Chancellery. He formed \"Kampfgruppe Mohnke\", divided into two weak regiments. It was made up of the LSSAH Flak Company, replacements from the LSSAH Training and Reserve Battalion from Spreenhagan (under \"Standartenfuhrer\" Anhalt), 600 men from the \"Begleit-Bataillon Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\", the F\u00fchrer-Begleit-Company, and the core group\u2014800 men of the LSSAH Guard Battalion assigned to guard the \"F\u00fchrer\".\nOn 23 April, the Reich Chancellery ordered SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\" Gustav Krukenberg to proceed to Berlin with his men, who were reorganised as Assault Battalion \"Charlemagne\". Between 320 and 330 French troops arrived in Berlin on 24 April after a long detour to avoid Soviet advance columns. Krukenberg was also appointed the commander of (Berlin) Defence Sector C. This included the \"Nordland\" Division, whose previous commander, Joachim Ziegler, was relieved of command the same day. On 27 April, after a futile defence, the remnants of \"Nordland\" were pushed back into the centre government district (Zitadelle sector) in Defence Sector Z. There Krukenberg's headquarters was a carriage in the Stadtmitte U-Bahn station. The men of the \"Nordland\" Division were now under Mohnke's overall command. Among the men were French, Latvian, and Scandinavian \"Waffen-SS\" troops.\nA heavy artillery bombardment of the centre government district had begun on 20 April 1945 and lasted until the end of hostilities. Under intense shelling, the SS troops put up stiff resistance which led to bitter and bloody street fighting with the Red Army. By 26 April, the defenders were pushed back into the Reichstag and Reich Chancellery. There, over the next few days, the survivors (mainly French SS troops from the former 33rd SS Division \"Charlemagne\") fought in vain against the Soviets.\nOn 30 April, after receiving news of Hitler's suicide, orders were issued that those who could do so were to break out. Prior to the break-out, Mohnke briefed all commanders that could be reached within the Zitadelle sector about Hitler's death and the planned break-out. The break out started at 2300 hours on 1 May. There were ten main groups that attempted to head northwest towards Mecklenburg. Fierce fighting continued all around, especially in the Weidendammer Bridge area. What was left of the \"Nordland\" Division under Krukenberg fought hard in that area, but Soviet artillery, anti-tank guns, and tanks destroyed the groups. Several very small groups managed to reach the Americans at the Elbe's west bank, but most, including Mohnke's group, could not make it through the Soviet rings.\nHimmler fled and attempted to go into hiding. Using a forged paybook under the name of Sergeant Heinrich Hitzinger, he fled south on 11 May to Friedrichskoog. On 21 May, Himmler and two aides were detained at a checkpoint set up by former Soviet POWs and then handed over to the British Army. On 23 May, after Himmler had admitted his real identity, a doctor attempted to examine him. However, Himmler bit into a hidden cyanide pill and collapsed onto the floor. He was dead within 15 minutes.\nDivisions.\nAll divisions in the \"Waffen-SS\" were ordered in a single series of numbers as formed, regardless of type. A total of 39 were formed, beginning with the initial three in 1933 and ramping up to nine alone in 1945. Those tagged with nationalities were at least nominally recruited from those nationalities. Many of the late-formed higher-numbered units were in fact small battlegroups (\"Kampfgruppen\"), and divisions in name only.\nCasualties.\nMilitary historian R\u00fcdiger Overmans estimates that the \"Waffen-SS\" suffered 314,000 dead. Casualty rates were not significantly higher than in the \"Wehrmacht\" overall and were comparable to those among the armoured divisions of the army and the \"Luftwaffe\" paratroop formations.\nCriminality.\nThe \"Allgemeine SS\" was responsible for the administration of both the concentration and extermination camps. Many members of it and the \"SS-Totenkopfverb\u00e4nde\" subsequently became members of the \"Waffen-SS\", forming the initial core of the 3rd SS \"Totenkopf\" Division. A number of SS medical personnel who were members of the \"Waffen-SS\" were convicted of crimes during the \"Doctors' trials\" in Nuremberg, held between 1946 and 1947 for the Nazi human experimentation they performed at the camps.\nAccording to the \"Modern Genocide: The Definitive Resource and Document Collection\", the \"Waffen-SS\" had played a \"paramount role\" in the ideological war of extermination (\"Vernichtungskrieg\"), and not just as frontline or rear area security formations: a third of the \"Einsatzgruppen\" (mobile death squads) members, which were responsible for mass murder, especially of Jews, Slavs and communists, had been recruited from \"Waffen-SS\" personnel prior to the invasion of the Soviet Union. The \"Waffen-SS\" construction office built the gas chambers at Auschwitz, and, according to Rudolf H\u00f6ss, about 7,000 served as guards at that camp.\nMany \"Waffen-SS\" members and units were responsible for war crimes against civilians and allied servicemen. After the war the SS organisation as a whole was held to be a criminal organisation by the post-war German government. Formations such as the \"Dirlewanger\" and Kaminski Brigades were singled out, and many others participated in large-scale massacres or smaller-scale killings such as murder of 34 captured allied servicemen ordered by Josef Kieffer during Operation Bulbasket in 1944, the Houtman affair, or murders perpetrated by Heinrich Boere. The listed \"Waffen-SS\" units were responsible for the following massacres:\nThe linking of the SS-VT with the \"SS-Totenkopfverb\u00e4nde\" (SS-TV) in 1938 raised important questions about \"Waffen-SS\" criminality, since the SS-TV were already responsible for the imprisonment, torture, and murder of Jews and other political opponents through providing the personnel for manning the concentration camps. Their leader, Theodor Eicke, who was the commandant of Dachau, inspector of the camps, and murderer of Ernst R\u00f6hm, later became the commander of the 3rd SS \"Totenkopf\" Division. With the invasion of Poland, the \"Totenkopfverb\u00e4nde\" troops were called on to carry out so-called \"police and security measures\" in rear areas. What these measures entailed is demonstrated by the record of \"SS Totenkopf Standarte Brandenburg\". It arrived in W\u0142oc\u0142awek on 22 September 1939 and embarked on a four-day \"Jewish action\" that included the burning of synagogues and the execution en masse of the leaders of the Jewish community. On 29 September the Standarte travelled to Bydgoszcz to conduct an \"intelligentsia action\". Approximately 800 Polish civilians and what the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (SD) termed \"potential resistance leaders\" were killed. Later the formation became the 3rd SS Panzer Division \"Totenkopf\", but from the start they were among the first executors of a policy of systematic extermination.\n\"Waffen-SS\" formations were found guilty of war crimes, especially in the opening and closing phases of the war. In addition to documented atrocities, \"Waffen-SS\" units assisted in rounding up Eastern European Jews for deportation and utilised scorched earth tactics during rear security operations. Some \"Waffen-SS\" personnel convalesced at concentration camps, from which they were drawn, by serving guard duties. Other members of the \"Waffen-SS\" were more directly involved in genocide.\nThe end of the war saw a number of war crime trials, including the Malmedy massacre trial. The counts of indictment related to the massacre of more than 300 American prisoners in the vicinity of Malmedy, between 16 December 1944 and 13 January 1945, and the massacre of 100 Belgian civilians mainly in the vicinity of Stavelot.\nDuring the Nuremberg Trials, the \"Waffen-SS\" was declared a criminal organisation for its major involvement in war crimes and for being an \"integral part\" of the SS. An exception was made for conscripts who were not given a choice in joining the ranks, and had not committed \"such crimes\". They were determined to be exempt.\nIn 2016, the Polish parliament classified the crimes of the 14th Grenadier Division's soldiers against the Polish population as genocide.\nPost-war.\nIn the Federal Republic of Germany, the dissemination of propaganda material and the use of SS symbols are a crime and punishable by Sections 86 and 86a of the German Criminal Code.\nWaffen-SS veterans in post-war Germany.\n\"Waffen-SS\" veterans in post-war Germany played a large role, through publications and political pressure, in the efforts to rehabilitate the reputation of the \"Waffen-SS\", which had committed many war crimes during World War II. High ranking German politicians such as Konrad Adenauer, Franz Josef Strauss, and Kurt Schumacher courted former \"Waffen-SS\" members and their veteran organisation, HIAG, in an effort to tap into the voter potential, and helped deflect blame for war crimes onto other branches of the SS. A small number of veterans served in the new German armed forces, the \"Bundeswehr\", something that raised national and international unease in regard to how it would affect the democratic nature of the new army.\nSS-\"Gruppenf\u00fchrer\" Heinz Lammerding, who commanded the \"Das Reich\" Division that perpetrated the Tulle and the Oradour-sur-Glane massacres in occupied France, died in 1971, following a successful business career in West Germany. The West German government refused to extradite him to France since, as originally drafted, Article 16(2) of the German Basic Law did not permit German citizens to be extradited to foreign countries. \nA historical review in Germany of the impact of \"Waffen-SS\" veterans in post-war German society continues, and a number of books on the subject have been published in recent years.\n\"Waffen-SS\" veterans have received pensions (West Germany's War Victims' Assistance Act, or the \"Bundesversorgungsgesetz\") from the German government. According to \"The Times of Israel\", \"The benefits come through the Federal Pension Act, which was passed in 1950 to support war victims, whether civilians or veterans of the Wehrmacht or Waffen-SS.\"\nOn 22 June 2005, the Italian military court in La Spezia found ten former \"Waffen-SS\" officers and NCOs living in Germany guilty of participation in the Sant'Anna di Stazzema massacre and sentenced them \"in absentia\" to life imprisonment. Extradition requests from Italy were rejected by Germany, even though the German Basic Law had been amended after 2000 to permit the extradition of German citizens to member states of the European Union.\nHIAG lobby group.\nHIAG (, literally \"Mutual aid association of former \"Waffen-SS\" members\") was a lobby group and a revisionist veterans' organisation founded by former high-ranking \"Waffen-SS\" personnel in West Germany in 1951. It campaigned for the legal, economic and historical rehabilitation of the \"Waffen-SS\", using contacts with political parties to manipulate them for its purposes. Kurt Meyer, \"Brigadef\u00fchrer\" of the 12th SS Division, a convicted war criminal, was HIAG's most effective spokesperson.\nHIAG's historical revisionism encompassed multi-prong propaganda efforts, including periodicals, books and public speeches, alongside a publishing house that served as a platform for its publicity aims. This extensive body of work \u2013 57 book titles and more than 50 years of monthly periodicals \u2013 have been described by historians as revisionist apologia: [a] \"chorus of self-justification\"; \"crucible of historical revisionism\"; \"false\" and \"outrageous\" claims; \"most important works of [\"Waffen-SS\"] apologist literature\" (in reference to books by Hausser and Steiner); and \"exculpating multi-volume chronicle\" (in reference to the history of the SS Division ).\nAlways in touch with its Nazi past, HIAG was a subject of significant controversy, both in West Germany and abroad, since its founding. The organisation drifted into right-wing extremism in its later history. It was disbanded in 1992 at the federal level, but local groups, along with the organisation's monthly periodical, continued to exist at least into the 2000s.\nWhile the HIAG leadership only partially achieved the goals of legal and economic rehabilitation of \"Waffen-SS\", falling short of their \"extravagant fantasies about [\"Waffen-SS\"'s] past and future\", HIAG's propaganda efforts have led to a reshaping of the image of the \"Waffen-SS\" in popular culture. The results are still felt, with scholarly works being drowned out by a \"veritable avalanche of titles\", including amateur historical studies, memoirs, picture books, websites, and wargames.\nBaltic states.\nIn 1990, Latvian Legion veterans started commemorating 'Legionnaire Day' (\"Le\u0123ion\u0101ru diena\") in Latvia. On 21 February 2012, The Council of Europe's Commission against Racism and Intolerance published its report on Latvia (fourth monitoring cycle), in which it condemned commemorations of persons who fought in the \"Waffen-SS\".\nEstonian Waffen SS Grenadier Division veterans have participated in yearly commemoration of the Battle of Tannenberg Line at Sinim\u00e4ed Hills in Estonia.\nFinland.\nThree former members of the Waffen SS served as ministers of defense; the Finnish SS Battalion officers Sulo Suorttanen and Pekka Malinen as well as Mikko Laaksonen, a soldier in the Finnish SS-Company, formed of pro-Nazi defectors.\nThe Nordic Resistance Movement and Finns Party, along with other nationalist organizations, organizes an annual torch march demonstration in Helsinki in memory of the Finnish SS Battalion on Finnish independence day, which ends at the Hietaniemi cemetery where participants visit the tomb of Marshal Baron Mannerheim and the monument to the Finnish SS Battalion. The event has been protested by antifascists, which has led to counterdemonstrators being violently assaulted by the NRM members who act as security. The demonstration attracted close to 3000 participants at its peak according to the estimates of the police and hundreds of officers patrol Helsinki to prevent violent clashes. By 2024, participation had dwindled to 500\u2013600, with counter-protesters numbering up to 1500, according to police. The march has been attended and promoted by the Finns Party, and condemned by left-wing parties, for example Green League MP Iiris Suomela characterized it as \"obviously neo-Nazi\" and expressed her disappointment in it being attended by such a large number of people.\nIn between 2019 and 2022, Finns party MP and later Minister of Economic Affairs Vilhelm Junnila made four budgetary motions in order to support Veljesapu-Perinneyhdistys, a Finnish organization that cherishes the heritage of the Finnish volunteers in the Waffen-SS. Junnila wrote in his motion, that the support would be \"for the promotion of balanced historical research\". According to Der Spiegel, three Finns party ministers supported a motion to provide funding for SS veterans association for a \"counter-study\" in response to accusations of Finnish SS men having participated in the Holocaust.\nUkraine.\nIn 2020, the Ukrainian Supreme Court ruled that symbols of SS Division Galicia (14th Grenadier Division) do not belong to the Nazis and were not banned in the country. However, the division's insignia is classified as a Nazi and hate symbol by the non-governmental Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union and Freedom House.\nOn 28 April, an annual march is organised in Lviv to celebrate the anniversary of the 14th Grenadier Division's foundation. On 30 April 2021, after the march was held in Kyiv, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy stated: \"We categorically condemn any manifestation of propaganda of totalitarian regimes, in particular the National Socialist, and attempts to revise truth about World War II.\" The march was condemned by the German and Israeli governments.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33187", "revid": "41163249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33187", "title": "W. Somerset Maugham", "text": "English playwright and author (1874\u20131965)\nWilliam Somerset Maugham ( ; 25 January 1874 \u2013 16 December 1965) was an English writer, known for his plays, novels and short stories. \nBorn in Paris, where he spent his first ten years, Maugham was schooled in England and went to a German university. He became a medical student in London and qualified as a physician in 1897. He never practised medicine, and became a full-time writer.\nHis first novel, \"Liza of Lambeth\" (1897), a study of life in the slums, attracted attention, but it was as a playwright that he first achieved national celebrity. By 1908 he had four plays running at once in the West End of London. He wrote his 32nd and last play in 1933, after which he abandoned the theatre and concentrated on novels and short stories.\nMaugham's novels after \"Liza of Lambeth\" include \"Of Human Bondage\" (1915), \"The Moon and Sixpence\" (1919), \"The Painted Veil\" (1925), \"Cakes and Ale\" (1930) and \"The Razor's Edge\" (1944). His short stories were published in collections such as \"The Casuarina Tree\" (1926) and \"The Mixture as Before\" (1940); many of them have been adapted for radio, cinema and television. His great popularity and prodigious sales provoked adverse reactions from highbrow critics, many of whom sought to belittle him as merely competent. More recent assessments generally rank \"Of Human Bondage\" \u2013 a book with a large autobiographical element \u2013 as a masterpiece, and his short stories are widely held in high critical regard. Maugham's plain prose style became known for its lucidity, but his reliance on clich\u00e9s attracted adverse critical comment.\nDuring the First World War Maugham worked for the British Secret Service, later drawing on his experiences for stories published in the 1920s. Although primarily homosexual, he attempted to conform to some extent with the norms of his day. After a three-year affair with Syrie Wellcome which produced their daughter, Liza, they married in 1917. The marriage lasted for twelve years, but before, during and after it, Maugham's principal partner was a younger man, Gerald Haxton. Together they made extended visits to Asia, the South Seas and other destinations; Maugham gathered material for his fiction wherever they went. They lived together in the French Riviera, where Maugham entertained lavishly. After Haxton's death in 1944, Alan Searle became Maugham's secretary-companion for the rest of the author's life. Maugham gave up writing novels shortly after the Second World War, and his last years were marred by senility. He died at the age of 91.\nLife and career.\nBackground and early years.\nWilliam Somerset Maugham came from a family of lawyers. His grandfather, Robert Maugham, was a prominent solicitor and co-founder of the Law Society of England and Wales. Maugham's father, Robert Ormond Maugham, was a prosperous solicitor, based in Paris; his wife, Edith Mary, \"n\u00e9e\" Snell, lived most of her life in France, where all the couple's children were born. Robert Maugham handled the legal affairs of the British Embassy there, as his eldest surviving son, Charles, later did. The second son, Frederic, became a barrister, and had a distinguished legal career in Britain \u2013 \"The Times\" described him as \"a great legal figure\" \u2013 serving as a Lord of Appeal in Ordinary (1935\u20131938) and Lord Chancellor (1938\u20131939). The two younger sons became writers: Henry (1868\u20131904) wrote poetry, essays and travel books.\nShortly before the birth of the Maughams' fourth son the government of France proposed a new law under which all boys born on French soil to foreign parents would automatically be French citizens and liable to conscription for military service. The British ambassador, Lord Lyons, had a maternity ward set up within his embassy \u2013 which was legally recognised as UK territory \u2013 enabling British couples in France to circumvent the new law, and it was there that William Somerset Maugham was born on 25 January 1874. Maugham never greatly liked his middle name \u2013 which commemorated a great-uncle named after General Sir Henry Somerset \u2013 and was known by family and friends throughout his life as \"Willie\".\nMaugham's mother died of tuberculosis in January 1882, a few days after his eighth birthday. He later said that for him her loss was \"a wound that never entirely healed\" and even in old age he kept her photograph at his bedside. Two and a half years after his mother's death his father died, and Maugham was sent to England to live with his paternal uncle Henry MacDonald Maugham, the vicar of Whitstable in Kent.\nAfter spending the first ten years of his life in Paris, Maugham found an unwelcome contrast in life at Whitstable, which according to his biographer Ted Morgan \"represented social obligation and conformity, the narrow-minded provincialism of nineteenth-century small-town English life\". He found his uncle and aunt well-meaning but remote by contrast with the loving warmth of his home in Paris; he became shy and developed a stammer that stayed with him all his life. In a 2004 biography of Maugham, Jeffrey Meyers comments, \"His stammer, a psychological and physical handicap, and his gradual awareness of his homosexuality made him furtive and secretive\". Maugham's biographer Selina Hastings describes as \"the first step in Maugham's loss of faith\" his disillusion when the God in whom he had been taught to believe failed to answer his prayers for relief from his troubles. In his teens he became a lifelong non-believer.\nFrom 1885 to 1890 Maugham attended The King's School, Canterbury, where he was regarded as an outsider and teased for his poor English (French had been his first language), his short stature, his stammer, and his lack of interest in sport. He left as soon as he could, although he later developed an affection for the school, and became a generous benefactor. A modest legacy from his father enabled him to go to Heidelberg University to study. His aunt, who was German, arranged accommodation for him, and aged sixteen he travelled to Germany. For the next year and a half he studied literature, philosophy and German. During his time in Heidelberg he had his first sexual affair; it was with John Ellingham Brooks, an Englishman ten years his senior. Brooks encouraged Maugham's ambitions to be a writer and introduced him to the works of Schopenhauer and Spinoza. Maugham wrote his first book while in Heidelberg, a biography of the composer Giacomo Meyerbeer, but it was not accepted for publication and the author destroyed the manuscript.\nAfter Maugham's return to Britain in 1892, he and his uncle had to decide on his future. He did not wish to follow his brothers to Cambridge University, and his stammer precluded a career in the church or the law even if either had attracted him. His uncle ruled out the civil service, believing that it was no longer a career for gentlemen after reforms requiring applicants to pass an entrance examination. A family friend found Maugham a position in an accountant's office in London, which he endured for a month before resigning. The local physician in Whitstable suggested the medical profession, and Maugham's uncle agreed. Maugham, who had been writing steadily since he was 15, intended to make his career as an author, but he dared not tell his guardian. From 1892 until he qualified in 1897, he studied medicine at St Thomas's Hospital Medical School in Lambeth.\nEarly works.\nIn his work as a medical student Maugham met the poorest working-class people: \"I was in contact with what I most wanted, life in the raw\". In maturity, he recalled the value of his experiences: \"I saw how men died. I saw how they bore pain. I saw what hope looked like, fear and relief; I saw the dark lines that despair drew on a face.\"\nMaugham took rooms in Westminster, across the Thames from the hospital. He made himself comfortable there, filled many notebooks with literary ideas, and continued writing nightly, while studying for his medical degree. In 1897 he published his first novel, \"Liza of Lambeth\", a tale of working-class adultery and its consequences. It drew its details from his obstetric duties in South London slums. He wrote near the opening of the novel: \"it is impossible always to give the exact unexpurgated words of Liza and the other personages of the story; the reader is therefore entreated with his thoughts to piece out the necessary imperfections of the dialogue\".\nThe book received mixed reviews. \"The Evening Standard\" commented that there had not been so powerful a story of slum life since Rudyard Kipling's \"The Record of Badalia Herodsfoot\" (1890), and praised the author's \"vividness and knowledge\u00a0... extraordinary gift of directness and concentration\u00a0... His characters have an astounding amount of vitality\". \"The Westminster Gazette\" praised the writing but deplored the subject matter, and \"The Times\" also conceded the author's skill \u2013 \"Mr Maugham seems to aspire, and not unsuccessfully, to be the Zola of the New Cut\" \u2013 but thought him \"capable of better things [than] this singularly unpleasant novel\". The first print run sold out within three weeks and a reprint was quickly arranged. Maugham qualified as a physician the month after the publication of \"Liza of Lambeth\" but he immediately abandoned medicine and embarked on his 65-year career as a writer. He later said, \"I took to it as a duck takes to water.\"\nBefore the publication of his next novel, \"The Making of a Saint\" (1898), Maugham travelled to Spain. He found Mediterranean lands much to his liking, for what his biographer Frederic Raphael calls their \"\"douceur de vivre\" missing under grim English skies\". He based himself in Seville, where he grew a moustache, smoked cigars, took lessons in the guitar, and developed a passion for \"a young thing with green eyes and a gay smile\" (gender carefully unspecified, as Hastings comments).\n\"The Making of a Saint\", a historical novel, attracted less attention than \"Liza of Lambeth\" and its sales were unremarkable. Maugham continued to write assiduously and within five years he published two more novels and a collection of short stories, and had his first play produced; but a success to match that of his first book eluded him. Between 1903 and 1906 he wrote two more plays, a travel book and two novels, but his next big commercial and critical success did not come until October 1907, when his comedy \"Lady Frederick\" opened at the Court Theatre in London. He had written it four years earlier, but numerous managements turned it down until Otho Stuart accepted it and cast the popular Ethel Irving in the title role. It ran for 422 performances at five different West End theatres. By the next year, while the run of \"Lady Frederick\" continued, Maugham had three other plays running simultaneously in London.\nMaugham later said that he made comparatively little money from this unprecedented theatrical achievement, but it made his reputation. \"Punch\" printed a cartoon of Shakespeare's ghost looking concerned about the ubiquity of Maugham's plays. Between 1908 and the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Maugham wrote a further eight plays, but his stage successes did not completely distract him from writing novels. His supernatural thriller \"The Magician\" (1908) had a principal character modelled on Aleister Crowley, a well-known occultist. Crowley took offence and wrote a critique of the novel in \"Vanity Fair\", charging Maugham with \"varied, shameless and extensive\" plagiarism.\nMaugham was acutely conscious of the fate of Oscar Wilde, whose arrest and imprisonment took place when Maugham was in his early twenties. Lifelong, Maugham was highly reticent about homosexual encounters, but it was thought by at least two of his lovers that at this period in his life he had recourse to young male prostitutes. Nevertheless he had a wish to marry, which he later greatly regretted. Looking back, he described his early attempts to be heterosexual as the greatest mistake in his life. He told his nephew Robin, \"I tried to persuade myself that I was three-quarters normal and that only a quarter of me was queer \u2013 whereas really it was the other way round\". In 1913 he proposed to the actress Sue Jones, daughter of the playwright Henry Arthur Jones; she declined his offer. In 1914 he began an affair with Syrie Wellcome, whom he had known since 1910. She was married to the pharmaceutical magnate Henry Wellcome, but the couple had formally separated in 1909, after which she had a succession of partners, including the retailer Harry Gordon Selfridge.\nFirst World War.\nBy 1914 Maugham was famous, with thirteen plays and eight novels completed. Too old to enlist when the First World War broke out, he served in France as a volunteer ambulance driver for the British Red Cross. Among his colleagues was Frederick Gerald Haxton, a young San Franciscan, who became his lover and companion for the next thirty years, but the affair between Maugham and Syrie Wellcome continued.\nIn the weeks before the war began, Maugham had been completing his novel \"Of Human Bondage\", a Bildungsroman with substantial autobiographical elements. The critic John Sutherland says of it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The hero, Philip Carey, suffers the same childhood misfortunes as Maugham himself: the loss of his mother, the breakup of his family home, and his emotionally straitened upbringing by elderly relatives. In addition, Carey has a club foot, a disability which commentators equate with either Maugham's stammer or his homosexuality.\nAccording to some of Maugham's intimates, the main female character, the manipulative Mildred, was based on \"a youth, probably a rent boy, with whom he became infatuated\". Raphael comments that there is no firm evidence for this, and Meyers suggests that she is based on Harry Phillips, a young man whom Maugham had taken to Paris as, nominally, his secretary for a prolonged stay in 1905.\nMaugham proofread \"Of Human Bondage\" at Malo-les-Bains, near Dunkirk, during a lull in his ambulance duties. When the book was published in 1915 some of the initial reviews were favourable but many, both in Britain and in the US, were unenthusiastic. The \"New York World\" described the romantic obsession of the protagonist as \"the sentimental servitude of a poor fool\". The tide of opinion was turned by the influential American novelist and critic Theodore Dreiser, who called Maugham a great artist and the book a work of genius, of the utmost importance, comparable to a Beethoven symphony. Bryan Connon comments in \"The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\", \"After this it seemed that Maugham could not fail, and the public eagerly bought his novels [and] volumes of his carefully crafted short stories\".\nIn 1915 Syrie Wellcome became pregnant, and in September, while Maugham was on leave to be with her, she gave birth to their only child, Mary Elizabeth, known as Liza. The baby was legally the daughter of Henry Wellcome, although he had not seen his wife for many years. He successfully sued for divorce in 1916, citing Maugham as co-respondent.\nSecret Service and marriage.\nAfter the birth of his daughter, Maugham moved to Switzerland. His fluency in French and German was an advantage, and for a year he worked in Geneva \u2013 at his own expense \u2013 as an agent for the British Secret Service. He was recruited by Sir John Wallinger, a friend of Syrie, portrayed as the spymaster \"R\" in the \"\" stories Maugham wrote after the war. Syrie and Liza were with him for part of the year, providing a convincing domestic cover, and his profession as a writer enabled him to travel about and stay in hotels without attracting attention. His covert job, which was in violation of Switzerland's neutrality laws, was to coordinate the work of British agents in enemy territory and dispatch their information to London. In his overt capacity as an author he wrote \"Caroline\", a three-act comedy, which opened in February 1916 at the New Theatre, London, with Irene Vanbrugh in the title role.\nIn November 1916 Maugham was asked by the intelligence service to go to the South Seas. Samoa was regarded as crucial to Britain's strategic interests, and Maugham's task was to gather information about the island's powerful radio transmitter and the threat from German military and naval forces in the region. He was reunited with Haxton, who joined him as secretary-companion. In addition to his intelligence work, Maugham gathered material for his fiction wherever he went. He was, by his own account, not a particularly imaginative or inventive person, but he studied people and places and used them, sometimes with minimal alteration or disguise, in his stories. He was helped in this by Haxton \u2013 extrovert and gregarious in contrast with Maugham's shyness \u2013 who became what Morgan terms an \"intermediary with the outside world\". Maugham wrote of Haxton:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He had an amiability of disposition that enabled him in a very short time to make friends with people in ships, clubs, bar-rooms, and hotels, so that through him I was able to get into easy contact with an immense number of persons whom otherwise I should have known only from a distance.\nAfter the South Seas trip Maugham visited the US and was joined by Syrie. In May 1917 they married at a ceremony in New Jersey. He entered the marriage from a sense of duty rather than from personal inclination, and the two quickly began to grow apart. She returned to England and he continued with his work as a secret agent. He was selected by Sir William Wiseman of British Intelligence to go to Russia, where the overthrow of the monarchy threatened to lead to a Russian withdrawal from the war. Maugham's job was to counter German propaganda, and to encourage the moderate republican Russian government under Alexander Kerensky to continue fighting. He arrived in Petrograd in August, too late to influence the outcome: in November, Kerensky was supplanted by Lenin and the Bolsheviks, who took Russia out of the war.\nBy that time Maugham was ill with tuberculosis. He returned to Britain and spent three months in a sanatorium in Scotland. While there he wrote a farce, \"Home and Beauty\", which was presented at the Playhouse Theatre in August 1919 starring Gladys Cooper and Charles Hawtrey. In the same year Maugham published one of his best-known novels, \"The Moon and Sixpence\", about a respectable stockbroker who rebels against conformity, abandons his wife and children, flees to Tahiti and becomes a painter. It was well received: reviewers called it \"extraordinarily powerful and interesting\", and \"a triumph [that] has given me such pleasure and entertainment as rarely comes my way\"; one described it as \"an exhibition of the beast in man, done with such perfect art that it is beyond praise\".\n1920s: travel and divorce.\nAfter the war Maugham had to choose between living in Britain or being with Haxton, because the latter was refused admission to the country. The lifelong ban followed his arrest and trial over a homosexual incident in 1915. He was acquitted, but was nonetheless registered as an \"undesirable alien\". When in Britain, Maugham lived with his wife at their house in Marylebone, but the couple were temperamentally incompatible, and their relationship grew increasingly fractious. He spent much time travelling with Haxton. They visited the Far East together in 1919\u201320, keeping Maugham away from home for six months.\nIn late 1920 Maugham and Haxton set out on a trip that lasted more than a year. In the US they spent time in Hollywood, which Maugham despised from the first, but found highly remunerative. They then visited San Francisco and sailed to Honolulu and Australia before the final leg of their voyage, to Singapore and the Malay Peninsula, where they remained for six months. Maugham, as always, observed closely and collected material for his stories wherever they went. His fellow author Cyril Connolly wrote, \"there will remain a story-teller's world from Singapore to the Marquesas that is exclusively and forever Maugham\". In 1922\u201323 Maugham's next extended trip was in south and east Asia, with stops at Colombo, Rangoon, Mandalay, Bangkok and Hanoi.\nIn Maugham's absence his wife found an occupation, becoming a sought-after interior designer. Her concentration on her work briefly lessened the domestic tensions at the couple's house when Maugham was in residence. By 1925, Maugham, learning that his wife was spreading scandal about his private life and had taken lovers of her own, was reconsidering his future. After another long trip to the Far East, he agreed with Syrie that they would live separately, she in London and he at Cap Ferrat in the south of France. They divorced in 1929.\nDuring the 1920s Maugham published one novel (\"The Painted Veil\", (1925)), three books of short stories (\"The Trembling of a Leaf\" (1921), \"The Casuarina Tree\" (1926) and \"\" (1928)) and a travel book (\"On a Chinese Screen\", (1922)) but much of his work was for the theatre. He wrote seven plays during the decade: \"The Unknown\" (1920), \"The Circle\" (1921), \"East of Suez\" (1922), \"The Camel's Back\" (1923), \"The Constant Wife\" (1926), \"The Letter\" (1927) and \"The Sacred Flame\" (1928). His longest-running play of the decade, and of his whole career, was \"Our Betters\". It was written in 1915 and staged in New York in 1917, for a satisfactory but not unusual 112 performances, but when produced in the West End in 1923 it was played 548 times.\n1930\u20131940.\nIn 1930 Maugham published the novel \"Cakes and Ale\", regarded by Connon as the most likely of the author's works to survive. This book, described by Raphael as \"an elegant piece of literary malice\", is a satire on the literary world and a humorously cynical observation of human mating. There was hostile comment in the press that the central figure seemed to be a tasteless parody of Thomas Hardy, who had died in 1928. Maugham further damaged his own reputation by denying that another character, Alroy Kear \u2013 a superficial novelist of more pushy ambition than literary talent \u2013 was a caricature of Hugh Walpole. Few believed Maugham's denial and he eventually admitted it was a lie. Hastings quotes a contemporary's view that Kear was Maugham's revenge on Walpole for \"a stolen boyfriend, an unrequited love and an old canker of jealousy\".\nBy the early 1930s Maugham had grown tired of the theatre. He told No\u00ebl Coward in 1933:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am done with playwriting.\u00a0... I cannot tell you how I loathe the theatre. It is all very well for you, you are author, actor and producer. What you give an audience is all your own; the rest of us have to content ourselves with at the best an approximation of what we see in the mind's eye. After one has got over the glamour of the stage and the excitement, I do not myself think the theatre has much to offer the writer compared with the other mediums in which he has complete independence and need consider no one.\nMaugham's thirty-second and last play was \"Sheppey\" (1933). It was a departure from his previous style; its moral ambiguity and equivocal ending puzzled the critics and the public. Despite some help from Coward in the drafting and having Ralph Richardson as star and John Gielgud as director, it ran for a modest 83 performances. Maugham later wrote, \"I grew conscious that I was no longer in touch with the public that patronises the theatre. This happens in the end to most dramatists, and they are wise to accept the warning. It is high time for them then to retire. I did so with relief.\" Raphael suggests that Maugham now wished to write to please himself rather than others.\nMaugham's days of lengthy trips to distant places were mostly behind him, but at Kipling's suggestion he sailed to the West Indies in 1936. The British colonies there failed to provide him with anything like the material he had gathered in the Asian outposts in the 1920s, but the French penal settlement on Devil's Island furnished him with some stories. During a visit to India in 1938 he found his interest prompted less by the British expatriates than by Indian philosophers and ascetics: \"As soon as the Maharajas realized that I didn't want to go on tiger hunts but that I was interested in seeing poets and philosophers they were very helpful.\" He visited the Hindu sage Ramana Maharishi at his ashram, and later used him as the model for the spiritual guru of his 1944 novel \"The Razor's Edge\".\nThroughout the decade Maugham, with Haxton in attendance, lived and entertained lavishly at his house on Cap Ferrat, the Villa La Mauresque. His domestic staff there comprised thirteen servants. When the Second World War began in 1939 he stayed in his home as long as he could, but in June 1940 France surrendered; knowing himself to be proscribed by the Nazis (Joseph Goebbels denounced him personally), Maugham made his way to England in uncomfortable conditions on a coal freighter from Nice. Haxton, as a citizen of neutral America, was not in immediate peril from the Germans and remained at the villa, securing it and its contents as far as possible, before making his way via Lisbon to New York.\nSecond World War.\nMaugham spent most of the war years in the US, based for much of the time at a comfortable house on the estate of his American publisher, Nelson Doubleday. His lifestyle was modest: he felt that despite his considerable wealth he should not live luxuriously while Britain was enduring wartime privations. He saw little of Haxton, who undertook war work in Washington DC. As always, Maugham wrote continually. His daily routine was to write between an early breakfast and lunchtime, after which he entertained himself. His most substantial book from the war years was \"The Razor's Edge\"; he found writing it unusually tiring \u2013 he was seventy when it was completed \u2013 and vowed it would be the last long novel he wrote.\nHaxton was holding down a responsible job in Washington and enjoying his new independence and self-reliance. Maugham was happy for him and was reconciled to the possibility of returning to La Mauresque without him after the war. The possibility became a certainty when in November 1944, after a six-month illness initially diagnosed as pleurisy, Haxton died of tuberculosis. Maugham was distraught; he told his nephew, Robin, \"You'll never know how great a grief this has been to me. The best years of my life \u2013 those we spent wandering about the world \u2013 are inextricably connected with him. And in one way or another \u2013 however indirectly \u2013 all I've written during the last twenty years has something to do with him\".\nEven before Haxton's mortal illness, Maugham had already chosen a replacement as secretary-companion, in anticipation that Haxton would not return to live at La Mauresque. This was Alan Searle, whom Maugham had known since 1928, when Searle was twenty-three. He came from Bermondsey, a poor district of London. Morgan describes him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; ...\u00a0the son of a tailor, he dropped his aitches like one of the characters in \"Liza of Lambeth\". He had already been taken up by older homosexuals, including Lytton Strachey, who called him \"my Bronzino boy\".\nMaugham's biographers have differed considerably about Searle's character and his influence for better or worse on his employer. Connon writes, \"He was seen by some as a near saint and by others, particularly the Maugham family, as a villain\"; Hastings labels him \"a podgy Iago ... constantly briefing against [Syrie and Liza]\", and quotes Alan Pryce-Jones's summary: \"an intriguer, a schemer with a keen eye to his own advantage, a troublemaker\". Raphael calls him \"a man of more reliable stamp\" than Haxton; Meyers describes him as \"sober, efficient, honest and gentle\".\nPost-war and final years.\nBefore returning to the south of France after the war, Maugham travelled to England and lived in London until the end of 1946. While there, he established and endowed the Somerset Maugham Award, to be administered by the Society of Authors and given annually for a work of fiction, non-fiction, or poetry written by a British subject under the age of thirty-five. After returning to Cap Ferrat he completed his last full-length work of fiction, the historical novel \"Catalina\". He took part in the adaptation for the cinema of some of his short stories, \"Quartet\" (1948), \"Trio\" (1950) and \"Encore\" (1951), in all of which he appeared, contributing on-screen introductions. He did the same on American television, introducing the \"Somerset Maugham Theater\" series, which a reviewer said enjoyed \"tremendous popularity\u00a0... and has won for him an audience of millions of enthusiastic fans\".\nMaugham made many subsequent visits to London, including one for his daughter's second marriage in July 1948, where, in Hastings's words, \"with professional ease he acted the part of proud father, managed to be civil to Syrie, and made a creditable speech at the reception at Claridge's afterwards\". During a visit in 1954 he was invested as a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) by the Queen at a private audience in Buckingham Palace. He was widely understood in literary circles to have turned down a knighthood and to have hankered after the more prestigious and exclusive British honour, the Order of Merit, saying to friends that the CH \"means 'Well done, but\u00a0...'\". There is some suggestion that his known homosexuality may have militated against his receiving the higher honour.\nIn the post-war era, Maugham settled into a pattern of life that changed little from year to year:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Winter and spring at the Mauresque, a few weeks of foreign travel (Austria, Italy, Spain) with a stay at a spa (Vichy, Abano, Vevey), an intensely social summer on the Riviera, followed by the autumn in London in his regular suite at the Dorchester Hotel.\nIn 1959 the foreign travel included a final trip to the far East. He kept himself fit, and further attempted to fend off the encroachments of age with supposedly rejuvenating injections at the clinic of Paul Niehans. Nonetheless, his final years, according to Connon, were marred by increasing senility, misguided legal disputes and a memoir, published in 1962, \"Looking Back\", in which \"he denigrated his late former wife, was dismissive of Haxton, and made a clumsy attempt to deny his homosexuality by claiming he was a red-blooded heterosexual\". He attempted to disinherit his daughter and to make Searle his adopted son, but the courts prevented it.\nMaugham died in the Anglo-American Hospital in Nice on the night of 15\u201316 December 1965 at the age of 91, of complications following a fall. He was cremated in Marseille on 20 December. Two days later his ashes were interred in the grounds of The King's School, Canterbury, beside the wall of the Maugham Library, which he had endowed in 1961. Morgan observes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Maugham, the disbeliever in ecclesiastical ritual, was buried without ritual but on hallowed ground. Canterbury was the shrine of Thomas \u00e0 Becket, murdered in 1170 in the cathedral, and the destination of Chaucer's storytelling pilgrims. It was a fitting burial place for a teller of tales.\nWorks.\nAlthough most of Maugham's early successes were as a dramatist, it is for his novels and short stories that he has been best known since the 1930s. He was a prolific writer: between 1902 and 1933 he had 32 plays staged, and between 1897 and 1962 he published 19 novels, nine volumes of short stories, and non-fiction books covering travel, reminiscences, essays and extracts from his notebooks. His works sold prodigiously throughout the English-speaking world. His American publishers estimated that four and a half million copies of his books were bought in the US during his lifetime.\nMaugham wrote that he followed no master, and acknowledged none, but he named Guy de Maupassant as an early influence. In the view of Kenneth Funsten in a 1981 study, British writers with whom Maugham has stylistic affinities include Jonathan Swift, William Hazlitt, John Dryden and John Henry Newman \u2013 \"all practitioners of precise prose\". Maugham's literary style was plain and functional; he disclaimed any pretence of being a prose stylist. He was not known as a phrase-maker; the 2014 edition of \"The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations\" cites him ten times, compared with nearly a hundred quotations from his contemporary Bernard Shaw. H.E.Bates, praising many of Maugham's attributes as a writer, objected to his frequent reliance on clich\u00e9d phrases, and George Lyttelton commented that Maugham \"purchases a beautiful lucidity at the cost of numberless clich\u00e9s\", but rated the lucidity second only to that of Shaw. Morgan comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his effort to achieve a casual tone, \"like the conversation of a well-bred man\", he used colloquialisms that bordered on clich\u00e9s. He did not use them, like Evelyn Waugh, to reveal character through dialogue, but in the narrator's voice. His characters \"got along like a house afire\", or \"didn't care a row of pins for each other\", or exchanged \"sardonic grins\" and \"disparaging glances\". A person was \"as clever as a bagful of monkeys\", the beauty of the heroine \"took your breath away\", a friend was \"a damned good sort\", a villain was \"an unmitigated scoundrel\", a bore \"talked your head off\", and the hero's heart \"beat nineteen to the dozen\".\nIn his 1926 short story \"The Creative Impulse\" Maugham made fun of self-conscious stylists whose books appealed only to a literary clique: \"It was indeed a scandal that so distinguished an author, with an imagination so delicate and a style so exquisite, should remain neglected of the vulgar\". After his early writing, in which long sentences are punctuated with semicolons and commas, Maugham came to favour short, direct sentences. In \"The Spectator\" the critic J. D. Scott wrote of \"The Maugham Effect\": \"This quality is one of force, of swiftness, of the dramatic leap\". Scott thought the style more effective in narrative than in suggestion and nuance.\nPlays.\nThe biggest theatrical success of Maugham's career was an adaptation by others of his short story \"Rain\", which opened on Broadway in 1921 and ran for 648 performances. The majority of his original plays were comedies, but of his serious dramas \"East of Suez\" (1922), \"The Letter\" (1927) and \"The Sacred Flame\" (1929) ran for more than 200 performances. Among his longest-running comedies were \"Lady Frederick\" (1907), \"Jack Straw\" (1908), \"Our Betters\" (1923) and \"The Constant Wife\" (1926), which ran in the West End or on Broadway for 422, 321, 548 and 295 performances respectively. Raphael remarks about Maugham as a playwright, \"His wit was sharp but rarely distressing; his plots abounded in amusing situations, his characters were usually drawn from the same class as his audiences and managed at once to satirize and delight their originals\".\nAs in his novels and short stories, Maugham's plots are clear and his dialogue naturalistic. The critic J. C. Trewin writes, \"His dialogue, unlike that of many of his contemporaries, is designed to be spoken\u00a0... Maugham does not write elaborately visual prose: that is, it does not make a fussy pattern on the page\". Trewin quoted with approval Maugham's observation, \"Words have weight, sound, and appearance; it is only by considering these that you can write a sentence that is good to look at and good to listen to\".\nUnlike his elder contemporary Shaw, Maugham did not view drama as didactic or moralistic; like his younger contemporary Coward, he wrote plays to entertain, and any moral or social conclusions were at most incidental. Several commentators have characterised him as a pessimist, who did not share Shaw's optimistic belief that art could improve humanity. Christopher Innes has observed that, like Chekhov, Maugham qualified as a doctor, and their medical training gave them \"a materialistic determinism that discounted any possibility of changing the human condition\". When Maugham's \"The Circle\" was revived in the US in 2011, the reviewer in \"The New York Times\" wrote that the play had been criticised \"for not having anything substantial to say about love, marriage or infidelity. Actually it has extremely complicated things to say about them, but its most important message may be that actions have real consequences, no matter how casually those actions may be taken\". Trewin singles out \"The Circle\", calling it one of the great comedies of the 20th century, and comparing it with Congreve's \"The Way of the World\", to the disadvantage of the latter: \"He can put Congreve to shame in the task of telling a theatrical story \u2013 telling it clearly and without inessentials\".\nA few of Maugham's plays have been revived occasionally. The Internet Broadway Database in 2022 records three productions since the author's death: \"The Constant Wife\" directed by Gielgud and starring Ingrid Bergman in 1975; \"The Circle\", starring Rex Harrison, Stewart Granger and Glynis Johns in 1989\u201390; and another production of \"The Constant Wife\", with Kate Burton in the title role. In London, the National Theatre has presented two Maugham plays since its inception in 1963: \"Home and Beauty\" in 1968 and \"For Services Rendered\" in 1979. Other London productions have included \"The Circle\" (1976), \"For Services Rendered\" (1993), \"The Constant Wife\" (2000) and \"Home and Beauty\" (2002).\nNovels.\nMaugham published novels in every decade from the 1890s to the 1940s. There are nineteen in all, of which those most often mentioned by critics are \"Liza of Lambeth\", \"Of Human Bondage\", \"The Painted Veil\", \"Cakes and Ale\", \"The Moon and Sixpence\" and \"The Razor's Edge\".\n\"Liza of Lambeth\" caused outrage in some quarters, not only because its heroine sleeps with a married man, but also for its graphic depiction of the deprivation and squalor of the London slums, of which most people from Maugham's social class preferred to remain ignorant. Unlike many of Maugham's later novels it has an unequivocally tragic ending.\n\"Of Human Bondage\", influenced by Goethe and Samuel Butler, is a serious, partly autobiographical work, depicting a young man's struggles and emotional turmoil. The hero survives, and by the end of the book he is evidently set for a happy ending. \"The Painted Veil\" is a story of marital strife and adultery against the background of a cholera epidemic in Hong Kong. Again, despite the suffering of the main characters, there is a reasonably happy ending for the central figure, Kitty.\n\"Cakes and Ale\" combines humorous satire on the London literary scene and wry observations about love. Like \"Of Human Bondage\" it has a strong female character at its centre, but the two are polar opposites: the malign Mildred in the earlier novel contrasts with the lovable, and much loved, Rosie in \"Cakes and Ale\". Rosie appears to be based on Sue Jones, to whom Maugham had proposed in 1913. He observed, \"I am willing enough to agree with common opinion that \"Of Human Bondage\" is my best work. It is the kind of book that an author can only write once. After all, he has only one life. But the book I like best is \"Cakes and Ale\". It was an amusing book to write.\"\n\"The Moon and Sixpence\" is the story of a man rejecting a conventional lifestyle, family obligations and social responsibility to indulge his ambition to be a painter. The structure of the book is unusual in that the protagonist is already dead before the novel opens, and the narrator attempts to piece together his story, and particularly his final years in Tahitian exile. \"The Razor's Edge\", the author's last major novel, is described by Sutherland as \"Maugham's twentieth-century manifesto for human fulfilment\", satirising Western materialism and drawing on Eastern spiritualism as a way to find meaning in existence.\nShort stories.\nFor many readers and critics, the best of Maugham is in his short stories. Raphael writes that Maugham became widely regarded as the supreme English exponent of the form \u2013 \"both the magazine squib and the more elaborate conte\". Most were first published in weekly or monthly magazines and later collected in book form. The first volume, \"Orientations\", came out in 1898 and his last, \"Creatures of Circumstance\", in 1947, with seven others between the two. Maugham's British and American publishers issued and reissued various, sometimes overlapping, permutations during his lifetime and subsequently.\nThe stories range from the short sketches of \"On a Chinese Screen\", which he had written during his 1920 travels through China and Hong Kong, to many, mostly serious, short stories dealing with the lives of British and other colonial expatriates in the Pacific Islands and Asia. These often convey the emotional toll that isolation exacts from the characters. Among the best-known examples are \"Rain\" (1921), charting the moral disintegration of a missionary attempting to convert the sexual sinner Sadie Thompson; \"The Letter\" (1924), dealing with domestic murder and its implications; \"The Book Bag\" (1932), a story of the tragic result of an incestuous relationship; and \"Flotsam and Jetsam\" (1947), set in a rubber plantation in Borneo, where a dreadful shared secret binds a husband and wife to a mutually abhorrent relationship.\nAmong the short stories set in England, one of the best known is \"The Alien Corn\" (1931), where a young man rediscovers his Jewish heritage and rejects his family's efforts to distance themselves from Judaism. His aspiration to become a concert pianist ends in failure and suicide. Another English story is \"Lord Mountdrago\" (1939), depicting the psychological collapse of a pompous cabinet minister.\nThe polished, detached , the central figure of the eponymous collection of spy stories (1928), is a writer recruited, as Maugham was, into the British Secret Service. His stories \u2013 the first in the genre of spy fiction continued by Ian Fleming, John le Carr\u00e9 and many others \u2013 are based so closely on Maugham's experiences that it was not until ten years after the war ended that the security services permitted their publication. In the 1928 volume Ashenden features in sixteen stories; two years later he reappeared, in his peacetime role of writer, as the narrator of \"Cakes and Ale\".\nComic stories include \"Jane\" (1923), about a dowdy widow who reinvents herself as an outrageous and conspicuous society figure, to the consternation of her family; \"The Creative Impulse\" (1926), in which a domineering authoress is shocked when her mild-mannered husband leaves her and sets up home with their cook; and \"The Three Fat Women of Antibes\" (1933) in which three middle-aged friends play highly competitive bridge while attempting to slim, until reversals at the bridge table at the hands of an effortlessly slender fourth player provoke them into extravagantly breaking their diets.\nAdaptations.\n\"The New York Times\" commented in 1964:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are times when one thinks that British television and radio would have to shut up shop if there were not an apparently inexhaustible supply of stories by Maugham to turn into 30-minute plays. One recalls, too, the long list of movies that have been made from his novels \u2013 \"Of Human Bondage\", \"The Moon and Sixpence\", \"The Painted Veil\", \"The Razor's Edge\" and the rest.\nIn a study published thirteen years after Maugham's death, Robert L. Calder notes that the writer's works had been made into forty films and hundreds of radio and television plays, and he suggests \"it would be fair to say that no other serious writer's work has been so often presented in other media\".\nIn Calder's view Maugham's \"ability to tell a fascinating story and his dramatic skill\" appealed strongly to the makers of films and radio programmes, but his liberal attitudes, disregard of conventional morality and unsentimental view of humanity led adapters to make his stories \"blander, safer, and more narrowly moralistic than he had ever conceived them\". Some of his stories were judged too improper for the cinema; Calder cites an adaptation of the historical novel \"Then and Now\" which the Hays Office rejected for thirty-seven separate reasons. In the first screen version of \"Rain\" (1928) expurgations fundamentally altered the characters; an adaptation of \"The Facts of Life\" in the 1948 omnibus film \"Quartet\" omitted the key plot point that the scheming young woman on whom the young hero turns the tables is a prostitute with whom he has just spent a night; in \"The Ant and the Grasshopper\" a young adventurer marries not a rich old woman who dies soon afterwards but a rich young one who remains very much alive. Titles were altered to avoid association with stage plays held to be sensational: \"Rain\" became \"Sadie Thompson\" and \"The Constant Wife\" became \"Charming Sinners\".\nRadio and television adaptations have, in general, been more faithful to Maugham's original stories. Calder cites BBC Television's series of twenty-six stories shown in 1969 and 1970, adapted by dramatists including Roy Clarke, Simon Gray, Hugh Leonard, Simon Raven and Hugh Whitemore, \"presented with scrupulous fidelity to [their] tone, attitude, and thematic intention\". On radio, the BBC's connection with Maugham goes back to 1930, when Hermione Gingold and Richard Goolden starred in an adaptation of \"Before the Party\" from his 1922 volume \"The Casuarina Tree\". Since then BBC radio has broadcast numerous adaptations of his plays, novels and short stories \u2013 ranging from one-off presentations to 12-part serialisations \u2013 including six productions of \"The Circle\" and two adaptations apiece of \"The Razor's Edge\", \"Of Human Bondage\" and \"Cakes and Ale\".\nAwards and honours.\nMaugham was appointed Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in 1954, on the recommendation of the British prime minister, Winston Churchill, and six years later \u2013 along with Churchill \u2013 he was one of the first five writers to be made a Companion of Literature. He was a Commandeur of the Legion of Honour, and an honorary doctor of the universities of Oxford and Toulouse. On his eightieth birthday the Garrick Club gave a dinner in his honour: only Dickens, Thackeray and Trollope had been similarly honoured. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, a Fellow of the Library of Congress, Washington, an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, and an honorary senator of Heidelberg University.\nReputation.\nThe critic Philip Holden wrote in 2006 that Maugham occupies a paradoxical position in twentieth-century British literature. Although he was an important influence on many well-known writers, \"Maugham's critical stock has remained low\". Maugham outsold, and outlived, contemporaries such as James Joyce, Virginia Woolf and D. H. Lawrence, but, in Holden's view, \"he could not match them in terms of stylistic innovation or thematic complexity\". Nonetheless, Maugham is recognised as an influence on Coward, Lawrence, Kingsley Amis, Graham Greene, Christopher Isherwood, V. S. Naipaul and George Orwell. His urbane spy, Ashenden, influenced the stories of Raymond Chandler, Ian Fleming, Georges Simenon and John le Carr\u00e9.\nIn \"The Summing Up\" (1938), Maugham wrote of his non-dramatic work, \"I have no illusions about my literary position. There are but two important critics in my own country who have troubled to take me seriously and when clever young men write essays about contemporary fiction they never think of considering me. I do not resent it. It is very natural\". Some biographers have doubted Maugham's claim to be unresentful at being overlooked or dismissed by literary critics, but there is little doubt that he was right about it. L. A. G. Strong acknowledged his craftsmanship, but described his writing as having an effect like \"that of music expertly played in an expensive restaurant at dinner\". Virginia Woolf was friendly though a little patronising; Lytton Strachey disparaged one of his books as \"Class II, Division I\". Lee Wilson Dodd wrote, \"Mr Maugham knows how to plan a story and carry it through. Competence is the word. His style is without a trace of imaginative beauty.\" In a 2016 survey Don Adams remarks, \"The gist of the criticism of Maugham's fiction, that it lacks psychological and emotional profundity, is remarkably consistent throughout the decades.\"\nThe \"two important critics\" Maugham referred to were probably Desmond MacCarthy and Raymond Mortimer; the former particularly praised the short stories, tracing their roots in French naturalism, and the latter reviewed Maugham's books carefully and on the whole favourably in the \"New Statesman\". A rising critic of a younger generation, Cyril Connolly, praised Maugham for his lucidity and called him \"the last of the great professional writers\", but Connolly's contemporary Edmund Wilson insisted that Maugham was second-rate and \"disappointing\". Even an admirer such as Evelyn Waugh felt that Maugham's disciplined writing with its \"brilliant technical dexterity\" was not without disadvantages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He is never boring or clumsy, he never gives a false impression; he is never shocking; but this very diplomatic polish makes impossible for him any of those sudden transcendent flashes of passion and beauty which less competent novelists occasionally attain.\nMaugham himself, although he never used the terms \"second rate\" or \"mediocre\" about his work, was modest about his status. He said that lacking any great powers of imagination he wrote about what he saw, and that although he could see more than most people could, \"the greatest writers can see through a brick wall \u2013 my vision is not so penetrating\".\nMarking Maugham's eightieth birthday \"The New York Times\" commented that he had not only outlived his contemporaries including Shaw, Joseph Conrad, H. G. Wells, Henry James, Arnold Bennett and John Galsworthy but was now seen to rank with them in excellence, after years in which his popularity had caused critics to depreciate his work. The tribute continued, \"Best sellers that appeal to the mass reader are seldom good literature, but there are exceptions. \"Of Human Bondage\" is certainly one; \"Cakes and Ale\" probably; \"The Moon and Sixpence\" possibly. Some of the short stories will undoubtedly prove immortal\". In 2014 Robert McCrum concluded an article about \"Of Human Bondage\" \u2013 which he said \"shows the author's savage honesty and gift for storytelling at their best\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many would say that his short stories embody his best work, and he remains a substantial figure in the early-20th-century literary landscape. Although Maugham's former reputation has become somewhat eclipsed, \"Of Human Bondage\" can still be cited as his masterpiece, a 20th-century English classic with a devoted following.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33189", "revid": "1378709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33189", "title": "Wake Island", "text": "Pacific island administered by the United States\nWake Island (), also known as Wake Atoll (), is a coral atoll in the Micronesia subregion of the Pacific Ocean. The atoll is composed of three islets \u2013 Wake, Wilkes, and Peale Islands \u2013 surrounding a lagoon encircled by a coral reef. The nearest inhabited island is Utirik Atoll in the Marshall Islands, located to the southeast.\nThe island may have been found by prehistoric Austronesian mariners before its first recorded discovery by \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira in 1568. Ships continued visiting the area in the following centuries, but the island remained undeveloped until the United States claimed it in 1899. Significant development of the island did not begin until 1935 when Pan American Airways constructed an airfield and hotel, establishing Wake Island as a stopover for trans-Pacific flying boat routes. In December 1941 at the opening of the Pacific Theatre of World War II Japan seized the island, which remained under Japanese occupation until the end of the war in September 1945. In 1972, Pan American Airways ceased using the island for trans-Pacific layovers, instead using Boeing 747 aircraft, which could cross the ocean without stopping. With the withdrawal of Pan American Airways, the island's administration was taken over by the United States Air Force, which later used the atoll as a processing location for Vietnamese refugees during Operation New Life in 1975.\nWake Island is claimed by the Marshall Islands but is administered by the United States as an unorganized and unincorporated territory and is part of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. The island is administered by the Department of the Interior and managed by the United States Air Force. While there are no permanent residents, approximately 300 people are on the island at any given time, primarily military personnel and contractors.\nThe natural areas of Wake are a mix of tropical trees, scrub, and grasses that have adapted to the limited rainfall. Thousands of hermit crabs and rats live on Wake, and in the past, cats were introduced to help control the rat population, which at one time was estimated at 2 million. The Wake Island rail, a small flightless bird, once lived on the atoll but went extinct during World War II. Many seabird species also visit Wake, although the thick vegetation has caused most birds to nest in a designated bird sanctuary on Wilkes Island. The submerged and emergent lands at Wake Island are a unit of the Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument.\nEtymology.\nWake Island derives its name from British sea captain Samuel Wake, who rediscovered the atoll in 1796 while in command of the \"Prince William Henry\". The name is sometimes attributed to Captain William Wake, who also is reported to have discovered the atoll from the \"Prince William Henry\" in 1792.\nPeale Island is named after the naturalist Titian Peale, who visited the island in 1841, and Wilkes Island is named after U.S. Naval officer Charles Wilkes, who led the U.S. expedition to Wake Atoll in 1841.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe presence of the Polynesian rat on the island suggests that Wake was likely visited by Polynesian or Micronesian voyagers at an early date. In the Marshallese oral tradition, stories tell of \u0100nen Kio, or \"island of the orange flower,\" where men would collect albatross bones for tattooing rituals. Dwight Heine speculated that the Marshall Islanders treated \u0100nen Kio similar to a game preserve for hunting and gathering food and that no one permanently lived there, similar to land usage practices on Bokak Atoll and Bikar Atoll. He also speculated that the islanders may have stopped traveling to Wake Atoll in the mid-1800s, around the time the first missionaries arrived in the Marshalls. However, the atoll's remoteness and lack of fresh water may have prevented permanent pre-modern human habitation; no ancient artifacts have been discovered.\nEarly exploration and shipwrecks.\nThe first recorded discovery of Wake Island was on October 2, 1568, by Spanish explorer and navigator \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira. In 1567, Menda\u00f1a and his crew had set off on two ships, \"Los Reyes\" and \"Todos los Santos\", from Callao, Peru, on an expedition to search for a gold-rich land in the South Pacific mentioned in Inca tradition. After visiting Tuvalu and the Solomon Islands, the expedition headed north and came upon Wake Island, \"a low barren island, judged to be eight leagues in circumference\". Since the date, October 2, was the eve of the feast of Saint Francis of Assisi, the captain named it \"St Francis Island\" ( ). The ships were in need of water and the crew was suffering from scurvy, but after circling the island, it was determined that Wake was waterless and had \"not a cocoanut (coconut) nor a pandanus\" and \"there was nothing on it but sea-birds, and sandy places covered with bushes.\" (It was while attempting to relocate Wake according to Menda\u00f1a's description of its coordinates that James Cook first reached the Hawaiian Islands.)\nIn 1796, Captain Samuel Wake of the merchant ship \"Prince William Henry\" also came upon Wake Island, naming the atoll Wake, for himself. Soon thereafter, the 80-ton fur trading merchant brig \"Halcyon\" arrived at Wake and Master Charles William Barkley, unaware of Captain Wake's visit and other prior European contact, named the atoll \"Halcyon Island\" in honor of his ship. In 1823, Captain Edward Gardner, while in command of the whaling ship \"Bellona\", visited an island at , which he judged to be long. The island was \"covered with wood, having a very green and rural appearance\". This report is considered to be another sighting of Wake Island.\nOn December 20, 1841, the United States Exploring Expedition, commanded by US Navy Lieutenant Charles Wilkes, arrived at Wake on and sent several boats to survey the island. Wilkes described the atoll as \"a low coral one, of triangular form and above the surface. It has a large lagoon in the center, which was well filled with fish of a variety of species; among these were some fine mullet.\" He also noted that Wake had no fresh water but was covered with shrubs, \"the most abundant of which was the tournefortia.\" The expedition's naturalist, Titian Peale, noted that \"the only remarkable part in the formation of this island is the enormous blocks of coral that have been thrown up by the violence of the sea\". Peale collected an egg from a short-tailed albatross and added other specimens, including a Polynesian rat, to the natural history collections of the expedition. Wilkes also reported that \"from appearances, the island must be at times submerged, or the sea makes a complete breach over it\".\nWake Island first received international attention with the wreck of the barque . On the night of March 4, 1866, the 650-ton iron-hulled \"Libelle\", of Bremen, struck the eastern reef of Wake Island during a gale. Commanded by Captain Anton Tobias, the ship was en route from San Francisco to Hong Kong with a cargo of mercury (quicksilver). After three days of searching and digging on the island for water, the crew recovered a water tank from the wrecked ship. Valuable cargo was also recovered and buried on the island, including some of the 1,000 flasks of mercury, coins, and precious stones. After three weeks with a dwindling water supply and no sign of rescue, the passengers and crew decided to leave Wake and attempt to sail to Guam (the center of the then Spanish colony of the Mariana Islands) on the two remaining boats from \"Libelle\". Twenty-two passengers and some of the crew sailed in the longboat under the command of First Mate Rudolf Kausch, and the remainder of the crew sailed with Captain Tobias in the gig. On April 8, 1866, the longboat reached Guam after 13 days of frequent squalls, short rations, and tropical sun. The gig, commanded by the captain, was lost at sea.\nThe Spanish governor of the Mariana Islands, Francisco Moscoso y Lara, welcomed and aided the \"Libelle\" shipwreck survivors in Guam. He also ordered the schooner \"Ana\", owned and commanded by his son-in-law George H. Johnston, to be dispatched with first mate Kausch to search for the missing gig and then sail on to Wake Island to confirm the shipwreck story and recover the buried treasure. \"Ana\" departed Guam on April 10 and, after two days at Wake Island, found and salvaged the buried coins, precious stones, and a small quantity of the quicksilver.\nOn July 29, 1870, the British tea clipper \"Dashing Wave\", under the command of Captain Henry Vandervord, sailed out of Fuzhou en route to Sydney. On August 31, \"the weather was very thick, and it was blowing a heavy gale from the eastward, attended with violent squalls and a tremendous sea.\" At 10:30\u00a0pm, breakers were seen, and the ship struck the reef at Wake Island. The vessel began to break up overnight, and at 10:00\u00a0am, the crew launched the longboat over the leeward side. In the chaos of the evacuation, the captain secured a chart and nautical instruments but no compass. The crew loaded a case of wine, some bread, and two buckets, but no drinking water. Since Wake Island appeared to have neither food nor water, the captain and his 12-man crew quickly departed, crafting a makeshift sail by attaching a blanket to an oar. With no water, each man was allotted a glass of wine daily until a heavy rain shower came on the sixth day. After 31 days of drifting westward in the longboat, they reached Kosrae (Strong's Island) in the Caroline Islands. Captain Vandervord attributed the loss of \"Dashing Wave\" to the erroneous way Wake Island \"is laid down in the charts. It is very low, and not easily seen even on a clear night.\"\nAmerican annexation.\nWith the annexation of Hawaii in 1898 and the acquisition of Guam and the Philippines resulting from the conclusion of the Spanish\u2013American War that same year, the United States began to consider the unclaimed and uninhabited Wake Island, located approximately halfway between Honolulu and Manila, as a good location for a telegraph cable station and coaling station for refueling warships of the rapidly expanding United States Navy and passing merchant and passenger steamships. On July 4, 1898, United States Army Brigadier General Francis V. Greene of the 2nd Brigade, Philippine Expeditionary Force, of the Eighth Army Corps, stopped at Wake Island and raised the United States flag while en route to the Philippines on the steamship liner SS \"China\".\nOn January 17, 1899, under orders from President William McKinley, Commander Edward D. Taussig of landed on Wake and formally took possession of the island for the United States. After a 21-gun salute, the flag was raised, and a brass plate was affixed to the flagstaff with the following inscription:\n\"United States of America\"\n\"William McKinley, President;\"\n\"John D. Long, Secretary of the Navy.\"\n\"Commander Edward D. Taussig, U.S.N.,\"\n\"Commander U.S.S. Bennington,\"\n\"this 17th day of January 1899, took\"\n\"possession of the Atoll known as Wake\"\n\"Island for the United States of America.\"\nAlthough the proposed Wake Island route for the submarine cable would have been shorter by , the Midway Islands and not Wake Island was chosen as the location for the telegraph cable station between Honolulu and Guam. Rear Admiral Royal Bird Bradford, chief of the U.S. Navy's Bureau of Equipment, stated before the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce on January 17, 1902, that \"Wake Island seems at times to be swept by the sea. It is only a few feet above the level of the ocean, and if a cable station were established there, costly work would be required; besides, it has no harbor, while the Midway Islands are perfectly habitable and have a fair harbor for vessels of draught.\"\nOn June 23, 1902, , commanded by Captain Alfred Croskey and bound for Manila, spotted a ship's boat on the beach as it passed closely by Wake Island. Soon thereafter, the Japanese launched the boat on the island and sailed out to meet the transport. The Japanese told Captain Croskey that they had been put on the island by a schooner from Yokohama in Japan and that they were gathering guano and drying fish. The captain suspected they were engaged in pearl hunting. The Japanese revealed that one of their parties needed medical attention, and the captain determined from their descriptions of the symptoms that the illness was most likely beriberi. They informed Captain Croskey that they did not need any provisions or water and expected the Japanese schooner to return in a month or so. The Japanese declined an offer to be taken on the transport to Manila and were given some medical supplies for the sick man, some tobacco, and a few incidentals.\nAfter USAT \"Buford\" reached Manila, Captain Croskey reported the Japanese presence at Wake Island. He also learned that USAT Sheridan had a similar encounter at Wake with the Japanese. The incident was brought to the attention of Assistant Secretary of the Navy Charles Darling, who at once informed the State Department and suggested that an explanation from the Japanese Government was needed. In August 1902, Japanese Minister Takahira Kogor\u014d provided a diplomatic note stating that the Japanese Government had \"no claim whatever to make on the sovereignty of the island, but that if any subjects are found on the island the Imperial Government expects that they should be properly protected as long as they are engaged in peaceful occupations.\"\nWake Island was now clearly a territory of the United States, but the island was only occasionally visited by passing American ships during this period. One notable visit occurred in December 1906, when U.S. Army General John J. Pershing, later famous as the commander of the American Expeditionary Forces in western Europe during World War I, stopped at Wake on and hoisted a 45-star U.S. flag that was improvised out of sail canvas.\nJapanese activity.\nWith limited freshwater resources, no harbor, and no plans for development, Wake Island remained a remote uninhabited Pacific island in the early 20th century. However, a large seabird population attracted Japanese feather collecting. The global demand for feathers and plumage was driven by the millinery industry and popular European fashion designs for hats, while other demand came from pillow and bedspread manufacturers. Japanese poachers set up camps to harvest feathers on many remote islands in the Central Pacific. The feather trade was primarily focused on Laysan albatross, black-footed albatross, masked booby, lesser frigatebird, great frigatebird, sooty tern and other species of tern. On February 6, 1904, Rear Admiral Robley D. Evans arrived at Wake Island on and observed Japanese collecting feathers and catching sharks for their fins. Abandoned feather poaching camps were seen by the crew of the submarine tender in 1922 and in 1923. Although feather collecting and plumage exploitation had been outlawed in the territorial United States, there is no record of any enforcement actions at Wake Island.\nIn January 1908, the Japanese ship \"Toyoshima Maru\", en route from Tateyama, Japan, to the South Pacific, encountered a heavy storm that disabled the ship and swept the captain and five of the crew overboard. The 36 remaining crew members landed on Wake Island and endured five months of great hardship, disease, and starvation. In May 1908, the Brazilian Navy training ship \"Benjamin Constant\", while on a voyage around the world, passed by the island and spotted a tattered red distress flag. Unable to land a boat, the crew executed a challenging three-day rescue operation using rope and cable to bring on board the 20 survivors and transported them to Yokohama.\nU.S. expeditions.\nIn his 1921 book \"Sea-Power in the Pacific: A Study of the American-Japanese Naval Problem\", Hector C. Bywater recommended establishing a well-defended fueling station at Wake Island to provide coal and oil for United States Navy ships engaged in future operations against Japan. On June 19, 1922, the submarine tender landed an investigating party to determine the practicality and feasibility of establishing a naval fueling station on Wake Island. Lt. Cmdr. Sherwood Picking reported that from \"a strategic point of view, Wake Island could not be better located, dividing as it does with Midway, the passage from Honolulu to Guam into almost exact thirds.\" He observed that the boat channel was choked with coral heads and that the lagoon was very shallow and not over in depth, and therefore Wake would not be able to serve as a base for surface vessels. Picking suggested clearing the channel to the lagoon for \"loaded motor sailing launches\" so that parties on shore could receive supplies from passing ships, and he strongly recommended that Wake be used as a base for aircraft. Picking stated, \"If the long heralded trans-Pacific flight ever takes place, Wake Island should certainly be occupied and used as an intermediate resting and fueling port.\"\nIn 1923, a joint expedition by the then Bureau of the Biological Survey (in the U.S. Department of Agriculture), the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum and the United States Navy was organized to conduct a thorough biological survey of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, then administered by the Biological Survey Bureau as the Hawaiian Islands Bird Reservation. On February 1, 1923, Secretary of Agriculture Henry C. Wallace contacted Secretary of Navy Edwin Denby to request Navy participation and recommended expanding the expedition to Johnston, Midway and Wake, all islands not administered by the Department of Agriculture. On July 27, 1923, , a World War I minesweeper, brought the Tanager Expedition to Wake Island under the leadership of ornithologist Alexander Wetmore, and a tent camp was established on the eastern end of Wilkes. From July 27 to August 5, the expedition charted the atoll, made extensive zoological and botanical observations, and gathered specimens for the Bishop Museum while the naval vessel under the command of Lt. Cmdr. Samuel Wilder King conducted a sounding survey offshore. Other achievements at Wake included examinations of three abandoned Japanese feather poaching camps, scientific observations of the now extinct Wake Island rail, and confirmation that Wake Island is an atoll, a group of three islands with a central lagoon. Wetmore named the southwest island for Charles Wilkes, who had led the original pioneering United States Exploring Expedition to Wake in 1841. The northwest island was named for Titian Peale, the chief naturalist of that 1841 expedition.\nPan American Airways.\nJuan Trippe, president of the world's then-largest airline, Pan American Airways (PAA), wanted to expand globally by offering passenger air service between the United States and China. To cross the Pacific Ocean, his planes would need to island-hop, stopping at various points for refueling and maintenance. He first tried to plot the route on his globe, but it showed only open sea between Midway and Guam. Next, he went to the New York Public Library to study 19th-century clipper ship logs and charts and he \"discovered\" a little-known coral atoll, Wake Island. To proceed with his plans at Wake and Midway, Trippe would need to be granted access to each island and approval to construct and operate facilities; however, the islands were not under the jurisdiction of any specific U.S. government entity.\nMeanwhile, U.S. Navy military planners and the State Department were increasingly alarmed by the Empire of Japan's expansionist attitude and growing belligerence in the Western Pacific. Following World War I, the Council of the League of Nations had granted the South Seas Mandate (\"Nanyo\") to Japan (which had joined the Allied Powers in the First World War) which included the already Japanese-held Micronesia islands north of the equator that were part of the former colony of German New Guinea of the German Empire; these include the modern nation/states of Palau, The Federated States of Micronesia, The Northern Mariana Islands and The Marshall Islands. In the 1920s and 1930s, Japan restricted access to its mandated territory and began to develop harbors and airfields throughout Micronesia in defiance of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922, which prohibited both the United States and Japan from expanding military fortifications in the Pacific islands. With Trippe's planned Pan American Airways aviation route passing through Wake and Midway, the U.S. Navy and the State Department saw an opportunity to project American air power across the Pacific under the guise of a commercial aviation enterprise. On October 3, 1934, Trippe wrote to the Secretary of the Navy, requesting a five-year lease on Wake Island with an option for four renewals. Given the potential military value of PAA's base development, on November 13, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral William H. Standley ordered a survey of Wake by and on December 29 President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 6935, which placed Wake Island and also Johnston, Sand Island at Midway and Kingman Reef under the control of the Department of the Navy. Rear Admiral Harry E. Yarnell designated Wake Island as a bird sanctuary to disguise the Navy's military intentions.\nUSS \"Nitro\" arrived at Wake Island on March 8, 1935, and conducted a two-day ground, marine, and aerial survey, providing the Navy with strategic observations and complete photographic coverage of the atoll. Four days later, on March 12, Secretary of the Navy Claude A. Swanson formally granted Pan American Airways permission to construct facilities at Wake Island.\nTo construct bases in the Pacific, PAA chartered the 6,700-ton freighter SS \"North Haven\", which arrived at Wake Island on May 9, 1935, with construction workers and the necessary materials and equipment to start to build Pan American facilities and to clear the lagoon for a flying boat landing area. The atoll's encircling coral reef prevented the ship from entering and anchoring in the shallow lagoon. The only suitable location for ferrying supplies and workers ashore was at nearby Wilkes Island; however, the chief engineer of the expedition, Charles R. Russell, determined that Wilkes was too low and, at times, flooded and that Peale Island was the best site for the Pan American facilities. To offload the ship, cargo was lightered (barged) from ship to shore, carried across Wilkes, and then transferred to another barge and towed across the lagoon to Peale Island. Someone had earlier loaded railroad track rails onto \"North Haven\" by inspiration, so the men built a narrow-gauge railway to make it easier to haul the supplies across Wilkes to the lagoon. The line used a flatbed car pulled by a tractor. On June 12, \"North Haven\" departed for Guam, leaving behind various PAA technicians and a construction crew.\nOut in the middle of the lagoon, Bill Mullahey, a swimmer and free diver from Columbia University, was tasked with placing dynamite charges to blast hundreds of coral heads from a long, wide, deep landing area for the flying boats. In total some of dynamite were used over three months on the coral heads in the Wake Atoll lagoon.\nOn August 17, the first aircraft landing at Wake Island occurred when a PAA flying boat landed in the lagoon on a survey flight of the route between Midway and Wake.\nThe second expedition of \"North Haven\" arrived at Wake Island on February 5, 1936, to complete the construction of the PAA facilities. A five-ton diesel locomotive for the Wilkes Island Railroad was offloaded, and the railway track was extended to run from dock to dock. Across the lagoon on Peale, workers assembled the Pan American Hotel, a prefabricated structure with 48 rooms and wide porches and verandas. The hotel consisted of two wings built out from a central lobby, with each room having a bathroom with a hot-water shower. The PAA facilities staff included a group of Chamorro men from Guam who were employed as kitchen helpers, hotel service attendants, and laborers. The village on Peale was nicknamed \"PAAville\" and was the first \"permanent\" human settlement on Wake.\nBy October 1936, Pan American Airways was ready to transport passengers across the Pacific on its small fleet of three Martin M-130 \"Flying Clippers\". On October 11, the \"China Clipper\" landed at Wake on a press flight with ten journalists on board. A week later, on October 18, PAA President Juan Trippe and a group of VIP passengers arrived at Wake on the \"Philippine Clipper\" (NC14715). On October 25, the \"Hawaii Clipper\" (NC14714) landed at Wake with the first paying airline passengers ever to cross the Pacific. In 1937, Wake Island became a regular stop for PAA's international trans-Pacific passenger and airmail service, with two scheduled flights per week, one westbound from Midway and one eastbound from Guam. Pan Am also flew the Boeing 314 Clipper flying boats, in addition to the Martin M130.\nWake Island is credited with being one of the early successes of hydroponics, which enabled Pan American Airways to grow vegetables for its passengers, as it was costly to airlift in fresh vegetables and the island lacked natural soil. Pan Am remained in operation up to the day of the first Japanese air raid in December 1941, forcing the U.S. into World War II.\nThe last flight out was a Martin M-130, which had just taken off on the flight to Guam when it was called on the radio about Pearl Harbor and the outbreak of World War II, so it returned to Wake. It was fueled up and was going to do a maritime patrol to search for the Japanese, when the Japanese bombing raid attacked, and the aircraft took some light damage during the raid. Two of the air crew were wounded. It was stripped of seats and spare weight and filled with 40 people to evacuate. After three take-off attempts, it got in the air. It flew to Midway, then Pearl Harbor, then back to the US. The flight with passengers and 26 Pan-Am employees left in such a hurry that 1 passenger, 1 employee, and 35 Guam staff were left behind. It departed about two hours after the air raid. Except for one other Marine that a PBY Catalina flew out on December 21, these were the last to leave Wake island before the Japanese capture on the 23rd. The US plan was to resupply Wake with a naval force and evacuate civilians, but the island fell to the Japanese while it was still en route.\nMilitary buildup.\nIn January 1941, the United States Navy began constructing a military base on the atoll. On August 19, 1941, the first permanent military garrison, elements of the U.S. Marine Corps' First Marine Defense Battalion, totaling 449 officers and men, were stationed on the island, commanded by Navy Cmdr. Winfield Scott Cunningham. Also on the island were 68 U.S. Naval personnel and about 1,221 civilian workers from the American firm Morrison-Knudsen Corp. The base plan was not complete at the time the war started, and work continued even during the Battle of Wake. One shortcoming was that the hangars and bunkers were incomplete, so repairing damaged aircraft during the battle was hard.\nOn February 14, 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8682 to create naval defense areas in the central Pacific territories. The proclamation established the \"Wake Island Naval Defensive Sea Area\", encompassing the territorial waters between the extreme high-water marks and the three-mile marine boundaries surrounding Wake. \"Wake Island Naval Airspace Reservation\" was also established to restrict access to the airspace over the naval defense sea area. Only U.S. government ships and aircraft were permitted to enter the naval defense areas at Wake Island unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy.\nIn November 1941, VMF-211 embarked with 12 of its 24 F4F-3 Wildcats and 13 of its 29 pilots aboard for movement to Wake Island launching from the carrier and arriving at Wake on December 3.\nWorld War II.\nOn December 8, 1941, the Japanese began an assault on Wake Island. At the time, there were about 500 Marines, 1100 civilian contractors, and dozens of Pan-Am airline employees and passengers. Shortly after a bombing raid that killed dozens, the Pan Am Flying Boat took off with the passengers and many employees. Three days later, the Japanese began a multi-ship amphibious invasion led by a cruiser, which was turned away at the loss of two destroyers by Wake's artillery. This action was widely reported as the first American battlefield success of the war. Meanwhile, the U.S. Navy began a plan to resupply the island and evacuate the contractors; however, before this could happen, a much larger amphibious invasion took place on the island on December 23, 1941, losing two more ships and additional casualties. The Japanese stationed about 4,000 troops on the island. All but 100 of the POWs were sent away; the ones that remained were executed in 1943 after a U.S. bombing raid. In June 1945, the Allies allowed a Japanese hospital ship to evacuate about 1000 soldiers from Wake. The island was bombed many times by the Allies throughout the war but never invaded; it was surrendered to the U.S. in September 1945.\nBattle of Wake Island.\nOn December 8, 1941 (December 7 in Hawaii, the day of the attack on Pearl Harbor), at least 27 Japanese Mitsubishi G3M \"Nell\" medium bombers flown from bases on Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands attacked Wake Island, destroying eight of the 12 Grumman F4F Wildcat fighter aircraft belonging to USMC Fighter Squadron 211 on the ground. The Marine garrison's defensive emplacements were left intact by the raid, which primarily targeted the aircraft. On December 9 and 10, there were more air attacks, and two Japanese bombers were shot down. However, the bombing of Wilkes Island detonated an ammunition dump; the Wake hospital was destroyed, and many other buildings were damaged. Meanwhile, the Japanese naval landing force was on its way from Roi in the Japanese-held Marshall Islands and would arrive at Wake on December 11, 1941. On the night of December 10, the US submarine USS \"Triton\" engaged an enemy destroyer near Wake while on patrol; it fired torpedoes, but in the battle neither vessel was sunk. This was the first time a U.S. submarine launched its torpedoes in the Pacific war.\nThe Japanese are known to have lost one of the submarines they sent as part of the operation. Still, it was because two of their submarines accidentally collided with one another on December 17, sinking one. Japanese submarine \"Ro-66\" was on the surface southwest of Wake Island \u2013 bearing 252 degrees from the atoll \u2013 to recharge her batteries in a heavy squall in the predawn darkness of December 17, 1941, when her lookouts suddenly sighted \"Ro-62\", also on the surface and recharging batteries. Both submarines attempted to back off, but it was too late to avoid a collision, and \"Ro-62\" rammed \"Ro-66\" at 20:20 Japan Standard Time. \"Ro-66\" sank at with the loss of 63 lives, including that of the commander of Submarine Division 27. \"Ro-62\" rescued her three survivors, who had been thrown overboard from her bridge by the collision.\nThe American garrison, supplemented by civilian construction workers employed by Morrison-Knudsen Corp., repelled several Japanese landing attempts. An American journalist reported that after the initial Japanese amphibious assault was beaten back with heavy losses on December 11, the American commander was asked by his superiors if he needed anything. Popular legend has it that Major James Devereux sent back the message, \"Send us more Japs!\" \u2013 a reply that became famous. After the war, when Major Devereux learned that he had been credited with sending such a message, he pointed out that he had not been the commander on Wake Island and denied sending it. \"As far as I know, it wasn't sent at all. None of us was that much of a damn fool. We already had more Japs than we could handle.\"\nIn reality, Commander Winfield S. Cunningham, USN, was in charge of Wake Island, not Devereux. Cunningham ordered that coded messages be sent during operations. A junior officer had added \"send us\" and \"more Japs\" to the beginning and end of a message to confuse Japanese code breakers. This was put together at Pearl Harbor and passed on as part of the message.\nOn December 12, in the early morning, a four-engined flying boat bombed Wake, but a Wildcat fighter aircraft was able to intercept and shoot it down. Later in the day, they were bombed again by 26 Nell aircraft (G3M twin-engine bombers), one of which was shot down by anti-aircraft fire. An F4F Wildcat on patrol late in the day sank a Japanese submarine that was near Wake. The next air raid was on December 14, which included a bombing raid by several 4-engined flying boats, and later in the day, 30 Nells (G3M) struck the atoll, destroying a Wildcat that was under repair. The island was bombed again on December 15, killing one civilian worker. Wake was bombed again on December 16 by 33 Nells (G3M), and again on the 19th, though in that attack one was shot down by anti-aircraft fire and several more damaged. Before and at the start of hostilities, the waters around Wake were patrolled by two USN submarines, the USS Triton and the USS Tambor. Before the start of the war one of the USS Triton crew members became sick and was dropped off at Wake Island on December 1, 1941. He became a prisoner of war and survived WWII. The Triton was radioed about the start of the war when it surfaced to recharge its batteries and was warned to stay away from the atoll, lest Wake's gunners target it. On December 10, the USS Triton had one engagement with a Japanese destroyer and fired the first US torpedoes of the Pacific War, though it did not sink. It escaped unscathed and went on to serve in the Pacific theater (it was later sunk in 1943). The submarine USS Tambor had to return to its home port in Hawaii in mid-December due to mechanical difficulties and had no engagements.\nA PBY Catalina flying boat arrived with mail delivery on December 20, 1941. When it left, Lt. Colonel Bayler was on board because he was required on Midway, becoming the last person to leave Wake Island before its loss. On December 21, 49 aircraft attacked Wake, striking from a Japanese carrier group. During this time, there was a US Naval force on the way that was going to resupply Wake on December 24, but it did not work as planned as the Japanese 2nd wave took the island on December 23 before this could take place. American and Japanese dead from the fighting between December 8 and 23 were buried on the island.\nThe U.S. Navy attempted to provide support from Hawaii but suffered great losses at Pearl Harbor. The relief fleet they managed to organize was delayed by bad weather. The isolated U.S. garrison was overwhelmed by a reinforced and greatly superior Japanese invasion force on December 23. American casualties numbered 52 military personnel (Navy and Marine) and approximately 70 civilians killed. Japanese losses exceeded 700 dead, with some estimates ranging as high as 1,000. Wake's defenders sank two Japanese fast transports (\"P32\" and \"P33\") and one submarine and shot down 24 Japanese aircraft. The US relief fleet, en route, on hearing of the island's loss, turned back.\nIn the aftermath of the battle, most of the captured civilians and military personnel were sent to POW camps in Asia. However, the Japanese enslaved some of the civilian laborers and tasked them with improving the island's defenses.\nAt the end of the battle on December 23, 1,603 people, of whom 1,150 were civilians, were taken prisoner. Three weeks later, all but roughly 350\u2013360 were taken to Japanese prisoner-of-war camps in Asia aboard the \"Nita Maru\" (later renamed \"Ch\u016by\u014d)\". Many of those who stayed were those who were too badly wounded, and some were civilian contractors who knew how to operate the machinery on the island. A significant source of the prisoner war experience on Wake were the accounts in the commanding officer logs for Wilcox and Russel. In September 1942, another 265 were taken off Wake including Wilcox and Russel; not including those that had died or been executed, that left 98 on the island. With the departure of the officers, their logs of daily prisoners of life on Wake ended. Still, additional facts are known, including a new commanding officer of the island in December 1942. In July 1943, a prisoner of war was executed for stealing food, as ordered by Sakaibara; however, the identity of this POW is unknown. On October 7, 1943, the prisoners of war were executed on order of Sakaibara; they were marched into an anti-tank ditch and executed by machine gun fire. At the end of the war, the Japanese garrison surrendered and said the POWs had been killed in a bombing attack; however, that story broke down when some of the officers wrote notes explaining the true story, and Sakaibara confessed to the mass execution.\nJapanese occupation, air raids, POWs.\nThe island's Japanese garrison was composed of the IJN 65th Guard Unit (2,000 men), Japan Navy Captain Shigematsu Sakaibara and the IJA units, which became the 13th Independent Mixed Regiment (1,939 men) under the command of Col. Shigeji Chikamori. Fearing an imminent invasion, the Japanese reinforced Wake Island with more formidable defenses. The American captives were ordered to build a series of bunkers and fortifications on Wake. The Japanese brought in an naval gun which is often incorrectly reported as having been captured in Singapore. The U.S. Navy established a submarine blockade instead of an amphibious invasion of Wake Island. The Japanese-occupied island (called \u014ctorishima (\u5927\u9ce5\u5cf6) or \"Big Bird Island\" by them for its birdlike shape) was bombed several times by American aircraft; one of these raids was the first mission for future United States President George H. W. Bush.\nThe island was also bombed with leaflets and even small rubber rafts, with the idea that someone could escape from the island by sea.\nIn February 1942, there was a raid attack on Wake, which included naval bombardment and bombing by aircraft. On the first day of the attack on February 23, several targets on the island were struck, and in the waters nearby, two Japanese patrol boats were sunk, and four Japanese seamen were recovered. The next day (February 24) a Japanese 4-engine patrol aircraft was shot down 5 miles east of Wake, and another patrol boat was sunk by air attack in addition to also striking targets on Wake Island. The raids would continue to reduce the danger of Wake being used as a launching point for a strike on Midway.\nFrom June 1942 to July 1943, many US B-24 raids and photographic recon missions were launched from Midway to Wake, often resulting in air battles between Zeros and bombers. For example, on May 15, 1943, a raid of 7 B-24s made it to Wake to be intercepted by 22 Zeros, with allies losing one B-24 and claiming four kills. In July 1943, a B-24 strike targeting the fuel depots lost another B-24 when intercepted by 20 to 30 Zeros. The last raid from Midway in 1943 was in July. The next significant attack combined naval bombardment and carrier strike aircraft in the fateful October 1943 raids. In 1944, Wake Island was bombed by PB2Y Coronado flying boats operating from Midway to stop the Japanese garrison from supporting the battle for the Marshall Islands. Once the Kwajalein was taken, Wake was attacked from the newly won base with B-24 raids. This continued until October 1944, thereafter Wake was only bombed a few more times by carrier strike groups usually heading west.\nOn May 10, 1942, one prisoner was executed for breaking into a store and getting drunk. In September 1942, another 265 POWs were taken off the island, leaving 98.\nIn March 1943, the Japanese transport ship Suwa Maru was traveling to Wake with over 1000 troops on board. The U.S. submarine USS Tunny torpedoed it, and the ship was taking on water as it approached Wake, so it was beached on the coral reef to avoid sinking.\nAfter a successful American air raid on October 5, 1943, Sakaibara ordered the execution of the remaining 97 (one had been executed in July) POWs. They were taken to the northern end of the island, blindfolded and machine-gunned. One prisoner escaped, carving the message \"98 US PW 5-10-43\" on a large coral rock near where the victims had been hastily buried in a mass grave. This unknown American was soon recaptured and beheaded. The one that escaped created an issue for the Japanese, who had already buried the bodies at the end of the runway under coral sand. They then had to dig up and count all the bodies, confirming that one was missing. This would not be the final resting place, as near the end of the war in August 1945, the bodies were again dug up and reburied at Peacock Point in a mass grave but with multiple wooden crosses. After the war, they were exhumed again and buried at the U.S. National Cemetery of the Pacific.\nLater in the war, the Japanese garrison had been almost cut off from supplies and was reduced to the point of starvation. While the islands' sooty tern colony had received some protection as a source of eggs, the Wake Island rail was hunted to extinction by the starving soldiers. Ultimately, about three-quarters of the Japanese garrison perished, and the rest survived only by eating tern eggs, the Polynesian rats, and what scant number of vegetables they could grow in makeshift gardens among the coral rubble. In early 1944, Wake was largely cut off from resupply because the Allies Pacific campaign had moved past Wake, in particular, the Japanese base to the south that had been resupplying Wake was captured in January 1944. In May 1944, the Japanese forces on Wake began rationing food, and the rationing became progressively stricter. To survive the garrison engaged in fishing, growing vegetables, bird eggs, and rats, which were essential food supplies at this time, and sometimes tens of thousands of rats were killed in a single day to stave off starvation.\nIn June 1945, the Japanese hospital ship \"Takasago Maru\" was allowed to visit Wake Island, and it departed with 974 patients. It was boarded and checked both before and after the visit to confirm it was not carrying contraband, and the number of patients was confirmed: 974 Japanese were taken off Wake. On the way to Wake, it was stopped by the USS \"Murray\" (DD-576) and on the way back from Wake it was stopped by the USS \"McDermut II\" (DD-677) to confirm it was carrying the patients. The condition was recorded first hand by the USS \"McDermut II\", which reported that about 15% of the troops that the Japanese evacuated were extremely sick.\nThe Pacific War finally came to a close in August 1945, with negotiations opening. The Emperor of Japan announced the surrender to the Japanese people, and the agreement was formally signed on September 2, 1945.\nMost of the Wake POWs were liberated from Hirahata Camp 12-B, which switched over from Japanese to American control in late August 1945. About 300 prisoners were included from Wake Island, and a makeshift flag was raised at the camp as they gathered to mark the end of their internment.\nSurrender and trial.\nOn September 4, 1945, the Japanese garrison surrendered to a detachment of United States Marines under the command of Brigadier General Lawson H. M. Sanderson. The garrison, having previously received news that Imperial Japan's defeat was imminent, exhumed the mass grave. The bones were moved to the U.S. cemetery established on Peacock Point after the invasion. Wooden crosses were erected in preparation for the expected arrival of U.S. forces. During the initial interrogations, the Japanese claimed that an American bombing raid mostly killed the remaining 98 Americans on the island. However, some escaped and fought to the death after being cornered on the beach at the north end of Wake Island. Several Japanese officers in American custody committed suicide over the incident, leaving written statements that incriminated Sakaibara. Sakaibara and his subordinate, lieutenant commander Tachibana, were later sentenced to death after conviction for this and other war crimes. Sakaibara was executed by hanging in Guam on June 18, 1947, while Tachibana's sentence was commuted to life in prison. The remains of the murdered civilians were exhumed and reburied at Honolulu's National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific at section G, commonly known as Punchbowl Crater. A year after the Wake executions, in 1944, there was the Palawan massacre in which Captain Nagayoshi Kojima ordered the execution of 150 POW when he was told the Allies were near. They were burned alive in trenches, and those who tried to flee were gunned down, but 11 escaped, leading to a death toll of 139. In response, the Allies then realized the Japanese might execute POWs if they thought the Allies were near and began a special mission to liberate POW camps. At the time, the events on Wake in 1943 were unknown, and the U.S. allowed the hospital ship \"Takasago Maru\" to visit Wake in June 1945. After the surrender, the POW gravesite was found where they had been buried with crosses at Peacock Point, and the story was that either they had died in a U.S. bombing raid or that they had died in a revolt. At the handover of Wake, 2200 Japanese were on the island, significantly less than at the start, but 974 had just been shipped back to Japan in June 1945. Wake was not cut off until later in the war, but it is estimated that hundreds died during the bombing strikes and from starvation, and many were sick with tuberculosis.\nIn any case, the Japanese soldiers who had survived were nearly all sent away by November 1, 1945, transported aboard the \"Hikawa Maru\" for repatriation. The remaining Japanese troops and the officers were shipped to the U.S. base atoll, but on the route, two of the officers committed suicide, leaving notes describing a POW massacre. Another officer wrote a note describing the same. Finally, the Admiral admitted what he had ordered and accepted blame, leading to two officers' trial in late December. Back on Wake, the bodies were eventually exhumed, including those that had died in the Battle of Wake, to try to make identifications. The task proved too difficult, and they were buried as a group with a memorial listing the names. There was a ceremony in 1953.\nPost-World War II military and commercial airfield.\nWith the end of hostilities with Japan and the increase in international air travel driven partly by wartime advances in aeronautics, Wake Island became a critical mid-Pacific base for the servicing and refueling of military and commercial aircraft. The United States Navy resumed control of the island, and in October 1945, 400 Seabees from the 85th Naval Construction Battalion arrived at Wake to clear the island of the effects of the war and to build basic facilities for a Naval Air Base. The base was completed in March 1946, and on September 24, Pan Am resumed regular commercial passenger service. The era of the flying boats was nearly over, so Pan Am switched to longer-range, faster, and more profitable airplanes that could land on Wake's new coral runway. Other airlines that established transpacific routes through Wake included British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), Japan Airlines, Philippine Airlines and Transocean Airlines. Due to the substantial increase in the number of commercial flights, on July 1, 1947, the Navy transferred administration, operations, and maintenance of the facilities at Wake to the Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA). In 1949, the CAA upgraded the runway by paving over the coral surface and extending its length to 7,000 feet. Previously Pan Am was still operating the airport at Wake.\nIn July 1950, the Korean Airlift started, and the Military Air Transport Service (MATS) used the airfield and facilities at Wake as an essential mid-Pacific refueling stop for its mission of transporting men and supplies to the Korean War. By September, 120 military aircraft were landing at Wake per day. On October 15, U.S. President Harry S. Truman and General MacArthur met at the Wake Island Conference to discuss progress and war strategy for the Korean Peninsula. They chose to meet at Wake Island because of its proximity to Korea so that MacArthur would not have to be away from the troops in the field for long.\nIn September 1952, Typhoon Olive struck, causing 750\u00a0people to shelter in World War II bunkers as the island was battered with 150\u00a0mph winds. Olive, the second typhoon to affect the island since 1935, produced sustained wind speeds of and peak gusts of on the island. Significant flooding was also recorded. Damage was severe; it is estimated that 85% of the island's structures were demolished due to the storm. All of the homes and the island's hotel were destroyed. Additionally, the island's chapel and Quonset huts were destroyed. The island's LORAN station, operated by the United States Coast Guard, was also damaged. On September\u00a018, 1952 water and power services were restored. The facilities on the island were fully restored in 1953. The total cost to repair damages caused by Olive amounted to $1.6\u00a0million (1952 USD; $13\u00a0million 2009 USD). No fatalities occurred on the island, and four injuries were reported. None of the 230\u00a0Pan Am employees received injuries. In 1953, the bridge between Peale and Wake Island was rebuilt.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard Loran station had a staff of about ten people. It operated from 1950 to 1978, with facilities rebuilt on Peale Island by 1958. Originally, the staff lived on Wake and commuted to the Loran station on Peale across the bridge; the Loran equipment was in a Quonset hut. However, after 1958, new modern facilities were all built on Peale. The cargo ship USCGC Kukui supported the construction of the new LORAN facilities, arriving at the island in 1957.\nMissile Impact Location System.\nFrom 1958 through 1960, the United States installed the Missile Impact Location System (MILS) in the Navy-managed Pacific Missile Range. Later, the Air Force managed Western Range to localize the splashdowns of test missile nose cones. MILS was developed and installed by the same entities that had completed the first phase of the Atlantic and U.S. West Coast SOSUS systems. A MILS installation, consisting of both a target array for precision location and a broad ocean area system for good positions outside the target area, was installed at Wake as part of the system supporting Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) tests. Other Pacific MILS shore terminals were at the Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay supporting Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM) tests with impact areas northeast of Hawaii and the other ICBM test support systems at Midway Island and Eniwetok.\nTanker shipwreck and oil spill.\nOn September 6, 1967, Standard Oil of California's 18,000-ton tanker SS \"R.C. Stoner\" was driven onto the reef at Wake Island by a strong southwesterly wind after the ship failed to moor to the two buoys near the harbor entrance. An estimated six million gallons of refined fuel oil \u2013 including 5.7\u00a0million gallons of aviation fuel, 168,000 gallons of diesel oil, and 138,600 gallons of bunker C fuel \u2013 spilled into the small boat harbor and along the southwestern coast of Wake Island to Peacock Point. The oil spill killed large numbers of fish; personnel from the FAA and crew members from the ship cleared the area closest to the spill of dead fish.\nThe U.S. Navy salvage team Harbor Clearance Unit Two and Pacific Fleet Salvage Officer Cmdr. John B. Orem flew to Wake to assess the situation. By September 13, the Navy tugs and , salvage ships and , tanker , and , arrived from Honolulu, Guam and Subic Bay in the Philippines, to assist in the cleanup and removal of the vessel. The salvage team pumped and skimmed oil at the boat harbor, which they burned each evening in nearby pits. Recovery by the Navy salvage team of the \"R.C. Stoner\" and its remaining cargo, however, was hampered by strong winds and heavy seas.\nOn September 16, Super Typhoon Sarah made landfall on Wake Island at peak intensity with winds up to 145-knots, causing widespread damage. The storm's intensity significantly accelerated the cleanup effort by clearing the harbor and scouring the coast. However, oil remained embedded in the reef's flat crevices, impregnating the coral. The storm also had broken the wrecked vessel into three sections and, although delayed by rough seas and harassment by blacktip reef sharks, the salvage team used explosives to flatten and sink the remaining portions of the ship that were still above water.\nU.S. military administration.\nIn the early 1970s, higher-efficiency jet aircraft with longer-range capabilities lessened the use of Wake Island Airfield as a refueling stop, and the number of commercial flights landing at Wake declined sharply. Pan Am had replaced many of its Boeing 707s with more efficient 747s, thus eliminating the need to continue weekly stops at Wake. Other airlines began to eliminate their scheduled flights into Wake. In June 1972, the last scheduled Pan Am passenger flight landed at Wake, and in July, Pan Am's last cargo flight departed the island, marking the end of the heyday of Wake Island's commercial aviation history. During this same period, the U.S. military had transitioned to longer-range C-5A and C-141 aircraft, leaving the C-130 as the only aircraft that would continue to use the island's airfield regularly. The steady decrease in air traffic control activities at Wake Island was apparent and was expected to continue.\nOn June 24, 1972, responsibility for the civil administration of Wake Island was transferred from the FAA to the United States Air Force under an agreement between the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Air Force. In July, the FAA turned over the administration of the island to the Military Airlift Command (MAC). However, legal ownership stayed with the Department of the Interior. The FAA continued maintaining air navigation facilities and providing air traffic control services. On December 27, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force (CSAF) General John D. Ryan directed MAC to phase out en-route support activity at Wake Island effective June 30, 1973. On July 1, 1973, all FAA activities ended, and the U.S. Air Force under Pacific Air Forces (PACAF), Detachment 4, 15th Air Base Wing assumed control of Wake Island.\nIn 1973, Wake Island was selected as a launch site for testing defensive systems against ICBMs under the U.S. Army's \"Project Have Mill\". Air Force personnel on Wake and the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) provided support to the Army's Advanced Ballistic Missile Defense Agency (ABMDA). A missile launch complex was activated on Wake, and, from February 13 to June 22, 1974, seven Athena H missiles were launched from the island to the Roi-Namur Test Range at Kwajalein Atoll.\nIn 1973, Wake Island was claimed by what would become the Republic of the Marshall Islands, based on oral legends.\nVietnam War refugees: \"Operation New Life\".\nIn the spring of 1975, the population of Wake Island consisted of 251 military, government, and civilian contract personnel, whose primary mission was to maintain the airfield as a Mid-Pacific emergency runway. With the imminent fall of Saigon to North Vietnamese forces, President Gerald Ford ordered American forces to support \"Operation New Life\", the evacuation of refugees from South Vietnam. The original plans included the Philippines' Subic Bay and Guam as refugee processing centers. Still, due to the high number of Vietnamese seeking evacuation, Wake Island was selected as an additional location.\nIn March 1975, Island Commander Major Bruce R. Hoon was contacted by PACAF and ordered to prepare Wake for its new mission as a refugee processing center where Vietnamese evacuees could be medically screened, interviewed, and transported to the United States or other resettlement countries. A 60-man civil engineering team was brought in to reopen boarded-up buildings and housing. Two complete MASH units arrived to set up field hospitals, and three Army field kitchens were deployed. A 60-man United States Air Force Security Police team, processing agents from the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, and various other administrative and support personnel were also on Wake. Potable water, food, medical supplies, clothing, and other supplies were shipped in.\nOn April 26, 1975, the first C-141 carrying refugees arrived. The airlift to Wake continued at a rate of one C-141 every hour and 45 minutes, each aircraft with 283 refugees on board. At the peak of the mission, 8,700 Vietnamese refugees were on Wake. When the airlift ended on August 2, a total of about 15,000 refugees had been processed through Wake Island as part of \"Operation New Life\".\nCommemorative and memorial visits.\nIn April 1981, a party of 19 Japanese, including 16 former Japanese soldiers who were at Wake during World War II, visited the island to pay respects for their war dead at the Japanese Shinto Shrine.\nOn November 3 and 4, 1985, a group of 167 former American prisoners of war (POWs) visited Wake with their wives and children. This was the first such visit by a group of former Wake Island POWs and their families.\nOn November 24, 1985, a Pan Am Boeing 747, renamed \"China Clipper II\", came through Wake Island on a flight across the Pacific to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of Pan American China Clipper Service to the Orient. Author James A. Michener and Lars Lindbergh, grandson of aviator Charles Lindbergh, were among the dignitaries on board the aircraft.\nArmy missile tests.\nSubsequently, the island has been used for strategic defense and operations during and after the Cold War, with Wake Island serving as a launch platform for military rockets involved in testing missile defense systems and atmospheric re-entry trials as part of the Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site. Wake's location allows for a safe launch and trajectory over the unpopulated ocean with open space for intercepts.\nIn 1987, Wake Island was selected as a missile launch site for a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program named \"Project Starlab/Starbird\". In 1989, the U.S. Army Strategic Defense Command (USASDC) constructed two launch pads on Peacock Point, as well as nearby support facilities, for the eight-ton, , multi-stage Starbird test missiles. The program involved using electro-optical and laser systems mounted on the Starlab platform in the payload bay of an orbiting Space Shuttle to acquire, track, and target Starbird missiles launched from Cape Canaveral and Wake. After being impacted by mission scheduling delays caused by the explosion of the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\", the program was canceled in late September 1990 to protect funding for another U.S. Army space-based missile defense program known as \"Brilliant Pebbles\". Although no Starbird missiles were ever launched from Wake Island, the Starbird launch facilities at Wake were modified to support rocket launches for the \"Brilliant Pebbles\" program, with the first launch occurring on January 29, 1992. On October 16, a Castor-Orbus rocket was destroyed by ground controllers seven minutes after its launch from Wake. The program was canceled in 1993.\nMissile testing activities continued with the Lightweight Exo-Atmospheric Projectile (LEAP) Test Program, another U.S. Army strategic defense project that included the launch of two Aerojet Super Chief HPB rockets from Wake Island. The first launch, on January 28, 1993, reached apogee at and was a success. On February 11, the second launch reached apogee at and was deemed a failure.\nDue to the U.S. Army's continued use of the atoll for various missile testing programs, on October 1, 1994, the U.S. Army Space and Strategic Defense Command (USASSDC) assumed administrative command of Wake Island under a caretaker permit from the U.S. Air Force. The USASSDC had been operating on Wake since 1988 when the construction of the Starbird launch and support facilities started. Now under U.S. Army control, the island, which is located north of Kwajalein Atoll, became a rocket launch site for the Kwajalein Missile Range known as the Wake Island Launch Center.\nOperation Prompt Return.\nIn July 1995, various units of the U.S. military established a camp on Wake Island to provide housing, food, medical care, and social activities for Chinese illegal immigrants as part of \"Operation Prompt Return\" (also known as \"Joint Task Force Prompt Return\"). The Chinese immigrants were discovered on July 3 on board MV \"Jung Sheng Number 8\" when the -long vessel was interdicted by the U.S. Coast Guard south of Hawaii. \"Jung Sheng Number 8\" had left Canton, China, en route to the United States on June 2 with 147 Chinese illegal immigrants, including 18 \"enforcers\", and 11 crew on board. On July 29, the Chinese were transported to Wake Island, where they were cared for by U.S. military personnel, and on August 7, they were safely repatriated to China by commercial air charter. From October 10 to November 21, 1996, military units assigned to \"Operation Marathon Pacific\" used facilities at Wake Island as a staging area for the repatriation of another group of more than 113 Chinese illegal immigrants who had been interdicted in the Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda aboard the human smuggling vessel \"Xing Da\".\nU.S. Air Force regains control.\nOn October 1, 2002, administrative control and support of Wake Island was transferred from the U.S. Army to the U.S. Air Force's 15th Wing of PACAF based at Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii. The 15th Wing had previously controlled Wake from July 1, 1973, to September 30, 1994. Although the Air Force was again in control, the Missile Defense Agency would continue operating the Wake Island Launch Center. The U.S. Army's Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site would maintain and operate the launch facilities and provide instrumentation, communications, flight and ground safety, security, and other support.\nOn August 31, 2006, Wake Island was hit by the Typhoon Ioke with sustained winds over 155\u00a0mph and gusts of 190; this caused damage to the wildlife and facilities on the atoll. There was considerable damage, but overall, it was less than feared on inspection. The runway was largely intact, but some electrical and waste-water systems had been damaged. The golf course at Heel Point and Golf clubhouse was also damaged by the Ioke Typhoon.\nOn January 6, 2009, President George W. Bush issued Executive Order 8836, establishing Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument to preserve the marine environments around Wake, Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef and Palmyra Atoll. The proclamation assigned management of the nearby waters and submerged and emergent lands of the islands to the Department of the Interior and management of fishery-related activities in waters beyond 12 nautical miles from the islands' mean low water line to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). On January 16, Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthorne issued Order Number 3284 which stated that the area at Wake Island assigned to the Department of Interior by Executive Order 8836 will be managed as a National Wildlife Refuge. Management of the emergent lands at Wake Island by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, however, will not begin until the existing management agreement between the Secretary of the Air Force and the Secretary of the Interior is terminated.\nThe 611th Air Support Group (ASG), a U.S. Air Force unit based at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson in Anchorage, Alaska took over control of Wake Island from the 15th Wing on October 1, 2010. The 611th ASG was already providing support and management to various geographically remote Air Force sites within Alaska, and the addition of Wake Island provided the unit with more opportunities for outdoor projects during the winter months when projects in Alaska are minimal. The 611th ASG, a unit of the 11th Air Force, was renamed the Pacific Air Forces Regional Support Center.\nOn September 27, 2014, President Barack Obama issued Executive Order 9173 to expand the area of the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument out to the full 200 nautical miles U.S. exclusive economic zone (EEZ) boundary for each island. By this proclamation, the area of the monument at Wake Island was increased from . In 2014, 3300 tons of waste dumps was removed from the islands on barges.\nOn November 1, 2015, a complex $230\u00a0million U.S. military missile defense system test event, called \"Campaign Fierce Sentry\" Flight Test Operational-02 Event 2 (FTO-02 E2), was conducted at Wake Island and the surrounding ocean areas. The test involved a Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system built by Lockheed Martin, two AN/TPY-2 radar systems built by Raytheon, Lockheed's Command, Control, Battle Management, and Communications system, and guided missile destroyer with its AN/SPY-1 radar. The objective was to test the ability of the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense and THAAD Weapon Systems to defeat a raid of three near-simultaneous air and missile targets, consisting of one medium-range ballistic missile, one short-range ballistic missile and one cruise missile target. During the test, a THAAD system on Wake Island detected and destroyed a short-range target simulating a short-range ballistic missile launched by a C-17 transport plane. At the same time, the THAAD system and the destroyer launched missiles to intercept a medium-range ballistic missile launched by a second C-17.\nIn 2017, Thai contractors and armed forces personnel celebrated the Thai New Year or Songkran in April, and Thai King's Day was celebrated in December. Wake at one point had an estimated 2 million rats, and despite eradication efforts hunting rats at night is popular activity of the islanders.\nIn early 2024, the island experienced multiple high waves that inundated areas, and this damaged dormitories and a dining hall. This was not the only U.S. facility damaged; to the south at Roi-Namur inundation also caused damage.\nGeography.\nAlthough Wake Island is officially called an island in its singular form, it is geologically an atoll composed of three islets (Wake, Wilkes, and Peale islets). They enclose a shallow lagoon of , with average depth of around and a maximum depth of . It is ringed by a sandy beach of around wide with an offshore fringing reef. The atoll has an average elevation of about and maximum elevation of , with a total land area of about .\nThe island is made of coral and sand, as it sits on a coral reef that grew on the top of a seamount made of the remnants of an old volcano. This is consistent with many islands in the Pacific, which are formed when waves erode extinct volcanoes until they reach the surface of the ocean and coral grows on it, forming an atoll (see also guyot). The island is covered in boulders that average 5\u20136 feet in diameter (1\u20132 meters) especially on the southern side of Wake and Wilkes islands.\nWake is located two-thirds of the way from Honolulu to Guam; Honolulu is to the east, and Guam to the west. Midway Atoll is to the northeast. The closest land is the uninhabited Bokak Atoll, away in the Marshall Islands to the southeast. The atoll is to the west of the International Date Line and in the Wake Island Time Zone (UTC+12), the easternmost time zone of the United States and almost one day ahead of the 50 states.\nA shallow channel separates Wake and Peale, while Wilkes is connected to Wake by a causeway. The partially completed submarine channel, which has washed through Wilkes at times, almost splits the island in half.\nThe atoll has several named capes and points:\nClimate.\nWake Island lies in the tropical zone but is subject to periodic temperate storms during the winter. Sea surface temperatures are warm all year long, reaching above in summer and autumn. Typhoons occasionally pass over the island. Temperatures range between and and it gets about 40 inches of rain each year, with the rainy season running from July through October. The island lies in the northeast trade winds of the Pacific. The climate of Wake Island is classified as tropical savanna (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw/As\", Trewartha \"Asha\").\nTyphoons.\nOn October 19, 1940, an unnamed typhoon hit Wake Island with winds. This was the first recorded typhoon to hit the island since observations began in 1935.\nSuper Typhoon Olive impacted Wake on September 16, 1952, with wind speeds reaching . Olive caused major flooding, destroyed approximately 85% of its structures, and caused in damage.\nOn September 16, 1967, at 10:40 pm local time, the eye of Super Typhoon Sarah passed over the island. Sustained winds in the eyewall were , from the north before the eye and the south afterward. All non-reinforced structures were demolished. There were no serious injuries, and most of the civilian population was evacuated after the storm.\nOn August 28, 2006, the United States Air Force evacuated all 188 residents and suspended all operations as Category 5 Super Typhoon Ioke headed toward Wake. By August 31 the southwestern eyewall of the storm passed over the island, with winds well over , driving a storm surge and waves directly into the lagoon inflicting major damage. A U.S. Air Force assessment and repair team returned to the island in September 2006 and restored limited function to the airfield and facilities leading ultimately to a full return to normal operations.\nEcology.\nWake Island is home to the Wake Atoll National Wildlife Refuge and is a unit of the Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument.\nNative vegetation communities of Wake Island include scrub, grass, and wetlands. \"Tournefortia argentia\" (heliotrope tree) dominated scrublands exist in association with \"Scaevola taccada\" (beach cabbage), \"Cordia subcordata\" (sea trumpet), and \"Pisonia grandis\". Grassland species include \"Dactyloctenium aegyptium\" and \"Tribulus cistoides\". Wetlands are dominated by \"Sesuvium portulacastrum\", and \"Pemphis acidula\" is found near intertidal lagoons.\nThe atoll, with its surrounding marine waters, has been recognized as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International for its sooty tern colony, with some 200,000 individual birds estimated in 1999. 56 bird species have been sighted on the atoll. Wilkes Island is largely designated as a bird refuge and includes a field mowed annually to attract sooty terns and other birds that might otherwise seek to nest on the mowed apron of the airfield runway.\nDue to human use, several invasive species have become established on the atoll. Feral cats were introduced in the 1960s as pets and for pest control. Eradication efforts began in earnest in 1996 and were deemed successful in 2008. Two species of rat, \"Rattus exulans\" (Polynesian rat) and \"Rattus tanezumi\" (Asian house rat), have colonized the island. \"R. tanezumi\" populations were successfully eradicated by 2014, however, \"R. exulans\" persists. \"Casuarina equisetifolia\" (ironwood or coastal she-oak) was allegedly planted on Wake Island by Boy Scouts in the 1960s for use as a windbreak. It formed large mono-cultural forests that choked out native vegetation. Concerted efforts to kill the population began in 2017. Other introduced plant species include \"Cynodon dactylon\" (Bermuda grass) and \"Leucaena leucocephala\" (miracle tree). Non-native species of ants are also found on the atoll. Overall, the island is a mixture of tropical scrub brush and grass with trees; some of the trees are over 25 feet tall (over 7 meters).\nThe lagoon, surrounding reef, and the ocean are noted for their diverse collection of marine life. Wake waters have the largest known population of bumphead parrotfish (\"Bolbometopon muricatum)\". The coral reef that surrounds the island is home to at least 100 species of coral and over 320 species of fish. In the coral reef, there is a diverse collection of shark species, including grey reef, blacktip, and dusky sharks. The atoll is home to multiple species of land crabs, with \"Coenobita perlatus\" being especially abundant.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWake Island has no permanent inhabitants, and access is restricted. However, as of 2017, there are approximately 100 Air Force personnel and American and Thai contractor residents at any given time. As of 2011, the billeting at the airfield supports 198 beds.\nThe start of habitation was in 1935, the staff of the Pan Am waypoint and hotel on Peale Island.\nIn 1941, over 500 troops and over 1200 contractors were on the island. At the surrender on December 24, 1,603 (not counting those that had died in the battle) were surrendered to the Japanese. There was also 45 people from Guam that had been employed at the Pan Am airport and hotel that were left there also, of those 10 died on Wake and 35 were sent to POW camps in Asia. During the war all but 98 civilians were taken off the island or died, so the main occupants became the Japanese garrison there. The Japanese garrison during the war was nearly 4000, as described earlier in this article. About 1000 of these were confirmed to have been taken away by hospital ship in June 1945.\nThere were 45 workers from Guam working to support the Pan Am airbase. During the battle for Wake Island, five were killed, and five more were wounded in the attacks on December 8, 1941. Afterward, the Wake Island commander asked if the workers would help defend the island, and they agreed. During the defense of the island, the five wounded workers were killed when the hospital was bombed. When the island fell to the Japanese forces, the 35 remaining were taken prisoner and sent to a Japanese POW camp in China, where two died and others were tortured. The 33 survivors were sent to Osaka, Japan, where they stayed until the end of the war. In 1988, the Guam workers were given veteran status and POW medals for their participation in the Battle of Wake Island.\nIn 1975, there were at one point 8,700 Vietnamese refugees on the atoll when it was used as a waypoint in \"Operation New Life\".\nIn the early 21st century, many of the civilian contractors come from Thailand.\nGovernment.\nAccording to an agreement between the Department of the Interior and the Department of the Air Force, on June 24, 1972, the United States Air Force assumed responsibility for the civil administration of Wake Island.\nThe Secretary of the Air Force has delegated the civil administration authority at Wake Island to the General Counsel of the Air Force under U.S. federal law known as the \"Wake Island Code\". The general counsel provides civil, legal, and judicial authority and can appoint one or more judges to serve on the Wake Island Court and the Wake Island Court of Appeals.\nCertain authorities have been re-delegated by the general counsel to the Commander, Wake Island, a position currently held by Commander, Detachment 1, Pacific Air Forces Regional Support Center. The commander may issue permits or registrations, appoint peace officers, impose quarantines, issue traffic regulations, commission notaries public, direct evacuations and inspections and carry out other duties, powers, and functions as the agent of the general counsel on Wake.\nSince Wake Island is an active Air Force airfield, the commander is also the senior officer in charge of all activities on the island.\nThe Empire of Japan administered the atoll from December 23, 1941, to September 4, 1945.\nThe U.S. administered the island from January 17, 1899, when it was both unclaimed and uninhabited.\nTransportation.\nAviation.\nAir transportation facilities at Wake are operated by the United States Air Force at Wake Island Airfield in support of trans-Pacific military operations, western Pacific military contingency operations, and missile launch activities. The runway on Wake is also available to provide military and commercial in-flight emergency services. Although there is only one flight scheduled every other week to transport passengers and cargo to Wake, approximately 600 aircraft per year use Wake Island Airfield.\nIn 2020, the runway and support facilities were modernized.\nPorts.\nAlthough Wake Island is supplied by seagoing barges and ships, the island's only harbor between Wilkes and Wake is too narrow and shallow for seagoing vessels to enter. The Base Operations Support (BOS) contractor maintains three small landing barges for transferring material from ships moored offshore to the dockyard in the harbor. Hydrants also pump gasoline and JP-5 fuels to the storage tanks on Wilkes. The landing barges and recreational offshore sportfishing boats are docked in the marina. A submarine channel was planned for Wilkes Island but was just partially complete at the start of hostilities in World War II.\nRoads.\nTransportation on Wake Island is provided by contractors or government-owned vehicles. The primary road is a two-lane paved road extending the length of Wake Island to the causeway between Wake Island and Wilkes Island. A bridge connecting Wake and Peale Islands burned down in December 2002. The causeway was rehabilitated in 2003 and is capable of supporting heavy equipment. A combination of paved and coral gravel roads serves the marina area. Paved access to Wilkes Island ends at the petroleum tank farm, where a road constructed of crushed coral provides access to the western point of Wilkes Island. Near the unfinished WWII submarine channel, a portion of the road is flooded nearly every year by high seas. The launch sites are accessed from the main paved road on Wake Island by paved and coral roads. Generally, the road network is suitable for low-speed, light-duty use only. Wake Island's paved roadway network has been adequately maintained to move materials, services, and personnel from the airfield on the southern end to the personnel support area on the northern end. Modes of transportation include walking, bicycles, light utility carts, automobiles, vans, and larger trucks and equipment.\nThe main road that connects Wilkes and most of Wake Island is a crushed coral road about wide that runs the perimeter. There used to be since World War II a 450-foot-long timber bridge between Wake and Peale. With the bridge gone, traversing between Wake and Peale is usually done by a kayak trip.\nTerritorial claims.\nNo one has lodged any complaints or counterclaims after 1899, although the US occasionally found Japanese bird hunters on the island and so formally asked the Japanese about this, but they reaffirmed that they were not claiming Wake with a diplomatic note. Japanese Minister Takahira Kogor\u014d said in 1902 that the Japanese Government had \"no claim whatever to make on the sovereignty of the island, but that if any subjects are found on the island the Imperial Government expects that they should be properly protected as long as they are engaged in peaceful occupations.\" (see also Root\u2013Takahira Agreement) The island did not become an issue until World War II, the Japanese occupied the island from December 23, 1941, to September 4, 1945.\nFor 75 years, there were no claims on Wake until 1973, when a claim was made from the Congress of the Trust Territory of the Pacific. The Marshallese were people living on islands that Germany annexed in the late 19th century, taken in World War I, and under Japanese control until 1944, when the U.S. captured the islands The U.S. was to administer the islands after World War II but the Congress of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which was established in 1964, attempted to make a change. In 1973, Marshallese in the Trust Territory of the Pacific claimed Wake Island, which they call \u0100nen Kio (new orthography) or Enen-kio (old orthography). In 1973, Marshallese lawmakers meeting in Saipan at the Congress of Micronesia, the legislative body for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, asserted that \"Enen-kio is and always has been the property of the people of the Marshall Islands\". Their claim was based on oral legends and songs, passed down through generations, describing ancient Marshallese voyages to Wake to gather food and a sacred bird's wing bone used in traditional tattooing ceremonies. In 1990, legislation in the U.S. Congress proposed including Wake Island within the boundaries of the U.S. territory of Guam. In response, Marshallese President Amata Kabua reasserted his nation's claim to Wake, declaring that Enen-kio was a site of great importance to the traditional rituals of the Marshall Islands.\nThe self-declared Kingdom of EnenKio has also claimed Wake Island as a separate sovereign nation and has issued passports. The Kingdom of EnenKio is not recognized in any international forum as a sovereign state, nor does any internationally recognized state recognize it. The Kingdom of EnenKio is characterized as a scam by anti-fraud website Quatloos!. In 2000, Robert Moore, who claimed to be the head of state, was prevented by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission from fraudulently issuing bonds for the non-existent nation. On April 23, 1998, the Marshall Islands government notified all countries with which it has diplomatic ties that the claims of the Kingdom of EnenKio are fraudulent.\nU.S. National Historic Landmark and NRHP.\nIn the early 1980s, the National Park Service evaluated Wake Island to determine if the World War II (WWII) cultural resources remaining on Wake, Wilkes, and Peale were of national historical significance. As a result of this survey, Wake Island was designated as a National Historic Landmark on September 16, 1985, helping preserve sites and artifacts on the atoll associated with World War II in the Pacific and the transpacific aviation era before the war. As a National Historic Landmark, Wake Island was also included in the National Register of Historic Places.\nHistoric items at the island include:\nThere is also danger of unexploded ordnance (UXO) on the atolls and submerged in reefs. The island was surveyed in 2010 for historical items and structures, and during that time, various UXOs were encountered and destroyed. One issue with many of the structures was that the salty sea air caused corrosion on the reinforced concrete buildings and gun emplacements.\nIn 2011, anthropological work discovered several more human remains on the island, at the site of the POW execution. The island was the initial burial site for American and Japanese dead from World War II. One of the issues with the human remains from the 1943 massacre was that they were buried, then dug up and reburied, then dug up again and reburied at Peacock Point in August 1945 in mass graves; those were exhumed yet again after the war and moved to the United States National Cemetery of the Pacific. At the national cemetery, both those who died during the battle for Wake or as POWs were interred and honored with a ceremony in 1953 in Hawaii.\nThere are many memorials to historic events on the island. Memorials and historical sites include the 98 rock, Nitro rock, Wake Defenders Memorial, Harry Morrison and Civilian Construction Memorial, Japanese Memorial, Historical Command Post, Historical Aircraft Revetments, 8\" Peale Island Gun, Pan Am Hotel and seaplane base remains. The islands are also noted for nature, including about 40,000 birds of 12 different types. One of the noted locations is Drifter's Reef Bar for those stationed on the island.\nShipwrecks.\nShipwrecks on or very near Wake Atoll:\nIn addition to shipwrecks, there are at least 21 World War II aircraft lost around Wake.\nAnother example of an air wreck is a USN Lockheed EC-130Q Hercules (156176) that crashed into the water from Wake on June 21, 1977, during its takeoff climb.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33190", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33190", "title": "History of Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33191", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33191", "title": "Geography of Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33193", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33193", "title": "Government of Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33194", "revid": "29495429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33194", "title": "Economy of Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33195", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33195", "title": "Communications on Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33196", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33196", "title": "Transportation on Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33197", "revid": "29495429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33197", "title": "Military of Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33198", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33198", "title": "Transnational issues of Wake Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "33199", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33199", "title": "Wallis and Futuna", "text": "Overseas collectivity of France\nWallis and Futuna, officially the Territory of the Wallis and Futuna Islands (), is a French island collectivity in the South Pacific, situated between Tuvalu to the northwest, Fiji to the southwest, Tonga to the southeast, Samoa to the east, and Tokelau to the northeast.\nMata Utu is its capital and largest city. Wallis and Futuna is associated with the European Union as an overseas country and territory (OCT). The territory's land area is . It had a population of 11,151 at the July 2023 census (down from 14,944 at the 2003 census). The territory is made up of three main volcanic tropical islands and a number of tiny islets. It is divided into two island groups that lie about apart: the Wallis Islands (also known as Uvea) in the northeast; and the Hoorn Islands (also known as the Futuna Islands) in the southwest, including Futuna Island proper and the mostly uninhabited Alofi Island.\nSince 28 March 2003, Wallis and Futuna has been a French overseas collectivity (, or ). Between 1961 and 2003, it had the status of a French overseas territory (, or ). Its official name did not change with the change in its status.\nHistory.\nEarly humans.\nThe earliest signs of human habitation on these islands are artifacts characteristic of the Lapita culture, dating roughly to between 850 and 800 BCE. The islands served as natural stopover points for boat traffic, mostly between Fiji and Samoa. During Tongan invasions in the 15th and 16th centuries, the islands defended themselves with varying levels of resistance, but also accepted varying degrees of assimilation. Futuna retained more of its pre-Tongan cultural features, while Wallis underwent greater fundamental changes in its society, language, and culture. The original inhabitants built forts and other identifiable structures on the islands (many of which are in ruins), some of which are still partially intact. Oral history and archaeological evidence suggests that the Tongan invaders re-occupied and modified some of these structures. The oral history also preserves a cultural memory of relationships between Samoa and Futuna that are so longstanding that they are described in the islanders' origin stories.\nEuropean settlements.\nFutuna was first put on European maps by Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire, during their circumnavigation of the globe, in 1616. They named the islands of Futuna \"Hoornse Eylanden\", after the Dutch town of Hoorn where they hailed from. This was later translated into French, as \"Isles de Horne\". The Wallis Islands are named after the British explorer Samuel Wallis, who sailed past them in 1767, after being the first European to visit Tahiti. The French were the first Europeans to settle in the territory, with the arrival of French missionaries in 1837, who converted the population to Roman Catholicism. Pierre Chanel, canonized in 1954, is a major patron saint of the island of Futuna and of the region.\nOn 5 April 1842, the missionaries asked for the protection of France, after the uprising of part of the local population. On 5 April 1887, the queen of Uvea (of the traditional chiefdom of Wallis) signed a treaty, officially establishing a French protectorate. The kings of Sigave and Alo (on the islands of Futuna and Alofi) also signed a treaty establishing a French protectorate, on 16 February 1888. From that moment, the islands were officially under the authority of the French colony of New Caledonia.\nIn 1917, the three traditional kingdoms of Uvea, Sigave, and Alo were annexed by France, integrated into the colony of Wallis and Futuna, and remained under the authority of the colony of New Caledonia.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, the islands' administration was briefly pro-Vichy, until a \"Free French\" corvette from New Caledonia deposed the regime, on 26 May 1942. Units of the US Marine Corps later landed on Wallis, on 29 May 1942.\nOverseas territory.\nIn 1959, the inhabitants of the islands voted to become a separate French overseas territory, effective since 29 July 1961, thus ending their subordination to New Caledonia.\nIn 2005, the 50th king of Uvea, Tomasi Kulimoetoke II, faced being deposed after giving sanctuary to his grandson who was convicted of manslaughter. The king claimed his grandson should be judged by tribal law rather than by the French penal system. As a result, there were riots in the streets involving the king's supporters, who were victorious over attempts to replace the king. Two years later, Tomasi Kulimoetoke died on 7 May 2007. There was a six-month period of mourning, during which mentioning a successor was forbidden. On 25 July 2008, Kapeliele Faupala was installed as king despite protests from some of the royal clans. He was deposed in 2014. A new king, Patalione Kanimoa, was eventually installed in Uvea in 2016; Lino Leleivai in Alo on Futuna succeeded after Filipo Katoa abdicated, and Eufenio Takala succeeded Polikalepo Kolivai in Sigave. The French president at the time, Fran\u00e7ois Hollande, attended the installation ceremony.\nGovernance and law.\nThe territory is divided into three traditional kingdoms (\"royaumes coutumiers\"): Uvea, on the island of Wallis, Sigave, on the western part of the island of Futuna, and Alo, on the eastern part of the island of Futuna and on the uninhabited island of Alofi (only Uvea is further subdivided, into three districts):\nThe capital of the collectivity is Mata Utu on the island of Uv\u00e9a, the most populous of the Wallis Islands. As an overseas collectivity of France, it is governed under the French constitution of 28 September 1958, and has universal suffrage for those over 18 years of age. The French president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term; the high administrator is appointed by the French president on the advice of the French Ministry of the Interior and heads the Territory Government; the president of the Territorial Assembly is elected by the members of the assembly. The most recent election was held on 20 March 2022.\nAs of 2023, the head of state is President Emmanuel Macron of France, as represented by Administrator-Superior Herv\u00e9 Jonathan. The president of the Territorial Assembly has been Munipoese Muli\u02bbaka\u02bbaka since March 2022. The Council of the Territory consists of three kings (monarchs of the three pre-colonial kingdoms) and three members appointed by the high administrator on the advice of the Territorial Assembly.\nThe legislative branch consists of the unicameral 20-member Territorial Assembly or \"Assembl\u00e9e territoriale\". Its members are elected by popular vote, and serve five-year terms. Wallis and Futuna elects one senator to the French Senate and one deputy to the French National Assembly.\nCriminal justice is generally governed by French law and administered by a tribunal of first resort in Mata Utu; appeals from that tribunal are decided by the Court of Appeal in Noum\u00e9a, New Caledonia. However, in non-criminal cases (civil-law disputes), the three traditional kingdoms administer justice according to customary law.\nThe territory participates in the Franc Zone, and is both a permanent member of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community and an observer at the Pacific Islands Forum.\nGeography and climate.\nWallis and Futuna is located at , west of Samoa and northeast of Fiji \u2014 about one-third of the way northeast from New Zealand towards Hawaii.\nThe territory includes the island of Uv\u00e9a (also called Wallis), which is the most populous; the island of Futuna; the virtually uninhabited island of Alofi; and 20 uninhabited islets. The total area of the territory is , with of coastline. The highest point in the territory is Mont Puke, on the island of Futuna, at .\nThe islands have a hot, rainy season from November to April, when tropical cyclones passing over them cause storms. Then they have a cool, dry season from May to October, caused by the southeast trade winds that predominate during those months. The average annual rainfall is between , and rain is likely on at least 260 days per year. The average humidity is 80%. The average annual temperature is , rarely falling below ; during the rainy season, it ranges between .\nOnly 5% of the islands' land area consists of arable land; permanent crops cover another 20%. Deforestation is a serious problem: Only small portions of the original forests remain, largely because the inhabitants use wood as their main fuel source, and, as a result, the mountainous terrain of Futuna is particularly susceptible to erosion. The island of Alofi lacks natural freshwater resources, so it has no permanent settlements.\nVolcanic activity during the mid-Pleistocene created numerous volcanic crater lakes on Uvea (Wallis Island). The names of some of them are: Lalolalo, Lano, Lanutavake, Lanutuli, Lanumaha, Kikila, and Alofivai.\nWallis and Futuna is part of the Fiji tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion.\nEconomy.\nThe GDP of Wallis and Futuna in 2019 was US$212\u00a0million (at market exchange rates). \nThe territory's economy consists mostly of traditional subsistence agriculture, with about 80% of the labor force earning its livelihood from agriculture (coconuts and vegetables), livestock (mostly pigs), and fishing. About 4% of the population is employed in government. Additional revenue comes from French government subsidies, licensing of fishing rights to Japan and South Korea, import taxes, and remittances from expatriate workers in New Caledonia, French Polynesia, and France. Industries include copra, handicrafts, fishing, and lumber. Agricultural products include coconuts, breadfruit, yams, taro, bananas, pigs, and fish.\nExports include copra, chemicals, and fish.\nThere is a single bank in the territory, Banque de Wallis-et-Futuna, established in 1991. It is a subsidiary of BNP Paribas. There had previously been a branch of Banque Indosuez at Mata Utu. It had opened in 1977, but was closed in 1989, leaving the territory without any bank for two years.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nThe total population of the territory at the July 2023 census was 11,151 (72.5% on the island of Wallis, 27.5% on the island of Futuna), down from 14,944 at the July 2003 census. The vast majority of the population are of Polynesian ethnicity, with a small minority who were born in Metropolitan France or are of French European descent.\nLack of economic opportunities has, since the 1950s, been impelling many young Wallisians and Futunians to migrate to the more prosperous French territory of New Caledonia, where, as French citizens, they are legally entitled to settle and work. Since the mid-2000s, emigration has surged in response to political tensions on the main island of Wallis (Uvea), that have arisen from a feud between rival aristocratic clans, who are supporting competing kings. Emigrants have begun settling, not only in New Caledonia, but also much farther away, in Metropolitan France. At the 2019 New Caledonian census, 22,520 residents of New Caledonia (whether born in New Caledonia or in Wallis and Futuna) reported their ethnicity as \"Wallisian and Futunian\". This is almost double the total population of Wallis and Futuna.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2018 census, among people 14 years and older, 59.1% reported Wallisian as the language they spoke the most at home (down from 60.2% in 2008), 27.9% reported Futunan (down from 29.9% in 2008), and 12.7% reported French (up from 9.7% in 2008). On Wallis Island, the languages most spoken at home were Wallisian (82.2%, down from 86.1% in 2008), French (15.6%, up from 12.1% in 2008), and Futunan (1.9%, up from 1.5% in 2008). On Futuna, the languages most spoken at home were Futunan (94.5%, down from 94.9% in 2008), French (5.3%, up from 4.2% in 2008), and Wallisian (0.2%, down from 0.8% in 2008).\nAt the 2018 census, 90.5% of people 14 y/o and older could speak, read and write either Wallisian or Futunan (up from 88.5% at the 2008 census), and 7.2% had no knowledge of either Wallisian or Futunan (same percentage as at the 2008 census).\nAmong those 14 y/o and older, 84.2% could speak, read and write French in 2018 (up from 78.2% at the 2008 census), and 11.8% reported that they had no knowledge of French (down from 17.3% at the 2008 census). On Wallis Island, 85.1% of people age 14 or older could speak, read and write French (up from 81.1% at the 2008 census), and 10.9% reported that they had no knowledge of French (down from 14.3% at the 2008 census). On Futuna, 81.9% of people age 14 or older could speak, read and write French (up from 71.6% at the 2008 census), and 14.0% had no knowledge of French (down from 24.3% at the 2008 census).\nReligion.\nThe overwhelming majority (99%) of the people in Wallis and Futuna are Catholics, with the island having been evangelized in the 19th century by Fr Peter Chanel, SM. They are served by their own Diocese of Wallis and Futuna, with a see at Mata Utu, a suffragan diocese of the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Noum\u00e9a (New Caledonia). There are smaller numbers of people following ethnic religions, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith or who have no religion.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Wallis and Futuna is Polynesian, and is similar to the cultures of its neighboring nations Samoa and Tonga. The Wallisian and Futunan cultures are very similar to each other in language, dance, cuisine and modes of celebration.\nFishing and agriculture are the traditional occupations, and most people live in traditional oval, thatch \"fale\" houses. Kava is a popular beverage brewed in the two islands, as in much else of Polynesia. It also serves as a traditional offering in rituals. Highly detailed tapa cloth art is a specialty of Wallis and Futuna.\nUvea Museum Association is a private museum that holds a collection of objects that record the history of the Second World War in the territory. It is located in Mata Utu shopping center and in 2009 was open by appointment.\nTransport and communications.\nIn 2018, the territory had 3,132 telephones in use, one AM radio station, and two television broadcast stations. Communication costs are up to ten times higher than in western countries. The island of Wallis has about of roadways, 16 of which are paved. The island of Futuna has only of roadways, none of which are paved. The territory has two main ports, in the harbors at Mata Utu and Leava (on the island of Futuna). These ports support its merchant marine fleet, which comprises three ships (two passenger ships and a petroleum tanker), totaling 92,060 GRT or 45,881 tonnes. There are two airports: Hihifo Airport, on Wallis, which has a paved runway; and Pointe Vele Airport, on Futuna, which has a runway. Now the only commercial flights to and from Wallis are operated by Caledonia-based Aircalin, which has an office in Mata Utu. There are currently no commercial boat operators.\nNewspapers.\nThe French High Commission published a local newspaper in the 1970s, \"Nouvelles de Wallis et de Futuna\". Today, news is available online via a local program broadcast by the French television network La Premi\u00e8re.\nEducation.\nThere are 18 primary schools in the territory, 12 on Wallis and six on Futuna, with a combined total of over 5200 students.\nThe territory has six junior high schools and one senior high school/sixth-form college.\nThere is also an agricultural high school.\nHealthcare.\nAs of 2018, yaws was endemic in the area, but cases were not being reported to the WHO eradication program.\nHealthcare is available free of charge in two hospitals on Uvea and Futuna islands. There are also three dispensaries.\nEnvironment.\nDeforestation is a major concern in the region as only small portions of the original forests remain due to the continued use of wood as the main source of fuel. Consequently, the mountainous terrain of Futuna has become prone to erosion. There are no permanent settlements on Alofi due to the lack of natural freshwater resources, and the presence of infertile soil on the islands of Uvea and Futuna further reduces agricultural productivity.\nSport.\nWallis and Futuna competes in the Pacific Games. Volleyball and rugby union are popular in the territory, with several rugby players going on to play for the France national rugby union team.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33200", "revid": "32527418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33200", "title": "History of Wallis and Futuna", "text": ""}
{"id": "33201", "revid": "32527418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33201", "title": "Geography of Wallis and Futuna", "text": ""}
{"id": "33202", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33202", "title": "Demographics of Wallis and Futuna", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Wallis and Futuna include population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects. Statistics are from INSEE and the United Nations Demographic Yearbooks.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBetween July 24 and August 19, 2023, 11,151 people were counted in Wallis and Futuna (8,088 in Wallis and 3,063 in Futuna). Since 2003, these French Pacific islands have been facing a decrease in their population due to a strong emigration of young people of university or working age. This decrease was particularly marked between 2003 and 2013 (-2.0% on average per year), then it eased between 2013 and 2023 (-0.9% per year). The majority of the inhabitants (72.5%) live in Wallis, which has the highest population density of the two inhabited islands (104 inhabitants per km\u00b2 compared to only 48 inhabitants per km\u00b2 in Futuna). Over the last twenty years, the population has fallen by 25.4%, but the population decline has been half as pronounced in Wallis as in Futuna (respectively -19.7% versus -37.1%).\nThe evolution of a population depends on the natural balance and the migratory balance. In Wallis and Futuna, natural increase has been divided by five in past twenty years. As the balance of births over deaths is very slightly in surplus, the migratory deficit explains the decline in the population. Between the censuses of 2018 and 2023, natural increase was only 42 people on average per year. It contributed 0.4% to the average annual population increase, compared to 0.7% between 2013 and 2018 (80 people per year) and 1.5% over the period 1996-2003 (218 people per year). However, the migratory balance has been in deficit since 1969 (except during the period from 1976 to 1983). It has contributed to the decline in population over the last five years (-1.1% per year on average), but less significantly than before (-3.2% per year on average between 2003 and 2008).\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 22.VII.2013): \nVital statistics.\nBirths and deaths\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33203", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33203", "title": "Government of Wallis and Futuna", "text": ""}
{"id": "33204", "revid": "1290078105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33204", "title": "Economy of Wallis and Futuna", "text": "This page is an overview of the economy of Wallis and Futuna.\nFinance.\nThe GDP of Wallis and Futuna in 2005 was 188\u00a0million US dollars at market exchange rates. The GDP per capita was 12,640 US dollars in 2005 (at market exchange rates, not at PPP), which is lower than in New Caledonia, French Polynesia, and all the other French overseas departments and territories (except Mayotte), but higher than in all the small insular independent states of Oceania.\nAlong with the French territories of New Caledonia and French Polynesia, the territory uses the CFP Franc, which is fixed vs. the euro, at the rate of 1,000 XPF = 8.38 euro. In 1991, BNP Nouvelle-Cal\u00e9donie, a subsidiary of BNP Paribas, established a subsidiary, Banque de Wallis et Futuna, which currently is the only bank in the territory. Two years earlier Banque Indosuez had closed the branch at Mata-Utu that it had opened in 1977, leaving the territory without any bank.\nAgriculture and industry.\nThe territory's economy is limited to traditional subsistence agriculture, with about 80% of the labor force earning its livelihood from agriculture (coconuts and vegetables), livestock (mostly pigs), and fishing. Agricultural products include breadfruit, yams, taro, bananas, pigs, and goats.\nIndustries include copra, handicrafts, fishing, and lumber. In 2007, US$63\u00a0million worth of commodities (foodstuffs, manufactured goods, transportation equipment, fuel, clothing) were imported, primarily from France, Singapore, Australia, and New Zealand, and there were no exports (the previous year, in 2006, exports amounted to US$122,000 and consisted entirely of 19 tons of trochus shells). About 4% of the population is employed in government. Revenues come from French government subsidies, licensing of fishing rights to Japan and South Korea, import taxes, and remittances from expatriate workers in New Caledonia, French Polynesia and France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33205", "revid": "32527418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33205", "title": "Wallis and Futuna/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "33206", "revid": "32527418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33206", "title": "Wallis and Futuna/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "33207", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33207", "title": "Military of Wallis and Futuna", "text": ""}
{"id": "33209", "revid": "40153758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33209", "title": "West Bank", "text": "Palestinian territory occupied by Israel\nThe West Bank is on the western bank of the Jordan River and is the larger of the two Palestinian territories (the other being the Gaza Strip) that make up the State of Palestine. A landlocked territory near the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in West Asia's Levant region, it is bordered by Jordan and the Dead Sea to the east and by Israel (via the Green Line) to the south, west, and north. Since 1967, the territory has been under Israeli occupation, which has been regarded as illegal under the law of the international community.\nThe territory first emerged in the wake of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War as a region occupied and subsequently annexed by Jordan. Jordan ruled the territory until the 1967 Six-Day War, when it was occupied by Israel. Since then, Israel has administered the West Bank (except for East Jerusalem, which was effectively annexed in 1980) as the Judea and Samaria Area. Jordan continued to claim the territory as its own until 1988. The mid-1990s Oslo Accords split the West Bank into three regional levels of Palestinian sovereignty, via the Palestinian National Authority (PNA): Area A (PNA), Area B (PNA and Israel), and Area C (Israel, comprising 60% of the West Bank). The PNA exercises total or partial civil administration over 165 Palestinian enclaves across the three areas. \nThe West Bank remains central to the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. The Palestinians consider it the heart of their envisioned state, along with the Gaza Strip. Right-wing and ideological Israelis see it as their ancestral homeland, with numerous biblical sites. There is a push among some Israelis for partial or complete annexation of this land. Additionally, it is home to a rising number of Israeli settlers. Area C contains 230 Israeli settlements where Israeli law is applied. Under the Oslo Accords this area was to be mostly transferred to the PNA by 1997, but that did not occur. The international community considers Israeli settlements in the West Bank to be illegal under international law. Citing the 1980 law in which Israel claimed Jerusalem as its capital, the 1994 Israel\u2013Jordan peace treaty, and the Oslo Accords, a 2004 advisory ruling by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) concluded that the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, remains Israeli-occupied territory. In 2024 the ICJ again ruled that Israel's occupation of the West Bank is unlawful, adding that its conduct also violates the international prohibition on racial segregation and apartheid.\nThe West Bank has a land area of about . It has an estimated population of 2,747,943 Palestinians and over 670,000 Israeli settlers, of which approximately 220,000 live in East Jerusalem.\nNames.\nWest Bank.\nThe name \"West Bank\" is a translation of the Arabic term (), which designates the territory situated on the western side of the Jordan River that was occupied in 1948 and annexed in 1950 by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. This annexation was widely considered to be illegal, and was recognized only by Iraq, Pakistan, and the United Kingdom. In Hebrew this term is also used (), although the territory is more often called Judea and Samaria ().\nCisjordan.\nVariations on the neo-Latin name \"Cisiordania\" (lit.\u2009'on this side of the River Jordan') are the usual names for the territory in Romance languages, e.g. , , , , and , and in some others, e.g. , , , , and . The name \"West Bank\", however, has become the standard usage for this geopolitical entity in English and some of the other Germanic languages since its inception following the 1948 Jordanian capture.\nThe analogous \"Transjordan\" (lit.\u2009'over the River Jordan') was historically used to designate the region now roughly comprising the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, which lies to the east of the Jordan River.\nHistory.\nFrom 1517 to 1917, the area now known as the West Bank was under Turkish rule, as part of Ottoman Syria. In the early Ottoman period, much of the northern West Bank, including the area of Jenin, and the hill country north of Nablus, formed part of the Turabay Emirate, a semi-autonomous Bedouin polity centered at Lajjun. The Turabay clan administered wide territories on behalf of the Ottoman sultans from the sixteenth to the seventeenth century, collecting taxes and overseeing security along key trade routes. Their authority reflected the empire\u2019s reliance on local Arab elites to govern frontier districts, and the town of Lajjun became a regional administrative hub before its decline in the late seventeenth century.\nIn the late Ottoman period, the rural population of Palestine, including the West Bank hill country, expanded significantly. Villages grew in size, new hamlets were established, and peasants extended cultivation into previously marginal lands such as forests, marshes, and stony slopes. This process was part of a wider demographic recovery and agrarian commercialization in the region, which saw Palestinian peasants increasing grain production and integrating more fully into regional and international markets.\nAt the 1920 San Remo conference, the victorious Allies of World War\u00a0I allocated the area to the British Mandate of Palestine (1920\u20131948). The San Remo Resolution, adopted on 25 April 1920, incorporated the Balfour Declaration of 1917. It and Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations were the basic documents upon which the British Mandate of Palestine was constructed. The United Kingdom proclaimed Abdullah\u00a0I as emir of the Emirate of Transjordan on 11 April 1921. He declared it an independent Hashemite kingdom on 25 May 1946.\nUnder the United Nations in 1947, it was designated as part of a proposed Arab state by the Partition Plan for Palestine. UN Resolution 181 recommended the splitting of the British Mandate into a Jewish state, an Arab state, and an internationally administered enclave of Jerusalem. A broader region of the modern-day West Bank was assigned to the Arab state. The resolution designated the territory described as \"the hill country of Samaria and Judea\", the area now known as the \"West Bank\", as part of the proposed Arab state. Following the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, this area was captured by Transjordan.\nJordanian West Bank.\nDuring the 1948 war, Israel occupied parts of what was designated in the UN partition plan as \"Palestine\". The 1949 Armistice Agreements defined the interim boundary between Israel and Jordan, essentially reflecting the battlefield after the war. Following the December 1948 Jericho Conference, Transjordan annexed the area west of the Jordan River in 1950, naming it \"West Bank\" or \"Cisjordan\", and designated the area east of the river as \"East Bank\" or \"Transjordan\". Jordan, as it was now known, ruled over the West Bank from 1948 until 1967. Jordan's annexation was never formally recognized by the international community, with the exception of the United Kingdom and Iraq. King Abdullah of Jordan was crowned King of Jerusalem by the Coptic Bishop on 15 November 1948. Palestinian Arabs in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, were granted Jordanian citizenship and half of the Jordanian Parliament seats, thus enjoying equal opportunities in all sectors of the state.\nMany refugees continued to live in camps and relied on UNRWA assistance for sustenance. Palestinian refugees constituted more than a third of the kingdom's population of 1.5\u00a0million. The last Jordanian elections in which West Bank residents voted in were those of April 1967. Their parliamentary representatives continued in office until 1988, when West Bank seats were abolished. Palestinians enjoyed equal opportunities in all sectors of the state without discrimination. Agriculture remained the primary activity of the territory. The West Bank, despite its smaller area, contained half of Jordan's agricultural land.\nIn 1966, 43% of the labor force of 55,000 worked in agriculture, and 2,300\u00a0km2 were under cultivation. In 1965, 15,000 workers were employed in industry, producing 7% of the GNP. This number fell after the 1967 war and was not surpassed until 1983. The tourism industry played an important role. 26 branches of 8 Arab banks were present. The Jordanian dinar became legal tender and remains so until today. 80% of Jordan's fruit-growing land and 40% of its vegetables lay in the West Bank. With the onset of the occupation, the area could no longer produce export earnings.\nOn the eve of occupation, the West Bank accounted for 40% of Jordanian GNP, between 34% and 40% of its agricultural output and almost half of its manpower, though only a third of Jordanian investment was allocated to it and mainly to the private housing construction sector. Even though its per-capita product was 10 times greater than that of the West Bank, the Israeli economy on the eve of occupation had experienced two years (1966\u20131967) of a sharp recession.\nImmediately after the occupation, from 1967 to 1974, the economy boomed. In 1967, the Palestinian economy had a gross domestic product of $1,349 per capita for a million people. The West Bank's population was 585,500, of whom 18% were refugees, and was growing annually by 2%. West Bank growth, compared to Gaza (3%), had lagged, due to the effect of mass emigration of West Bankers seeking employment in Jordan. As agriculture gave way to industrial development in Israel, in the West Bank the former still generated 37% of domestic product, and industry a mere 13%.\nThe growth rate of the West Bank economy in the period of the Jordanian rule of the West Bank, before Israeli occupation, had ticked along at an annual rate of 6\u20138%. This rate of growth was indispensable if the post-war West Bank were to achieve economic self-reliance.\nIsraeli Military Governorate and Civil Administration.\nIn June 1967, the West Bank and East Jerusalem were captured by Israel as a result of the Six-Day War. With the exception of East Jerusalem and the former Israeli\u2013Jordanian no man's land, the West Bank was not annexed by Israel. It remained under Israeli military control until 1982.\nThe 1974 Arab League summit resolution at Rabat designated the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) as the \"sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people\". Jordan did not officially relinquish its claim to the area until 1988, when it severed all administrative and legal ties with the West Bank and eventually stripped West Bank Palestinians of Jordanian citizenship.\nIn 1982, as a result of the Egypt\u2013Israel peace treaty, the direct military rule was transformed into a semi-civil authority, operating directly under the Israeli Ministry of Defense, taking control of civil matters of Palestinians from the IDF to civil servants in the Ministry of Defense. The Israeli settlements were administered as Judea and Samaria Area, directly by Israel.\nSince the 1993 Oslo Accords, the Palestinian Authority officially controls a geographically non-contiguous territory comprising approximately 11% of the West Bank, known as Area A, which remains subject to Israeli incursions. Area B, approximately 28%, is subject to joint Israeli-Palestinian military and Palestinian civil control. Area C, approximately 61%, is under full Israeli control. Though 164 nations refer to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as \"Occupied Palestinian Territory\", the state of Israel quotes the UN that only territories captured in war from \"an established and recognized sovereign\" are considered occupied territories.\nAfter the 2007 split between Fatah and Hamas, the West Bank areas under Palestinian control are an exclusive part of the Palestinian Authority. The Gaza Strip is ruled by Hamas.\nEarly economic impact.\nThe Jordanians neglected to invest much in the area during their time governing the area, although there was some investment in the immediate vicinity of Jerusalem.\nSoon after the 1967 war, Yigal Allon produced the Allon Plan, which would have annexed a strip along the Jordan River valley and excluded areas closer to the pre-1967 border, which had a high density of Palestinians. Moshe Dayan proposed a plan which Gershom Gorenberg likens to a \"photo negative of Allon's.\" The Allon plan evolved over a period of time to include more territory. The final draft dating from 1970 would have annexed about half of the West Bank. Israel had no overall approach for integrating the West Bank.\nThe early occupation set severe limits on public investment and comprehensive development programmes in the territories. British and Arab commercial banks operating in the West Bank were closed down soon after Israel assumed power there. Bank Leumi then opened nine branches, without successfully replacing the earlier system. Farmers could get loans, but Palestinian businessmen avoided taking out loans from them, since they charged 9% compared to 5% interest in Jordan. By June 1967, only a third of West Bank land had been registered under Jordan's \"Settlement of Disputes over Land and Water Law\". In 1968, Israel moved to cancel the possibility of registering one's title with the Jordanian Land Register.\nIan Lustick states that Israel \"virtually prevented\" Palestinian investment in local industry and agriculture. At the same time, Israel encouraged Arab labour to enter into Israel's economy, and regarded them as a new, expanded and protected market for Israeli exports. Limited export of Palestinian goods to Israel was allowed. Expropriation of prime agricultural land in an economy where two thirds of the workforce had farmed is believed to account for the flight of labourers to work in Israel.\nAs much as 40% of the workforce commuted to Israel on a daily basis finding only poorly paid menial employment. Remittances from labourers earning a wage in Israel were the major factor in Palestinian economic growth during the 1969\u201373 boom years. The migration of workers from the territories had a negative impact on local industry, by creating an internal labour scarcity in the West Bank and consequent pressure for higher wages there. The contrast between the quality of their lives and Israelis' growing prosperity stoked resentment.\nAttempting to impose governmental authority, Israel established a licensing system according to which no industrial plant could be built without obtaining a prior Israeli permit. With Military Order No. 393 (14 June 1970), the local commander was given the power and authority to block any construction if, in his evaluation, the building might pose a danger to Israel's security. The overall effect was to obstruct manufacturing development and subordinate any local industrial activity to the exigencies of Israel's economy, or to block the creation of industries that might compete with Israel's. For example, entrepreneurs were denied a permit for a cement factory in Hebron. In order to protect Israeli farmers, melon production was forbidden, imports of grapes and dates were banned, and limits were set to how many cucumbers and tomatoes could be produced. Israeli milk producers exerted pressure on the Ministry for Industry and Trade to stop the establishment of a competitive dairy in Ramallah.\nThe sum effect after two decades was that 15% of all Palestinian firms in the West Bank and Gaza employing over eight people, and 32% with seven or less, were prohibited from selling their products in Israel. Israeli protectionist policies distorted wider trade relations to the point that, by 1996, 90% of all West Bank imports came from Israel, with consumers paying more than they would for comparable products had they been able to exercise commercial autonomy.\nLegal status.\nFrom 1517 to 1917 the West Bank was part of the Ottoman Empire. Turkey, successor state to the Ottoman Empire, renounced its territorial claims in 1923, signing the Treaty of Lausanne, and the area now called the West Bank became an integral part of the British Mandate for Palestine. During the Mandate period Britain had no right of sovereignty, which was held by the people under the mandate. Nevertheless, Britain, as custodians of the land, implemented the land tenure laws in Palestine, which it had inherited from the Ottoman Turks (as defined in the Ottoman Land Code of 1858), applying these laws to both Arab and Jewish legal tenants or otherwise. In 1947 the UN General Assembly recommended that the area that became the West Bank become part of a future Arab state, but this proposal was opposed by the Arab states at the time. In 1948, Jordan occupied the West Bank and annexed it in 1950.\nIn 1967, Israel captured the West Bank from Jordan in the Six-Day War. UN Security Council Resolution 242 followed, calling for withdrawal (return to the 1949 armistice lines) from territories occupied in the conflict in exchange for peace and mutual recognition. Since 1979, the United Nations Security Council, the United Nations General Assembly, the United States, the EU, the International Court of Justice, and the International Committee of the Red Cross refer to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as occupied Palestinian territory or the occupied territories. General Assembly resolution 58/292 (17 May 2004) affirmed that the Palestinian people have the right to sovereignty over the area.\nThe International Court of Justice (ICJ) and the Supreme Court of Israel have ruled that the status of the West Bank is that of military occupation. In its 2004 advisory opinion the International Court of Justice concluded that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the same vein the Israeli Supreme Court stated in the 2004 \"Beit Sourik\" case that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The general point of departure of all parties \u2013 which is also our point of departure \u2013 is that Israel holds the area in belligerent occupation (occupatio bellica)...The authority of the military commander flows from the provisions of public international law regarding belligerent occupation. These rules are established principally in the Regulations Concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land, The Hague, 18 October 1907 [hereinafter \u2013 the Hague Regulations]. These regulations reflect customary international law. The military commander's authority is also anchored in IV Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War 1949.\nThe executive branch of the Israeli government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, has defined the West Bank as \"disputed\" instead of \"occupied\" territory, whose status can only be determined through negotiations. The Ministry argues that the West Bank was not captured in war because it was not under the legitimate sovereignty of any state prior to the Six-Day War (when it was occupied by Israel).\nThe International Court of Justice advisory opinion of 9 July 2004, however, found that the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is territory held by Israel under military occupation, regardless of its status prior to it coming under Israeli occupation, and that the Fourth Geneva convention applies \"de jure\". The international community regards the West Bank (including East Jerusalem) as territories occupied by Israel.\nIn 2024, the ICJ reaffirmed in an advisory opinion that Israel's military occupation of the West Bank (along with the Gaza strip and East Jerusalem) is unlawful. The opinion added that Israel's \"legislation and measures violate the international prohibition on racial segregation and apartheid.\"\nInternational law (Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention) prohibits \"transfers of the population of an occupying power to occupied territories\", incurring a responsibility on the part of Israel's government to not settle Israeli citizens in the West Bank.\nAs of June 2024, 146 (75.6%) of the 193 member states of the United Nations have recognised the State of Palestine within the Palestinian territories, which are recognized by Israel to constitute a single territorial unit, and of which the West Bank is the core of the would-be state. \nPolitical status.\nThe future status of the West Bank, together with the Gaza Strip on the Mediterranean shore, has been the subject of negotiation between the Palestinians and Israelis, although the 2002 Road Map for Peace, proposed by the \"Quartet\" comprising the United States, Russia, the European Union, and the United Nations, envisions an independent Palestinian state in these territories living side by side with Israel (see also history of the State of Palestine). However, the \"Road Map\" states that in the first phase, Palestinians must end all attacks on Israel, whereas Israel must dismantle all outposts.\nThe Palestinian Authority believes that the West Bank ought to be a part of their sovereign nation, and that the presence of Israeli military control is a violation of their right to Palestinian Authority rule. The United Nations calls the West Bank and Gaza Strip \"Israeli-occupied territories\". The United States State Department also refers to the territories as \"occupied\".\nIn 2005 the United States ambassador to Israel, Daniel C. Kurtzer, expressed U.S. support \"for the retention by Israel of major Israeli population centres [in the West Bank] as an outcome of negotiations\", reflecting President Bush's statement a year earlier that a permanent peace treaty would have to reflect \"demographic realities\" on the West Bank. In May 2011 US President Barack Obama officially stated US support for a future Palestinian state based on borders prior to the 1967 War, allowing for land swaps where they are mutually agreeable between the two sides. Obama was the first US president to formally support the policy, but he stated that it had been one long held by the US in its Middle East negotiations.\nIn December 2016, a resolution was adopted by United Nations Security Council that condemned Israel's settlement activity as a \"flagrant violation\" of international law with \"no legal validity\". It demands that Israel stop such activity and fulfill its obligations as an occupying power under the Fourth Geneva Convention. The United States abstained from the vote.\nIn 2020, President Donald Trump unveiled a peace plan, radically different from previous peace plans. The plan failed to gain support.\nWest Bank was ranked 10th most electoral democracy in the Middle East and North Africa according to V-Dem Democracy indices in 2024 with a score of 0.254 out of one.\nGeography.\nThe West Bank has an area of , which comprises 21.2% of former Mandatory Palestine (excluding Jordan) and has generally rugged mountainous terrain. The total length of the land boundaries of the region are . The terrain is mostly rugged dissected upland, some vegetation in the west, but somewhat barren in the east. The elevation span between the shoreline of the Dead Sea at \u2212408 m to the highest point at Mount Nabi Yunis, at 1,030\u00a0m (3,379\u00a0ft) above sea level. The West Bank is landlocked; its highlands are the main recharge area for Israel's coastal aquifers.\nThe West Bank has of water area, consisting of the northwestern quarter of the Dead Sea.\nThere are few natural resources in the area except the highly arable land, which comprises 27% of the land area of the region. It is mostly used as permanent pastures (32% of arable land) and seasonal agricultural uses (40%). Forests and woodland comprise just 1%, with no permanent crops.\nClimate.\nThe climate in the West Bank is mostly Mediterranean, slightly cooler at elevated areas compared with the shoreline, west to the area. In the east, the West Bank includes the Judean Desert and the shoreline of the Dead Sea \u2013 both with dry and hot climate.\nIn the most highly elevated areas in the northwest, annual rainfall is more than 27 inches (685\u00a0mm). This declines in the southwest and southeast to less than 4 inches (100\u00a0mm). Hilly terrains are used for sheep grazing and cultivating olives, cereals and fruits. The Jordan River valley is also cultivated for various fruits and vegetables.\nGovernment and politics.\nPolitical administration.\nPalestinian enclaves.\nThe 1993 Oslo Accords declared the final status of the West Bank to be subject to a forthcoming settlement between Israel and the Palestinian leadership. Following these interim accords, Israel withdrew its military rule from some parts of the West Bank, which was divided into three Areas:\nArea A, 2.7% of the West Bank under full civil control of the Palestinian Authority, comprises Palestinian towns, and some rural areas away from Israeli settlements in the north (between Jenin, Nablus, Tubas, and Tulkarm), the south (around Hebron), and one in the center south of Salfit. Area B, 25.2% of the area of the terriroty, adds what was the contemporary populated rural areas, many closer to the center of the West Bank. Area C contains all the Israeli settlements (excluding settlements in East Jerusalem), roads used to access the settlements, buffer zones (near settlements, roads, strategic areas, and Israel), and almost all of the Jordan Valley and the Judean Desert.\nAreas A and B are themselves divided among 227 separate areas (199 of which are smaller than ) that are separated from one another by Israeli-controlled Area C.\n Areas A, B, and C cross the 11 governorates used as administrative divisions by the Palestinian National Authority, Israel, and the IDF and named after major cities. The mainly open areas of Area C, which contains all of the basic resources of arable and building land, water springs, quarries and sites of touristic value needed to develop a viable Palestinian state, were to be handed over to the Palestinians by 1999 under the Oslo Accords as part of a final status agreement. This agreement was never achieved.\nAccording to B'tselem, while the vast majority of the Palestinian population lives in areas A and B, the vacant land available for construction in dozens of villages and towns across the West Bank is situated on the margins of the communities and defined as area C. Less than 1% of area C is designated for use by Palestinians, who are also unable to legally build in their own existing villages in area C due to Israeli authorities' restrictions.\nAn assessment by the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in 2007 found that approximately 40% of the West Bank was taken up by Israeli infrastructure. The infrastructure, consisting of settlements, the barrier, military bases and closed military areas, Israeli declared nature reserves and the roads that accompany them is off-limits or tightly controlled to Palestinians.\nIn June 2011, the Independent Commission for Human Rights published a report that found that Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were subjected in 2010 to an \"almost systematic campaign\" of human rights abuse by the Palestinian Authority and Hamas, as well as by Israeli authorities, with the security forces of the PA and Hamas being responsible for torture, arrests and arbitrary detentions.\nArea annexed by Israel.\nThrough the Jerusalem Law, Israel extended its administrative control over East Jerusalem. This has often been interpreted as tantamount to an official annexation, though Ian Lustick, in reviewing the legal status of Israeli measures, has argued that no such annexation ever took place. The Palestinian residents have legal permanent residency status. Rejecting the Jerusalem Law, the UN Security Council passed UN Security Council Resolution 478, declaring that the law was \"null and void\". Although permanent residents are permitted, if they wish, to receive Israeli citizenship if they meet certain conditions including swearing allegiance to the State and renouncing any other citizenship, most Palestinians did not apply for Israeli citizenship for political reasons. There are various possible reasons as to why the West Bank had not been annexed to Israel after its capture in 1967. The government of Israel has not formally confirmed an official reason; however, historians and analysts have established a variety of such, most of them demographic. Among those most commonly cited have been:\nThe importance of demographic concerns to some significant figures in Israel's leadership was illustrated when Avraham Burg, a former Knesset Speaker and former chair of the Jewish Agency for Israel, wrote in \"The Guardian\" in September 2003,\n\"Between the Jordan and the Mediterranean there is no longer a clear Jewish majority. And so, fellow citizens, it is not possible to keep the whole thing without paying a price. We cannot keep a Palestinian majority under an Israeli boot and at the same time think ourselves the only democracy in the Middle East. There cannot be democracy without equal rights for all who live here, Arab as well as Jew. We cannot keep the territories and preserve a Jewish majority in the world's only Jewish state \u2013 not by means that are humane and moral and Jewish.\"\nArea C and Israeli settlements.\nAs of 2022, there are over 450,000 Israeli settlers living in 132 Israeli settlements in the West Bank excluding East Jerusalem, with an additional 220,000 Jewish settlers residing in 12 settlements in East Jerusalem. In addition, there are over 140 Israeli outposts in the West Bank that are not recognized and are therefore illegal even under Israeli law, but which have nevertheless been provided with infrastructure, water, sewage, and other services by the authorities. They are colloquially known as \"illegal outposts\".\nAs a result of the application of Israeli law in the settlements (\"Enclave law\"), large portions of Israeli civil law are applied to Israeli settlements and to Israelis living in the Israeli-occupied territories.\nThe international consensus is that all Israeli settlements on the West Bank are illegal under international law. In 2002, the European Union as a whole found all Israeli settlement activities to be illegal. Significant portions of the Israeli public similarly oppose the continuing presence of Jewish Israelis in the West Bank and have supported the 2005 settlement relocation. The majority of legal scholars hold the settlements to violate international law; however, some others, including Julius Stone, Eugene Rostow, and Eugene Kontorovich, have argued that they are legal under international law.\nImmediately after the 1967 war, Theodor Meron, legal counselor of Israel's Foreign Ministry, advised Israeli ministers in a \"top secret\" memo that any policy of building settlements across occupied territories violated international law and would \"contravene the explicit provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention\". Fifty years later, citing decades of legal scholarship on the subject, Meron reiterated his legal opinion regarding the illegality of Israeli settlements in the Occupied Territories.\nThe UN Security Council has issued several non-binding resolutions addressing the issue of the settlements. Typical of these is UN Security Council resolution 446 which states that the \"practices of Israel in establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have no legal validity\", and it calls on Israel \"as the occupying Power, to abide scrupulously by the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention\"\".\"\nThe Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention held in Geneva on 5 December 2001 called upon \"the Occupying Power to fully and effectively respect the Fourth Geneva Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and to refrain from perpetrating any violation of the Convention.\" The High Contracting Parties reaffirmed \"the illegality of the settlements in the said territories and of the extension thereof.\"\nOn 30 December 2007, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert issued an order requiring approval by both the Israeli Prime Minister and Israeli Defense Minister of all settlement activities (including planning) in the West Bank. The change had little effect with settlements continuing to expand, and new ones being established. On 31 August 2014, Israel announced it was appropriating 400 hectares of land in the West Bank to eventually house 1,000 Israel families. The appropriation was described as the largest in more than 30 years. According to reports on Israel Radio, the development is a response to the 2014 kidnapping and murder of Israeli teenagers.\nPalestinian outposts.\nThe Haaretz newspaper published an article in December 2005 about demolition of \"Palestinian outposts\" in Bil'in. The demolitions sparked a political debate as according to \"PeaceNow\" it was a double standard (\"After what happened today in Bil'in, there is no reason that the state should defend its decision to continue the construction\" credited to Michael Sfard).\nIn January 2012, the European Union approved the \"Area C and Palestinian state building\" report. The report said Palestinian presence in Area C has been continuously undermined by Israel and that state building efforts in Area C of the Palestinian Authority (PA) and the EU were of \"utmost importance in order to support the creation of a contiguous and viable Palestinian state\". The EU will support various projects to \"support the Palestinian people and help maintain their presence\".\nIn May 2012, a petition was filed to the Israeli Supreme Court about the legality of more 15 Palestinian outposts and Palestinian building in \"Area C\". The cases were filed by Regavim.\nThe petition was one of 30 different petitions with the common ground of illegal land takeover and illegal construction and use of natural resources. Some of the petitions (27) had been set for trials and the majority received a verdict.\n\"Ynet News\" stated on 11 January 2013 that a group of 200 Palestinians with unknown number of foreign activists created an outpost named Bab al-Shams (\"Gate of the Sun\"), contains 50 tents\n\"Ynet News\" stated on 18 January 2013 that Palestinian activists built an outpost on a disputed area in Beit Iksa, where Israel plans to construct part of the separation fence in the Jerusalem vicinity while the Palestinians claim that the area belongs to the residents of Beit Iksa. named Bab al-Krama\nWest Bank barrier.\nThe Israeli West Bank barrier is a physical barrier ordered for construction by the Israeli Government, consisting of a network of fences with vehicle-barrier trenches. Israel began building the barrier on 23 June 2002, two years into the Second Intifada. It is surrounded by an on average wide exclusion area (90%) and up to high concrete walls (10%), although in most areas the wall is not nearly that high. It is located mainly within the West Bank, partly along the 1949 Armistice line, or \"Green Line\" between the West Bank and Israel. The length of the barrier as approved by the Israeli government is long. As of 2020, approximately have been constructed (64%). The space between the barrier and the green line is a closed military zone known as the Seam Zone, cutting off 9% of the West Bank and encompassing dozens of villages and tens of thousands of Palestinians.\nThe barrier generally runs along or near the 1949 Jordanian-Israeli armistice/Green Line, but diverges in many places to include on the Israeli side several of the highly populated areas of Jewish settlements in the West Bank such as East Jerusalem, Ariel, Gush Etzion, Immanuel, Karnei Shomron, Givat Ze'ev, Oranit, and Maale Adumim.\nSupporters of the barrier stated it was necessary for protecting Israeli civilians from Palestinian attacks, which increased significantly during the Al-Aqsa Intifada; it has helped reduce incidents of terrorism by 90% from 2002 to 2005; over a 96% reduction in terror attacks in the six years ending in 2007, though Israel's State Comptroller has acknowledged that most of the suicide bombers crossed into Israel through existing checkpoints. Its supporters state that the onus is now on the Palestinian Authority to fight terrorism.\nOpponents state the barrier is an illegal attempt to annex Palestinian land under the guise of security, violates international law, has the intent or effect to pre-empt final status negotiations, and severely restricts Palestinian livelihoods, particularly limiting their freedom of movement within and from the West Bank thereby undermining their economy.\nPalestinian governorates.\nAfter the signing of the Oslo Accords, the West Bank was divided into 11 governorates under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian National Authority. Since 2007 there are two governments claiming to be the legitimate government of the Palestinian National Authority, one based in the West Bank and one based in the Gaza Strip.\nIsraeli administrative districts.\nThe West Bank is further divided into 8 administrative regions: Menashe (Jenin area), HaBik'a (Jordan Valley), Shomron (Shechem area, known in Arabic as Nablus), Efrayim (Tulkarm area), Binyamin (Ramallah/al-Bireh area), Maccabim (Maccabim area), Etzion (Bethlehem area) and Yehuda (Hebron area).\nPublic opinion.\nPalestinian public opinion opposes Israeli military and settler presence on the West Bank as a violation of their right to statehood and sovereignty. Israeli opinion is split into a number of views:\nEconomy.\nAs of the early-21st century, the economy of Palestine is chronically depressed, with unemployment rates constantly over 20% since 2000. The unemployment rate was 19% in the West Bank in first half of 2013.\nTransportation and communications.\nRoad system.\nIn 2010, the West Bank and Gaza Strip together had of roadways.\nIt has been said that for \"Jewish settlers, roads \"connect\"; for Palestinians, they \"separate\".\" Between 1994 and 1997, the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) built of bypass roads in the territories, on appropriated land because they ran close to Palestinian villages. The given aim was said to be to afford protection to settlers from Palestinian sniping, bombing, and drive-by shootings. For TAU emeritus professor of geography Elisha Efrat, they ignored the historical topography, road systems and environmental characteristics of the West Bank, and simply formed an apartheid network of \"octopus arms which hold a grip on Palestinian population centres\".\nA large number of embankments, concrete slabs and barriers impeded movement on primary and secondary roads. The result was to cantonize and fragment Palestinian townships, and cause endless obstacles to Palestinians going to work, schools, markets and relatives. Ramallah was cut off from all of its feeder villages in 2000.\nThough prohibited by law, confiscation of Palestinian identity cards at checkpoints is a daily occurrence. At best drivers must wait for several hours for them to be returned, when, as can happen, the IDs themselves are lost as soldiers change shifts, in which case Palestinians are directed to some regional office the next day, and more checkpoints to get there. Even before the Al Aqsa Intifada, UNFPA estimated that 20% of pregnant West Bank women were unable to access prenatal care because of the difficulties and delays caused by crossing checkpoints, and dozens were forced to deliver their children on the roadside.\nConstant uncertainty and the inability to plan are the results for Palestinians of the Israeli military rules governing their movements. The World Bank noted that additional costs arising from longer travelling caused by restrictions on movement through three major routes in the West Bank alone ran to (2013) USD 185\u00a0million a year, adding that other, earlier calculations (2007) suggest restrictions on the Palestinian labour market cost the West Bank approximately US$229\u00a0million per annum. It concluded that such imposed restrictions had a major negative impact on the local economy, hindering stability and growth. In 2007, official Israeli statistics indicated that there were 180,000 Palestinians on Israel's secret travel ban list. 561 roadblocks and checkpoints were in place (October), the number of Palestinians licensed to drive private cars was 46,166 and the annual cost of permits was $454.\nThese checkpoints, together with the separation wall and the restricted networks restructure the West Bank into \"land cells\", freezing the flow of normal everyday Palestinian lives. Israel sets up flying checkpoints without notice. In 2017, 2,941 flying checkpoints were set up along West Bank roads, around 327 a month. There were 476 unstaffed physical obstacles (dirt mounds, concrete blocks, gates and fenced sections) on roads. Of the gates erected at village entrances, 59 were always closed.\nThe checkpoint system did not ease up after the Oslo Accords, but was strengthened after them, which has been interpreted as suggesting their function is to assert control over Palestinians, and as a sign of an unwillingness to yield ground in the West Bank. According to PA Health Ministry statistics relating to the period from 2000 to 2006, of 68 Palestinian women who gave birth to their children while held up at checkpoints, 35 miscarried and 5 died while delivering their child there. Machsom Watch accumulated over a mere five years (2001\u20132006) some 10,000 eyewitness reports and testimonies regarding the difficulties faced by Palestinians trying to negotiate West Bank checkpoints.\nTransportation infrastructure is particularly problematic as Palestinian use of roads in Area C is highly restricted, and travel times can be inordinate; the Palestinian Authority has also been unable to develop roads, airports or railways in or through Area C, while many other roads were restricted only to public transportation and to Palestinians who have special permits from Israeli authorities.\nAt certain times, Israel maintained more than 600 checkpoints or roadblocks in the region.\nMovement restrictions on main roads between cities were still (as of 2005) blamed for poverty and economic depression in the West Bank. Underpasses and bridges, 28 of which have been constructed and 16 of which are planned, link Palestinian areas separated from each other by Israeli settlements and bypass roads\"\nIsraeli restrictions were tightened in 2007.\nRoute 4370, which has a concrete wall dividing the two sides, one designated for Israeli vehicles, the other for Palestinian. The wall is designed to allow Palestinians to pass north\u2013south through Israeli-held land and facilitate the building of additional Jewish settlements in the Jerusalem neighborhood.\nRail.\nAs of \u00a02012[ [update]], a plan for 475-kilometer rail network, establishing 11 new rail lines in West Bank, was confirmed by Israeli Transportation Ministry. The West Bank network would include one line running through Jenin, Nablus, Ramallah, Jerusalem, Ma'aleh Adumim, Bethlehem and Hebron. Another would provide service along the Jordanian border from Eilat to the Dead Sea, Jericho and Beit She'an and from there toward Haifa in the west and in also in a northeasterly direction. The proposed scheme also calls for shorter routes, such as between Nablus and Tul Karm in the West Bank, and from Ramallah to the Allenby Bridge crossing into Jordan.\nAirports.\nThe only airport in the West Bank is the Atarot Airport near Ramallah, but it has been closed since 2001.\nCrossing points to Jordan and Egypt.\nAllenby Bridge, or 'King Hussein Bridge', is the main port for the Palestinians in the West Bank to cross the Jordanian borders. This crossing point is controlled by Israel since 1967. It was inaugurated on 11 December 2011 under the military order \"175\" entitled 'An order concerning transition station'. Later, Order '446' was issued which annexed the Damia Bridge crossing point to the Allenby Bridge as a commercial crossing point only. Goods were exported to Jordan, while the import was banned for security purposes.\nIn 1993, the Palestinian National Authority, according to Oslo Accord assigned by PLO and the Israeli government, became a partial supervisor over the Rafah Border Crossing to Gaza Strip. The Palestinian Authority was responsible for issuing passports to Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Israel remained the major responsible party for this crossing point. According to the agreement, Israel has the right to independently inspect luggage and to maintain security. In addition, it can prevent anyone from using the crossing.\nTelecommunication.\nThe Palestinian Paltel telecommunication companies provide communication services such as landline, cellular network and Internet in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Dialling code +970 is used in the West Bank and all over the Palestinian territories. Until 2007, the Palestinian mobile market was monopolized by Jawwal. A new mobile operator for the territories launched in 2009 under the name of Wataniya Telecom. The number of Internet users increased from 35,000 in 2000 to 356,000 in 2010.\nConsequences of occupation.\nEconomic consequences.\nAccording to a 2013 World Bank report, Israeli restrictions hinder Palestinian economic development in Area C of the West Bank. A 2013 World Bank report calculates that, if the Interim Agreement was respected and restrictions lifted, a few key industries alone would produce US$2.2\u00a0billion per annum more (or 23% of 2011 Palestinian GDP) and reduce by some US$800\u00a0million (50%) the Palestinian Authority's deficit; the employment would increase by 35%.\nWater supply.\nAmnesty International has criticized the way that the Israeli state is dealing with the regional water resources:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Palestinians in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT) do not have access to adequate, safe water supplies\u00a0... Discriminatory Israeli policies in the OPT are the root cause of the striking disparity in access to water between Palestinians and Israelis\u00a0... The inequality is even more pronounced between Palestinian communities and unlawful Israeli settlements, established in the OPT in violation of international law. Swimming pools, well-watered lawns and large irrigated farms in Israeli settlements in the OPT stand in stark contrast next to Palestinian villages whose inhabitants struggle even to meet their essential domestic water needs. In parts of the West Bank, Israeli settlers use up to 20 times more water per capita than neighbouring Palestinian communities, who survive on barely 20 litres of water per capita a day\u2014the minimum amount recommended by the WHO for emergency situations response.\nIsraeli settlers in the West Bank have seized dozens of wells from Palestinians. The wells are privately owned by Palestinians and the settlers forcibly took them, gave them Hebrew names and, with the assistance of the Israeli military, prevent Arab people, including the wells' owners, from using the wells and the pools the wells feed.\nIsraeli garbage disposal.\nIsrael ratified the international Basel Convention treaty on Israel on 14 December 1994, according to which, any transfer of waste must be performed with an awareness of the dangers posed to the disempowered occupied people. It forbids the creation among them of \"environmental sacrifice zones.\" Israel, it is argued, uses the West Bank as a \"sacrifice\" zone by placing 15 waste treatment plants, which are there under less stringent rules that those required in Israel because a different legal system has been organized regarding hazardous materials that can be noxious to local people and the environment. The military authorities do not make public the details of these operations. These materials include sewage sludge, infectious medical waste, used oils, solvents, metals, electronic waste and batteries.\nIn 2007 it was estimated that 38% (35 mcm a year) of all wastewater flowing into the West Bank derived from settlements and Jerusalem. Of the 121 settlements surveyed, 81 had wastewater treatment plant, much of it inadequate or subject to breakdown, with much sewage flowing into lowland streams and terrain where Palestinian villages are located. Only 4 of 53 indictments for waste pollution were made over the years from 2000 to 2008, whereas in Israel the laws are strictly applied and, in 2006 alone, 230 enforcements for the same abuse were enforced. At the same time 90\u201395% of Palestinian wastewater was not treated, with only 1 of 4 Israeli plants built in the 1970s to that purpose functioning, and the neglect to improve the infrastructure is attributed to Israeli budgetary problems.\nAfter the Oslo Accords, the global community earmarked $250,000,000 for West Bank wastewater infrastructure. Israel at times insisted its approval was conditional on linking the grid to Israeli settlements, which neither the donors nor Palestinians accepted. Most of the infrastructure was subsequently destroyed by IDF military operations. The PA raised funds from Germany for 15 plants, but only managed to build one, at al-Bireh, within Area B, though even there Israel insisted the plant process waste from the settlement of Psagot, though refusing to pay fees for the treatment. Palestinian town Salfit has been deeply affected by sewage overflow channelled past the town from the settlement of Ariel.\nUnlike the data available for sewage treatment within Israel, the Israeli Water Commission refuses to provide public reports on 15\u00a0million cubic metres of sewage flowing from Israeli settlements in the West Bank. It claims 75% is treated adequately but independent Israeli studies (2000) suggest that only 6% met Israeli treatment standards, while 48% was either not treated adequastely or discharged raw. Since then some improvements have been implemented.\nThe landfill near Al-Jiftlik in the Jericho Governorate, built on absentee Palestinian property without planning or an environment impact analysis, is for the exclusive use of waste, 1,000 tons per day, produced by Israeli settlements and cities within Israel. Palestinians are restricted to 3 landfills, and permits for more have been denied unless the sites can be used to dump settlement garbage. Even if a permit is given without this agreement, settler waste under military escort is still dumped there.\nIsrael has been accused of engaging in 'warfare ecology' in the West Bank. In response to local opposition in Israel to waste treatment plants and the high cost of meeting stringent environment laws in that country. It has been argued that Israel had used the area of the West Bank as a 'sacrifice zone' where its waste can be dumped.\"\nMany waste treatment facilities in the West Bank were built for processing waste generated inside Israeli sovereign territory, according to B'Tselem, Israel's leading human rights organization for monitoring the West Bank.\nThe Israel government requires no reporting by these West Bank facilities of the amount of waste they process or the risks they pose to the local population, and applies less rigorous regulatory standards to these facilities than it does to solid waste treatment facilities in Israel. The UNEP has described Israeli vehicle dismantling in the Palestinian territories as \"unregulated\". B'Tselem has said that \"any transfer of waste to the West Bank is a breach of international law which Israel is dutybound to uphold\" because according to international law \"an occupied territory or its resources may not be used for the benefit of the occupying power's own needs.\"\nExperts have also warned that some of these facilities are garbage dumps that endanger the purity of the mountain aquifer, which is one of the largest sources of water in the region. In addition to the exporting of Israeli waste and the waste generated by settlers, Israeli industrial and manufacturing operations with harmful health effects are typically outsourced to the West Bank where they can be carried out with little to no regulatory oversight.\nPalestinian water and sewage.\nIn 1995, the Palestinian Water Authority (PWA) was established by a presidential decree. One year later, its functions, objectives and responsibilities were defined through a by-law, giving the PWA the mandate to manage water resources and execute the water policy.\nAbout 90% of the Palestinians in the Territories had access to improved sanitation in 2008. Cesspits were used by 39% of households, while access to the sewer network increased to 55% in 2011, up from 39% in 1999. In the West Bank, only 13,000 out of 85,000 m3 of wastewater were treated in five municipal wastewater treatment plants in Hebron, Jenin, Ramallah, Tulkarem and Al-Bireh. The Al Bireh plant was constructed in 2000 with funding by the German aid agency KfW. According to the World Bank report, the other four plants perform poorly concerning efficiency and quality.\nResource extraction.\nBased on the number of quarries per km2 in Areas A and B, it is calculated that, were Israel to lift restrictions, a further 275 quarries could be opened in Area C. The World Bank estimates that Israel's virtual ban on issuing Palestinians permits for quarries there costs the Palestinian economy at least US$241\u00a0million per year.\nIn international law drawing on the Hague Conventions (Article 55), it is established that an occupying power may reap some value from the resources of the country occupied but not deplete its assets, and that the usufruct must benefit the people under occupation. The Oslo Accords agreed to hand over mining rights to the Palestinian Authority. Israel licenses eleven settlement quarries in the West Bank and they sell 94% of their material to Israel, which arguably constitutes \"depletion\" and pays royalties to its West Bank military government and settlement municipalities.\nThus the German cement firm quarrying at Nahal Raba paid out \u20ac430,000 ($479,000) in taxes to the Samaria Regional Council in 2014 alone. The Israeli High Court rejected a petition that such quarrying was a violation by stating that after four decades Israeli law must adapt to \"the realities on the ground\". The state did undertake not to open more quarries.\nA Human Rights Watch report contrasts the difference between a Palestinian-owned quarry company in Beit Fajar and that of a European one working on what Israeli considers its state land. The European company obtained a concession and license to harvest stone, whereas Israel refuses permits for most of the roughly 40 Beit Fajar quarries, or nearly any other Palestinian-owned quarry in the West Bank under Israeli administration.\nIsrael had denied Palestinians permits to process minerals in that area of the West Bank. The products of the Israeli cosmetics firm Ahava, established in 1988, were developed in laboratories at the West Bank Dead Sea settlements of Mitzpe Shalem and Kalya. 60% of their production is sold in the EU market. In 2018 The UN, stating that the violations were both \"pervasive and devastating\" to the local Palestinian population, identified some 206 companies which do business with Israeli settlements in the West Bank.\nRoughly 73 percent of global bromine production comes from Israeli and Jordanian exploitation of the Dead Sea. The potential incremental value that could accrue to the Palestinian economy from the production and sales of potash, bromine and magnesium has been conservatively estimated at US$918\u00a0million per annum, or 9 percent of GDP. The lost earnings from not being allowed to process Dead Sea minerals such as potash, and for making bromide-based flame retardants, based on calculations of comparable use by Israel and Jordan, suggest a figure of $642\u00a0million.\nLoss of cultural property.\nAlbert Glock argued that Israel is responsible for the disappearance of significant parts of the Palestinian cultural patrimony, by confiscating Arab cultural resources. In 1967 it appropriated the Palestine Archaeological Museum and its library in East Jerusalem. Often these losses are personal, as when homes are ransacked and looted of their valuables. The journalist Hamdi Faraj, jailed for endangering public order, had his 500-volume library confiscated, including copies of the Bible and Qur'an and, when he applied for their restitution, was told all the books had been accidentally burnt.\nThe Israeli occupation has wrought a profound change in Palestinian identity, which clings to a sense of a \"paradise lost\" before the changes brought out by the 1967 conquest.\nTourism.\nPalestine contains several of the most significant sites for Muslims, Christians and Jews, and are endowed with a world-class heritage highly attractive to tourists and pilgrims. The West Bank Palestinians themselves have difficulties in accessing the territory for recreation.\nBased on 1967 figures, the Palestinian Dead Sea Coastline is roughly 40\u00a0km in length, of which 15% (6\u00a0kilometres) could lend itself to the same tourist infrastructure developed by Jordan and Israel in their respective areas. Were Israel to permit a parallel development of this Palestinian sector, the World Bank estimates that 2,900 jobs would be added, allowing the Palestinian economy a potential value-added input of something like $126\u00a0million annually. It is also the only maritime recreational outlet for West Bankers, but according to an Acri complaint to the Israeli Supreme Court in 2008 Palestinians are often barred or turned away from the beaches at their only access point, the Beit Ha'arava checkpoint on Route 90. Acri claimed the ban responds to fears by settlers who operate tourist concessions in this West Bank area that they will lose Jewish customers if there are too many West Bank Palestinians on the beaches.\nThe key Palestinian towns in the West Bank for tourism are East Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Jericho. All access points are controlled by Israel and the road system, checkpoints and obstacles in place for visitors desiring to visit Palestinian towns leaves their hotels half-empty. From 92 to 94 cents in every dollar of the tourist trade goes to Israel. The general itineraries under Israeli management focus predominantly on Jewish history. Obstacles placed in the way of Palestinian-managed tourism down to 1995 included withholding licenses from tour guides, and hotels, for construction or renovation, and control of airports and highways, enabling Israel to develop a virtual monopoly on tourism.\nDemographics.\nIn December 2007, an official census conducted by the Palestinian Authority found that the Palestinian Arab population of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, was 2,345,000. However, the World Bank and American-Israeli Demographic Research Group identified a 32% discrepancy between first-grade enrollment statistics documented by the Palestinian Ministry of Education and Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS)' 2007 projections, with questions also raised about the PCBS' growth assumptions for the period 1997\u20132003. The Israeli Civil Administration put the number of Palestinians in the West Bank at 2,657,029 as of May 2012.\nIn 2014, there were 389,250 Israeli settlers living in the West Bank, excluding East Jerusalem, as well as around 375,000 living in Israeli-annexed East Jerusalem. There are also small ethnic groups, such as the Samaritans living in and around Nablus, numbering in the hundreds.\nAs of October 2007, around 23,000 Palestinians in the West Bank worked in Israel every day, while another 9,200 worked in Israeli settlements. In addition, around 10,000 Palestinian traders from the West Bank were allowed to travel every day into Israel. By 2014, 92,000 Palestinians worked in Israel legally or illegally, twice as many as in 2010.\nIn 2008, approximately 30% of Palestinians or 754,263 persons living in the West Bank were refugees or descendants of refugees from villages and towns located in what became Israel during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, according to UNRWA statistics. A 2011 EU report titled \"Area C and Palestinian State Building\" reported that before the Israeli occupation in 1967, between 200,000 and 320,000 Palestinians used to live in the Jordan Valley, 90% which is in Area C, but demolition of Palestinian homes and prevention of new buildings has seen the number drop to 56,000, 70% of which live in Area A, in Jericho. In a similar period, the Jewish population in Area C has grown from 1,200 to 310,000.\nMajor population centers.\nThe most densely populated part of the region is a mountainous spine, running north\u2013south, where the cities of Jerusalem, Nablus, Ramallah, al-Bireh, Jenin, Bethlehem, Hebron and Yattah are located as well as the Israeli settlements of Ariel, Ma'ale Adumim and Beitar Illit. Ramallah, although relatively mid in population compared to other major cities as Hebron, Nablus and Jenin, serves as an economic and political center for the Palestinians. Near Ramallah the new city of Rawabi is under construction. Jenin in the extreme north and is the capital of north of the West Bank and is on the southern edge of the Jezreel Valley. Modi'in Illit, Qalqilyah and Tulkarm are in the low foothills adjacent to the Israeli Coastal Plain, and Jericho and Tubas are situated in the Jordan Valley, north of the Dead Sea.\nReligion.\nThe population of the West Bank is 80\u201385% Muslim (mostly Sunni) and 12\u201314% Jewish. The remainder are 1\u20132.5% Christian (mostly Greek Orthodox), and others.\nEducation.\nSeven universities are operating in the West Bank:\nMost universities in the West Bank have politically active student bodies, and elections of student council officers are normally along party affiliations. Although the establishment of the universities was initially allowed by the Israeli authorities, some were sporadically ordered closed by the Israeli Civil Administration during the 1970s and 1980s to prevent political activities and violence against the IDF. Some universities remained closed by military order for extended periods during years immediately preceding and following the first Palestinian Intifada, but have largely remained open since the signing of the Oslo Accords despite the advent of the Al-Aqsa Intifada (Second Intifada) in 2000.\nThe founding of Palestinian universities has greatly increased education levels among the population in the West Bank. According to a Birzeit University study, the percentage of Palestinians choosing local universities as opposed to foreign institutions has been steadily increasing; as of 1997, 41% of Palestinians with bachelor's degrees had obtained them from Palestinian institutions. According to UNESCO, Palestinians are one of the most highly educated groups in the Middle East \"despite often difficult circumstances\". The literacy rate among Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip according to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS) is 94.6% for 2009.\nCulture.\nTelevision and radio.\nThe Palestinian Broadcasting Corporation broadcasts from an AM station in Ramallah on 675\u00a0kHz; numerous local privately owned stations are also in operation. Most Palestinian households have a radio and TV, and satellite dishes for receiving international coverage are widespread. PalTel began implementing an initiative to provide ADSL broadband internet service to all households and businesses.\nIsrael's cable television company Hot, satellite television provider Yes, AM/FM radio broadcast stations, and public television stations all also operate in the West Bank. Broadband internet service by Bezeq's ADSL and by the cable company is available as well. The Al-Aqsa Voice broadcasts from Dabas Mall in Tulkarem at 106.7 FM. The Al-Aqsa TV station shares these offices.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33210", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33210", "title": "History of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33211", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33211", "title": "Geography of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33212", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33212", "title": "Demographics of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33213", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33213", "title": "Government of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33214", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33214", "title": "Economy of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33215", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33215", "title": "Communications in the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33216", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33216", "title": "Transportation in the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33217", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33217", "title": "Military of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33218", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33218", "title": "Transnational issues of the West Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "33220", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33220", "title": "Western Sahara", "text": "Disputed territory in north-western Africa\nWestern Sahara is a non-self-governing territory in north-western Africa undergoing decolonization. It has a surface area of . Western Sahara is the last African colonial state yet to achieve independence and has been dubbed \"Africa's last colony\". With an estimated population of around 600,000 inhabitants, it is the most sparsely populated territory in Africa and the second most sparsely populated territory in the world, consisting mainly of desert flatlands.\nSpain previously colonized the territory as the Spanish Sahara until 1976, when it attempted to transfer its administration to Morocco and Mauritania while ignoring an International Court of Justice's verdict that those countries had no sovereignty over Western Sahara. A war erupted and the Polisario Front\u2014a national liberation movement recognized by the United Nations as the legitimate representative of the people of Western Sahara\u2014proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) with a government-in-exile in Tindouf, Algeria. Mauritania withdrew its claims in 1979, and Morocco secured \"de facto\" control of most of the territory, including all major cities and most natural resources. A UN-sponsored ceasefire agreement was reached in 1991, though a planned referendum monitored by the UN's MINURSO mission has since stalled.\nApproximately 30% of the Western Sahara is controlled by the Polisario Front; the remaining 70% is occupied by Morocco. Morocco maintains the Berm, a wall lined with land mines that splits the territory. The Polisario Front is primarily supported by Algeria and has received partial international recognition for the SADR and membership in the African Union. Morocco is supported by France and the United States, and several states began expressing support for its autonomy proposal in the 2020s.\nGeography.\nWestern Sahara is located on the north-west coast in West Africa and on the cusp of North Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean to the northwest, Morocco to the north-northeast, Algeria to the east-northeast, and Mauritania to the east and south.\nAmong the most arid and inhospitable on the planet, the land along the coast is low flat desert and rises, especially in the north, to small mountains reaching up to on the eastern side.\nWhile the area can experience flash flooding in the spring, there are no permanent streams. At times, a cool off-shore current can produce fog and heavy dew.\nThe interior experiences extreme summer heat, with average highs reaching in July and in August; during winter, days are still hot to very hot, with average highs from ; however, in the northern part of the territory, the thermometer may drop below at night and it can be freezing in December and in January, although this is rare.\nWestern Sahara contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Saharan halophytics, Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets, Atlantic coastal desert, and North Saharan steppe and woodlands.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest known inhabitants of Western Sahara were the Gaetuli. Depending on the century, Roman-era sources describe the area as inhabited by Gaetulian Autololes or the Gaetulian Daradae tribes. Berber heritage is still evident from regional and place-name toponymy, as well as from tribal names.\nOther early inhabitants of Western Sahara may be the Bafour and later the Serer. The Bafour were later replaced or absorbed by Berber-speaking populations, which eventually merged in turn with the migrating Beni \u1e24ass\u0101n Arab tribes.\nThe arrival of Islam in the 8th century played a major role in the development of the Maghreb region. Trade developed further, and the territory may have been one of the routes for caravans, especially between Marrakesh and Tombouctou in Mali.\nIn the 11th century, the Maqil Arabs (fewer than 200 individuals) settled in Morocco (mainly in the Draa River valley, between the Moulouya River, Tafilalt and Taourirt). Towards the end of the Almohad Caliphate, the Beni Hassan, a sub-tribe of the Maqil, were called by the local ruler of the Sous to quell a rebellion; they settled in the Sous Ksours and controlled such cities as Taroudant. During Marinid dynasty rule, the Beni Hassan rebelled but were defeated by the Sultan and escaped beyond the Saguia el-Hamra dry river. The Beni Hassan then were at constant war with the Lamtuna nomadic Berbers of the Sahara. Over roughly five centuries, through a complex process of acculturation and mixing seen elsewhere in the Maghreb and North Africa, some of the indigenous Berber tribes mixed with the Maqil Arab tribes and formed a culture unique to Morocco and Mauritania.\nSpanish province.\nThe Spanish presence in the region of modern-day Western Sahara lasted from 1884 to 1975. While initial Spanish interest in the Sahara was focused on using it as a port for the slave trade, by the 1700s Spain had transitioned economic activity on the Saharan coast towards commercial fishing. By the 19th century, Spain had claimed the southern coastal region and penetration of the hinterland gradually followed; later in 1904 the northern region was acquired. After an agreement among the European colonial powers at the Berlin Conference in 1884 on the division of spheres of influence in Africa, the same year Spain seized control of Western Sahara and established it as a Spanish colony. Despite establishing their first colony in the region at R\u00edo de Oro Bay in 1884, the Spanish were unable to pacify the interior of the region until the 1930s. Raids and rebellions by the indigenous Saharan population kept the Spanish forces out of much of the territory for a long time. The territory was eventually subdued by joint Spanish and French forces in 1934, the same year the Spaniards divided their Saharan territories into two regions named after the rivers: Sagu\u00eda el-Hamra and R\u00edo de Oro. After 1939 and the outbreak of World War II, this area was administered by Spanish Morocco. In 1958, Spain joined the district of Saguia el-Hamra (the \"Red River\") in the north with the R\u00edo de Oro (in the south) to form the province of Spanish Sahara, following Morocco's claiming these regions in 1957. As a consequence, Ahmed Belbachir Haskouri, the Chief of Cabinet, General Secretary of the Government of Spanish Morocco, cooperated with the Spanish to select governors in that area. The Saharan lords who were already in prominent positions, such as the members of Maa El Ainain family, provided a recommended list of candidates for new governors. Together with the Spanish High Commissioner, Belbachir selected from this list. During the annual celebration of Muhammad's birthday, these lords paid their respects to the caliph to show loyalty to the Moroccan monarchy.As time went by, Spanish colonial rule began to unravel with the general wave of decolonization after World War II; former North African and sub-Saharan African possessions and protectorates gained independence from European powers. Spanish decolonization proceeded more slowly, but internal political and social pressures for it in mainland Spain built up towards the end of Francisco Franco's rule. There was a global trend towards complete decolonization. Spain abandoned most territories within neighboring Morocco in 1956, but resisted encroachment by the Moroccan Liberation Army within Ifni and Spanish Sahara from 1956 to 1958. In 1971, Sahrawi (an Arabic term for those from Sahara) students in Moroccan universities began organizing what came to be known as The Embryonic Movement for the Liberation of Sagu\u00eda el Hamra and R\u00edo de Oro. The movement tried without success to gain backing from several Arab governments, including Algeria and Morocco. Spain began rapidly to divest itself of most of its remaining colonial possessions. By 1974\u201375 the government issued promises of a referendum on independence in Western Sahara.\nAt the same time, Morocco and Mauritania, which had historical and competing claims of sovereignty over the territory, argued that it had been artificially separated from their territories by the European colonial powers. Algeria, which also bordered the territory, viewed their demands with suspicion, as Morocco also claimed the Algerian provinces of Tindouf and B\u00e9char. After arguing for a process of decolonization to be guided by the United Nations, the Algerian government under Houari Boum\u00e9di\u00e8nne in 1975 committed to assisting the Polisario Front, which opposed both Moroccan and Mauritanian claims and demanded full independence of Western Sahara.\nThe UN attempted to settle these disputes through a visiting mission in late 1975, as well as a verdict from the International Court of Justice (ICJ). It acknowledged that Western Sahara had historical links with Morocco and Mauritania, but not sufficient to prove the sovereignty of either State over the territory at the time of the Spanish colonization. The population of the territory thus possessed the right of self-determination. On 6 November 1975 Morocco initiated the Green March into Western Sahara; 350,000 unarmed Moroccans converged on the city of Tarfaya in southern Morocco and waited for a signal from King Hassan II of Morocco to cross the border in a peaceful march. A few days before, on 31 October, Moroccan troops invaded Western Sahara from the north.\nDemands for independence.\nIn the waning days of General Franco's rule, and after the Green March, the Spanish government signed a tripartite agreement with Morocco and Mauritania as it moved to transfer the territory on 14 November 1975. The accords were based on a bipartite administration, and Morocco and Mauritania each moved to annex the territories, with Morocco taking control of the northern two-thirds of Western Sahara as its Southern Provinces, and Mauritania taking control of the southern third as Tiris al-Gharbiyya. Spain terminated its presence in Spanish Sahara within three months, repatriating Spanish remains from its cemeteries.\nThe Moroccan and Mauritanian annexations were resisted by the Polisario Front, which had gained backing from Algeria. It initiated guerrilla warfare and, in 1979, Mauritania withdrew due to pressure from Polisario, including a bombardment of its capital and other economic targets. Morocco extended its control to the rest of the territory. It gradually contained the guerrillas by setting up the extensive sand-berm in the desert (known as the Border Wall or Moroccan Wall) to exclude guerrilla fighters. Hostilities ceased in a 1991 cease-fire, overseen by the peacekeeping mission MINURSO, under the terms of a UN Settlement Plan.\nStalling of the referendum and Settlement Plan.\nThe referendum, originally scheduled for 1992, foresaw giving the local population the option between independence or affirming integration with Morocco, but it quickly stalled. In 1997, the Houston Agreement attempted to revive the proposal for a referendum but likewise has hitherto not had success. As of 2010[ [update]], negotiations over terms have not resulted in any substantive action. At the heart of the dispute lies the question of who qualifies to be registered to participate in the referendum, and, since about the year 2000, Morocco considers that since there is no agreement on persons entitled to vote, a referendum is not possible. Meanwhile, Polisario still insisted on a referendum with independence as a clear option, without offering a solution to the problem of who is qualified to be registered to participate in it.\nBoth sides blame each other for the stalling of the referendum. The Polisario has insisted on only allowing those found on the 1974 Spanish Census lists (see below) to vote, while Morocco has insisted that the census was flawed by evasion and sought the inclusion of members of Sahrawi tribes that escaped from Spanish invasion to the north of Morocco by the 19th century.\nEfforts by the UN special envoys to find a common ground for both parties did not succeed. By 1999 the UN had identified about 85,000 voters, with nearly half of them in the Moroccan-occupied parts of Western Sahara, and the others scattered between the Tindouf refugee camps, Mauritania and other places of exile. Polisario accepted this voter list, as it had done with the previous list presented by the UN (both of them originally based on the Spanish census of 1974), but Morocco refused and, as rejected voter candidates began a mass-appeals procedure, insisted that each application be scrutinized individually. This again brought the process to a halt.\nAccording to a NATO delegation, MINURSO election observers stated in 1999, as the deadlock continued, that \"if the number of voters does not rise significantly the odds were slightly on the SADR side\". By 2001, the process had effectively stalemated and the UN Secretary-General asked the parties for the first time to explore other, third-way solutions. Indeed, shortly after the Houston Agreement (1997), Morocco officially declared that it was \"no longer necessary\" to include an option of independence on the ballot, offering instead autonomy. Erik Jensen, who played an administrative role in MINURSO, wrote that neither side would agree to a voter registration in which they were destined to lose (see \"Western Sahara: Anatomy of a Stalemate\").\nBaker Plan.\nAs personal envoy of the Secretary-General, James Baker visited all sides and produced the document known as the \"Baker Plan\". This was discussed by the United Nations Security Council in 2000, and envisioned an autonomous Western Sahara Authority (WSA), which would be followed after five years by the referendum. Every person present in the territory would be allowed to vote, regardless of birthplace and with no regard to the Spanish census. It was rejected by both sides, although it was initially derived from a Moroccan proposal. According to Baker's draft, tens of thousands of post-annexation settlers from Morocco would be granted the vote in the Sahrawi independence referendum, and the ballot would be split three ways by the inclusion of an unspecified \"autonomy\", further undermining the independence camp. Morocco was also allowed to keep its army in the area and retain control over all security issues during both the autonomy years and the election. In 2002, the Moroccan king stated that the referendum idea was \"out of date\" since it \"cannot be implemented\"; Polisario retorted that that was only because of the King's refusal to allow it to take place.\nIn 2003, a new version of the plan was made official, with some additions spelling out the powers of the WSA, making it less reliant on Moroccan devolution. It also provided further detail on the referendum process in order to make it harder to stall or subvert. This second draft, commonly known as Baker II, was accepted by the Polisario as a \"basis of negotiations\" to the surprise of many. This appeared to abandon Polisario's previous position of only negotiating based on the standards of voter identification from 1991 (i.e. the Spanish census). After that, the draft quickly garnered widespread international support, culminating in the UN Security Council's unanimous endorsement of the plan in the summer of 2003.\nEnd of the 2000s.\nBaker resigned his post at the United Nations in 2004; his term did not see the crisis resolved. His resignation followed several months of failed attempts to get Morocco to enter into formal negotiations on the plan, but he was met with rejection.\nKing Hassan II of Morocco initially supported the referendum idea in principle in 1982, and signed contracts with Polisario and the UN in 1991 and 1997. No major powers have expressed interest in forcing the issue, however, and Morocco has shown little interest in a real referendum. Hassan II's son and successor, Mohammed VI, has opposed any referendum on independence, and has said Morocco will never agree to one: \"We shall not give up one inch of our beloved Sahara, not a grain of its sand.\" In 2006, he created an appointed advisory body Royal Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs (CORCAS), which proposes a self-governing Western Sahara as an autonomous community within Morocco.\nThe UN has put forth no replacement strategy after the breakdown of Baker II, and renewed fighting has been raised as a possibility. In 2005, former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan reported increased military activity on both sides of the front and breaches of several cease-fire provisions against strengthening military fortifications.\nMorocco has repeatedly tried to engage Algeria in bilateral negotiations, based on its view of Polisario as the cat's paw of the Algerian military. It has received vocal support from France and occasionally (and currently) from the United States. These negotiations would define the exact limits of a Western Sahara autonomy under Moroccan rule but only after Morocco's \"inalienable right\" to the territory was recognized as a precondition to the talks. The Algerian government has consistently refused, claiming it has neither the will nor the right to negotiate on behalf of the Polisario Front.\nIn May 2005, demonstrations and riots by supporters of independence or a referendum broke out in the Moroccan-occupied parts of Western Sahara and in parts of southern Morocco (notably the town of Assa). They were met by police. Several international human rights organizations expressed concern at what they termed abuse by Moroccan security forces, and a number of Sahrawi activists have been jailed. Pro-independence Sahrawi sources, including the Polisario, have given these demonstrations the name \"Independence Intifada\", while most sources have tended to see the events as being of limited importance. International press and other media coverage have been sparse, and reporting is complicated by the Moroccan government's policy of strictly controlling independent media coverage within the territory.\nDemonstrations and protests still occur, even after Morocco declared in February 2006 that it was contemplating a plan for devolving a limited variant of autonomy to the territory but still explicitly refused any referendum on independence. As of January 2007, the plan had not been made public, though the Moroccan government claimed that it was more or less complete.\nPolisario has intermittently threatened to resume fighting, referring to the Moroccan refusal of a referendum as a breach of the cease-fire terms, but most observers seem to consider armed conflict unlikely without the green light from Algeria, which houses the Sahrawis' refugee camps and has been the main military sponsor of the movement.\nIn April 2007, the government of Morocco suggested that a self-governing entity, through the CORCAS, should govern the territory with some degree of autonomy for Western Sahara. The project was presented to the UN Security Council in mid-April 2007. The stalemating of the Moroccan proposal options has led the UN in the recent \"Report of the UN Secretary-General\" to ask the parties to enter into direct and unconditional negotiations to reach a mutually accepted political solution.\n2010s.\nIn October 2010, Gadaym Izik camp was set up near Laayoune as a protest by displaced Sahrawi people about their living conditions. It was home to more than 12,000 people. In November 2010, Moroccan security forces entered Gadaym Izik camp in the early hours of the morning, using helicopters and water cannon to force people to leave. The Polisario Front said Moroccan security forces had killed a 26-year-old protester at the camp, a claim denied by Morocco. Protesters in Laayoune threw stones at police and set fire to tires and vehicles. Several buildings, including a TV station, were also set on fire. Moroccan officials said five security personnel had been killed in the unrest.\nOn 15 November 2010, the Moroccan government accused the Algerian secret services of orchestrating and financing the Gadaym Izik camp with the intent to destabilize the region. The Spanish press was accused of mounting a campaign of disinformation to support the Sahrawi initiative, and all foreign reporters were either prevented from traveling or else expelled from the area. The protest coincided with a fresh round of negotiations at the UN.\nIn 2016, the European Union (EU) declared that \"Western Sahara is not part of Moroccan territory.\" In March 2016, Morocco \"expelled more than 70 U.N. civilian staffers with MINURSO\" due to strained relations after Ban Ki-moon called Morocco's annexation of Western Sahara an \"occupation\".\n2020s.\nThe 2020s have seen a diplomatic shift in favor of Morocco, with several African states opening consulates accredited to Morocco in Western Sahara, implying \"de facto\" recognition. Even so, the Polisario Front has seen limited victories in cases brought before the African Court and the European Court of Justice. In November 2020, the ceasefire between the Polisario Front and Morocco broke down, leading to ongoing armed clashes between both sides.\nOn 10 December 2020, the United States announced that it would recognize full Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara in exchange for Morocco normalizing relations with Israel with a view for subsequent establishment of diplomatic relations. Following this, Israel officially recognized Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara in July 2023.\nIn February 2021, Morocco proposed to Spain the creation of an autonomy for Western Sahara under the sovereignty of the King of Morocco. In March 2022, the Spanish government abandoned its traditional position of neutrality in the conflict, siding with the Moroccan government and recognizing the autonomy proposal \"as the most serious, realistic and credible basis for the resolution of the dispute\". This sudden turnaround was generally rejected by both the Opposition, the parties that make up the government coalition, the Polisario Front, as well as members of the governing party, who support a solution \"that respects the democratic will of the Saharawi people\".\nIn October 2024, in a speech to the Parliament of Morocco, French President Emmanuel Macron backed Morocco's autonomy proposal. Macron also unveiled a \u20ac25 million ($27 million) investment in Guelmim-Oued Noun, which includes part of the Western Sahara. In June 2025, UK Foreign Secretary David Lammy stated that Morocco's plan for autonomy in Western Sahara represented \"the most credible, viable and pragmatic\" solution to the conflict. In July 2025, the Copernicus Programme corrected its cartography, separating Morocco from Western Sahara.\nIn October 2025, the United Nations Security Council referenced Morocco's Autonomy Proposal as a basis for negotiations \"with a view to achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable resolution to the dispute, consistent with the UN Charter\" and welcomed \"any constructive suggestions by the parties in response to the Autonomy Proposal\". The resolution recognised that \"genuine autonomy could represent a most feasible outcome\" and encouraged the parties to submit ideas to support \"a final mutually acceptable solution\".\nPolitics.\nSovereignty over Western Sahara is contested between Morocco and the Polisario Front and its legal status remains unresolved. The United Nations considers it to be a \"non-self-governing territory\".\nFormally, Morocco is administered by a bicameral parliament under a constitutional monarchy wherein the monarch retains significant powers, such as the capacity to appoint the government and to dissolve parliament. The last elections to the parliament's lower house were deemed reasonably free and fair by international observers. The Morocco-occupied parts of Western Sahara are divided into several provinces that are treated as integral parts of the kingdom. The Moroccan government heavily subsidizes the Saharan provinces under its occupation with cut-rate fuel and related subsidies, to appease nationalist dissent and attract immigrants from Sahrawis and other communities in Morocco proper.\nThe exiled government of the self-proclaimed Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) is a form of single-party parliamentary and presidential system, but according to its constitution, this will be changed into a multi-party system at the achievement of independence. It is presently based at the Tindouf refugee camps in Algeria, which it controls. It also controls the part of Western Sahara to the east of the Moroccan Wall, known as the \"liberated territories\". This area has a very small population, estimated to be approximately 30,000 nomads. The Moroccan government views it as a no-man's land patrolled by UN troops. The SADR government whose troops also patrol the area have proclaimed a village in the area, Bir Lehlou and Tifariti, as SADR's former and actual temporary factual capitals.\nOn 18 December 2019, the Comoros became the first nation to open a consulate in Laayoune in support of Moroccan claims to Western Sahara. In January 2020, The Gambia and Guinea opened consulates in Dakhla; meanwhile, Gabon opened a consulate general in Laayoune. As part of the Moroccan-Israeli normalisation deal, the United States established a temporary consulate post in Dakhla in January 2021 as a transition to establishing a permanent consulate within the near future.\nHuman rights.\nThe Western Sahara conflict has resulted in severe human-rights abuses, constantly reported by external reporters and human rights activists, most notably the displacement of tens of thousands of Sahrawi civilians from the country, the expulsion of tens of thousands of Moroccan civilians by the Algerian government from Algeria, and numerous casualties of war and repression.\nDuring the war years (1975\u20131991), both sides accused each other of targeting civilians. Moroccan claims of Polisario terrorism have generally had little to no support abroad, with the US, European Union, African Union and UN all refusing to include the group on their lists of terrorist organizations. Polisario leaders maintain that they are ideologically opposed to terrorism, and insist that collective punishment and forced disappearances among Sahrawi civilians should be considered state terrorism on the part of Morocco. Both Morocco and the Polisario additionally accuse each other of violating the human rights of the populations under their control, in the Moroccan-occupied parts of Western Sahara and the Tindouf refugee camps in Algeria, respectively. Morocco and organizations such as consider Algeria to be directly responsible for any crimes committed on its territory, and accuse the country of having been directly involved in such violations.\nMorocco has been repeatedly criticized for its actions in Western Sahara by international human rights organizations including:\nThe POLISARIO has received criticism from the French organization France Libertes on its treatment of Moroccan prisoners of war, and on its general behaviour in the Tindouf refugee camps in reports by the Belgian commercial counseling society ESISC. Social anthropologist of the Sahara Desert, Konstantina Isidoros, said that in both 2005 and 2008, ESISC issued two near-identical reports proclaiming distorted truths that Polisario is evolving to new fears terrorism, radical Islamism or international crime. According Isidoros \"lies appear to play some peculiar importance in this report\". Jacob Mundi considers this report as a part of the Moroccan propaganda designed to discredit the Polisario Front.\nA number of former Polisario officials who have defected to Morocco accuse the organization of abuse of human rights and sequestration of the population in Tindouf.\nAdministrative divisions.\nSahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.\nThe SADR has two levels of notional administrative division:\nMoroccan regions and provinces.\nThree Moroccan regions are within or partly within Western Sahara:\nMorocco occupies territory to the west of the berm (border wall) while the Sahrawi Republic controls territory to the east (see map on right).\nDispute.\nWestern Sahara was partitioned between Morocco and Mauritania in April 1976, with Morocco acquiring the northern two-thirds of the territory. When Mauritania, under pressure from Polisario guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its portion in August 1979, Morocco moved to occupy that sector shortly thereafter and has since asserted administrative control over the whole territory. The official Moroccan government name for Western Sahara is the \"Southern Provinces\", consisting of the R\u00edo de Oro and Saguia el-Hamra regions.\nThe portion not under the occupation of the Moroccan government is the area that lies between the border wall and the actual border with Algeria. The Polisario Front claims to run this as the Free Zone on behalf of the SADR. The area is patrolled by Polisario forces, and access is restricted, even among Sahrawis, due to the harsh climate of the Sahara, the military conflict and the abundance of land mines. Landmine Action UK undertook preliminary survey work by visiting the Polisario-controlled area of Western Sahara in October 2005 and February\u2013March 2006. A field assessment in the vicinity of Bir Lahlou, Tifariti and the berms revealed that the densest concentrations of mines are in front of the berms. Mines were laid in zigzags up to one meter apart, and in some parts of the berms, there are three rows of mines. There are also berms in the Moroccan-occupied zone, around Dakhla and stretching from Boujdour, including Smara on the Moroccan border. Mine-laying was not restricted to the vicinity of the berms though, as towns throughout the Polisario-controlled areas, such as Bir Lehlou and Tifariti, are ringed by mines laid by Moroccan forces.\nDespite this, the area is traveled and inhabited by many Sahrawi nomads from the Tindouf refugee camps of Algeria and the Sahrawi communities in Mauritania. United Nations MINURSO forces are also present in the area. The UN forces oversee the cease-fire between Polisario and Morocco agreed upon in the 1991 Settlement Plan.\nThe Polisario forces (of the Sahrawi People's Liberation Army (SPLA)) in the area are divided into seven \"military regions\", each controlled by a top commander reporting to the President of the Polisario proclaimed Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. The total size of the Polisario's guerrilla army present in this area is unknown, but it is believed to number a few thousand men, despite many combatants being demobilized due to the cease-fire.\nMajor Sahrawi political events, such as Polisario congresses and sessions of the Sahrawi National Council (the SADR parliament in exile) are held in the Free Zone (especially in Tifariti and Bir Lehlou), since it is politically and symbolically important to conduct political affairs on Sahrawi territory. In 2005, MINURSO lodged a complaint to the Security Council of the United Nations for \"military maneuvers with real fire which extends to restricted areas\" by Morocco. A concentration of forces for the commemoration of the Saharawi Republic's 30th anniversary were subject to condemnation by the United Nations, as it was considered an example of a cease-fire violation to bring such a large force concentration into the area. In late 2009, Moroccan troops performed military maneuvers near Umm Dreiga, in the exclusion zone, violating the cease-fire. Both parties have been accused of such violations by the UN, but to date there has been no serious hostile action from either side since 1991.\nUN sponsored peace talks, the first in six years between Morocco and Polisario, were held in Geneva on 5 December 2018, with both sides agreeing to meet again in a few months for further talks.\nDuring the joint Moroccan\u2013Mauritanian occupation of the area, the Mauritanian-occupied part, roughly corresponding to Saquia el-Hamra, was known as Tiris al-Gharbiyya.\nEconomy.\nAside from its rich fishing waters and phosphate reserves, Western Sahara has few natural resources and lacks sufficient rainfall and freshwater resources for most agricultural activities. Western Sahara's much-touted phosphate reserves are relatively unimportant, representing less than two percent of proven phosphate reserves in Morocco. There is speculation that there may be off-shore oil and natural gas fields, but the debate persists as to whether these resources can be profitably exploited, and if this would be legally permitted due to the non-self-governing status of Western Sahara (see below).\nWestern Sahara's economy is based almost entirely on fishing, which employs two-thirds of its workforce, with mining, agriculture and tourism providing modest additional income. Most food for the urban population comes from Morocco. All trade and other economic activities are controlled by the Moroccan government (as its de facto southern province). The government has encouraged citizens to relocate to the territory by giving subsidies and price controls on basic goods. These heavy subsidies have created a state-dominated economy in the Moroccan-occupied parts of Western Sahara.\nDue to the disputed nature of Moroccan sovereignty over the territory, the application of international accords to Western Sahara is highly ambiguous. Political leadership of trade agreement signatories such as the United States (US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement) and Norway (European Free Trade Association trade accord) have made statements as to these agreements' non-applicability \u2013 although practical policy application is ambiguous.\nExploitation of natural resources.\nAfter reasonably exploitable oil fields were located in Mauritania, speculation intensified on the possibility of major oil resources being located off the coast of Western Sahara. Despite the fact that findings remain inconclusive, both Morocco and the Polisario have signed deals with oil and gas exploration companies. US and French companies (notably TotalEnergies and Kerr-McGee) began prospecting on behalf of the Moroccan Office National de Recherches et d'Exploitations Petroli\u00e8res (ONAREP).\nIn 2002, Hans Corell, Under-Secretary General of the United Nations and head of its Office of Legal Affairs, issued a legal opinion on the matter. The opinion was rendered following an analysis of relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations General Assembly resolutions, the case law of the International Court of Justice and the practice of sovereign states. It concluded that while the existing exploration contracts for the area were not illegal, \"if further exploration and exploitation activities were to proceed in disregard of the interests and wishes of the people of Western Sahara, they would be in violation of the principles of international law.\" After pressures from corporate ethics-groups, TotalEnergies pulled out in late 2004.\nIn May 2006, the remaining company, Kerr-McGee, also left, following sales of numerous shareholders like the National Norwegian Oil Fund, due to continued pressure from NGOs and corporate groups.\nIn December 2014, it became known that Seabird Exploration operated controversial seismic surveys offshore Western Sahara, in violation of the 2002 Hans Corell legal opinion.\nThe European Union fishing agreements with Morocco include Western Sahara.\nIn a previously confidential legal opinion (published in February 2010, although it was forwarded in July 2009), the European Parliament's Legal Service opined that fishing by European vessels under a current EU\u2013Morocco fishing agreement covering Western Sahara's waters is in violation of international law.\nSimilarly, the exploitation of phosphate mines in Bou Craa has led to charges of international law violations and divestment from several European states.\nDemographics.\nThe indigenous population of Western Sahara is usually known in Western media as Sahrawis, but they are also referred to in Morocco as \"Southerners\" or \"Southern Berbers\". They are Hassaniya-speaking or Berber-speaking tribes of Berber origin (97% of Y-DNA). Many of them have mixed Berber-Arab heritage, effectively continuations of the tribal groupings of Hassaniya-speaking and Zenaga-Berber speaking Moorish tribes extending south into Mauritania and north into Morocco as well as east into Algeria. The Sahrawis are traditionally nomadic Bedouins with a lifestyle very similar to that of the Tuareg Berbers from whom Sahrawis most likely have descended, and they can be found in all surrounding countries. War and conflict has led to major population displacement.\nAs of July 2004, an estimated 267,405 people (excluding about 160,000 Moroccan military personnel) lived in the Moroccan-occupied parts of Western Sahara. Many people from parts of Morocco have come to settle in the territory, and these latest arrivals are today thought to outnumber the indigenous Western Sahara Sahrawis. The precise size and composition of the population is subject to political controversy.\nThe Polisario-controlled parts of Western Sahara are barren. This area has a sparse population, estimated to be approximately 30,000 in 2008. The population is primarily made up of nomads who engage in herding camels back and forth between the Tindouf area and Mauritania. The presence of land mines scattered throughout the territory by the Moroccan army makes this a dangerous way of life.\nSpanish census and MINURSO.\nA 1974 Spanish census claimed there were some 74,000 Sahrawis in the area at the time (in addition to approximately 20,000 Spanish residents), but this number is likely to be on the low side, due to the difficulty in counting a nomad people, even if Sahrawis were by the mid-1970s mostly urbanized. Despite these possible inaccuracies, Morocco and the Polisario Front agreed on using the Spanish census as the basis for voter registration when striking a cease-fire agreement in the late 1980s, contingent on the holding of a referendum on independence or integration into Morocco.\nIn December 1999, the United Nations' MINURSO mission announced that it had identified 86,425 eligible voters for the referendum that was supposed to be held under the 1991 Settlement plan and the 1997 Houston accords. By \"eligible voter\" the UN referred to any Sahrawi over 18 years of age that was part of the Spanish census or could prove their descent from someone who was. These 86,425 Sahrawis were dispersed between Moroccan-occupied Western Sahara and the refugee camps in Algeria, with smaller numbers in Mauritania and other places of exile. These numbers cover only Sahrawis 'indigenous' to Western Sahara during the Spanish colonial period, not the total number of \"ethnic\" Sahrawis (i.e., members of Sahrawi tribal groupings), who also extend into Mauritania, Morocco and Algeria. The number was highly politically significant due to the expected organization of a referendum on self-determination.\nThe Polisario has its home base in the Tindouf refugee camps in Algeria, and declares the number of Sahrawi population in the camps to be approximately 155,000. Morocco disputes this number, saying it is exaggerated for political reasons and for attracting more foreign aid. The UN uses a number of 90,000 \"most vulnerable\" refugees as basis for its food aid program.\nCulture.\nThe major ethnic group of Western Sahara are the Sahrawis, a nomadic or Bedouin ethnic group speaking the Hass\u0101n\u012bya dialect of Arabic, also spoken in much of Mauritania. They are of mixed Arab-Berber descent, but claim descent from the Beni Hassan, an Arab tribe that migrated across the desert in the 11th century.\nLike other Saharan Bedouin and Hassaniya groups, the Sahrawis are mostly Muslims of the Sunni branch and the Maliki fiqh. Local religious custom (Urf) is, like other Saharan groups, heavily influenced by pre-Islamic Berber and African practices, and differs substantially from urban practices. For example, Sahrawi Islam has traditionally functioned without mosques, in an adaptation to nomadic life.\nThe original clan-/tribe-based society underwent a massive social upheaval in 1975 when the war forced part of the population to settle in the refugee camps of Tindouf, Algeria, where they remain. Families were broken up by the dispute.\nThe Museum of the Sahrawi People's Liberation Army is located in this refugee camp. This museum is dedicated to the struggle for the independence of Western Saharan people. It presents weapons, vehicles and uniforms, as well as abundant documentation history.\nCross-cultural influence.\nThe contemporary history of the territory has experienced long-term international presence and occupation that has deeply influenced the cultural practices of the people, such as languages spoken throughout the territory and its institutions. Spanish colonization lasted roughly from 1884 to 1976, following the creation of the Madrid Accords where Spain absolved all responsibility over the territory and left it to Morocco and Mauritania.\nThroughout the nine decades of Spanish colonial presence, one of the primary spoken languages in Western Sahara came to be Spanish. The reasons for its widespread usage was due to the necessity of communicating with Spanish leadership and administrators throughout the territory, who ultimately established institutions modeled after those of Spain. The importance and prevalence of Spanish has persisted to the present day, even after Spanish withdrawal from Western Sahara in 1976, due to various education exchanges and host programs for Sahrawi children to Spain and Cuba.\nOne such exchange program to Spain is Vacaciones en Paz (Vacations in Peace), which is an annual holiday program that was created in 1988 and is organized by the Union of Sahrawi Youth (UJSARIO) in collaboration with 300 other associations throughout Spain. The program itself allows 7,000 to 10,000 Sahrawi children between the ages of 8 and 12 the opportunity to live in Spain for the summer outside of the refugee camps. Sometimes children return to the same Spanish household year after year while they are still eligible, and forge strong relationships with their host families. These types of exchange programs that successfully create cross-border and cross-cultural relationships reinforce the usage of the Spanish language throughout subsequent generations of Sahrawi children.\nGender relations.\nMuch Spanish literature and recent refugee studies scholarship has been dedicated to the exploration of the major role women play in Sahrawi society, and the degree of freedom they experience within the occupied territory and the refugee camps. There is a consensus among Sahrawi women that they have always enjoyed a large degree of freedom and influence within the Sahrawi community.\nTraditionally, women have played pivotal roles in Sahrawi culture, as well as in efforts to resist colonialism and foreign interference in their territory. Similar to other nomadic traditions on the African continent, Sahrawi women traditionally exercised significant power and roles both in the camp and in their tents.\nSahrawi women could inherit property, and subsist independently from their fathers, brothers, husbands, and other male relatives. Women were key for establishing alliances through marriage, being that the Sahrawi culture values monogamy, with their tribe and to others. Furthermore, Sahrawi women were endowed with major responsibility for the camp during long periods of absence by the men of the camp due to war or trade. Among the responsibilities women had were setting up, repairing, and moving the tents of the camp, and participating in major tribal decisions.\nIn the contemporary history of Western Sahara, women have occupied central roles and been highly represented in the political sphere. During Spanish colonial rule, Sahrawi women actively provided financial and physical support to the resistance movements during the 1930s, 1950s, and the late 1960s. In more official ways, women were consistently part of the Polisario Front, which in 1994 created the National Union of Sahrawi Women (NUSW). The NUSW was structured at the local, regional, and national levels and concentrated on four areas: the occupied territories and emigration, information and culture, political and professional development, and foreign affairs.\nArt and cultural expression.\nFiSahara International Film Festival is an annual film festival that takes place in one of the southwestern refugee camps in Algeria. At this event, actors, directors, and film industry insiders from around the world join the Sahrawi people for a week-long festival of screenings, parallel activities, and concerts. The festival provides entertainment and educational opportunities for Sahrawi refugees alongside cultural celebrations for visitors and spectators. It aims to raise awareness of the humanitarian crises in the refugee camps, and expose the Sahrawi people to this medium of art and expression.\nSpanish filmmakers and actors, such as Javier Bardem, Pen\u00e9lope Cruz, and Pedro Almod\u00f3var have supported and attended the festival. In 2013, the festival screened over 15 films from around the world including comedies, short films, animations, and documentaries. Some of the films were made by the refugees themselves. Art as embodied in film has been a strong and popular medium that Sahrawi youth have used to express themselves, and share their stories of conflict and exile.\nARTifariti, the International Art and Human Rights Meeting in Western Sahara, is an annual art workshop set up in the Liberated Zone and refugee camps, specifically in Tifariti, that brings artists from all over the world. This event led to the introduction of graffiti art to the camps, and popular graffiti artists have come to the workshop to work with refugees. One such artist was Spanish street artist MESA, who travelled to the Sahrawi refugee camps in 2011 and displayed his own graffiti throughout the landscape. His canvases of choice were destroyed walls, which he brought back to life through his art.\nMESA inspired other Sahrawis to express themselves and embody their national struggle through art and graffiti. One such artist is Mohamed Sayad, a Sahrawi artist that has been transforming the refugee camp landscape by creating works of art amongst the devastation in camps that have existed for four decades. His canvases, much like MESA, are walls that have been ruined by massive floods in the Sahrawi refugee camps in southwestern Algeria. Sayad's work tells a consistent story, one that draws on his experience of protracted conflict and a life under Moroccan occupation. Sayad's graffiti depicts aspects of Sahrawi culture and includes actual Sahrawi people as his subjects.\nPoetry is a popular artform in Sahrawi culture, and is composed by both men and women. Notable poets include: Al Khadra Mabrook, Hadjatu Aliat Swelm, Beyibouh El Haj. Traditionally, Sahrawi poetry was performed and passed on orally: younger poets would undergo 'apprenticeships to more experienced ones, today the internet is a key way in which Sahrawi poetry is transmitted between and within generations'. However Sahrawi poets find it difficult to be published, especially by Arabic publishers, due to the political nature of much of their output.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33221", "revid": "49993553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33221", "title": "History of Western Sahara", "text": "The history of Western Sahara can be traced back to the times of Carthaginian explorer Hanno the Navigator in the 5th century BC. Though few historical records are left from that period, Western Sahara's modern history has its roots linked to some nomadic groups (living under Berber tribal rule and in contact with the Roman Empire) such as the Sanhaja group, and the introduction of Islam and the Arabic language at the end of the 8th century AD.\nWestern Sahara has never been a nation in the modern sense of the word. It was home to Phoenician colonies, but those disappeared with virtually no trace. Islam arrived there in the 8th century, but the region, beset with desertification, remained little developed. From the 11th to the 19th centuries, Western Sahara was one of the links between the sub-Saharan and North African regions. During the 11th century, the Sanhaja tribal confederation allied with the Lamtuna tribe to found the Almoravid dynasty. The conquests of the Almoravids extended over present-day Morocco, Western Algeria, and the Iberian Peninsula to the north and Mauritania and Mali to the south, reaching the Ghana Empire. By the 16th century, the Arab Saadi dynasty conquered the Songhai Empire based on the Niger River. Some Trans-Saharan trade routes also traversed Western Sahara.\nIn 1884, Spain claimed a protectorate over the coast from Cape Bojador to Cape Blanc, and the area was later extended. In 1958, Spain combined separate districts together to form the province of Spanish Sahara.\nA 1975 advisory opinion by the International Court of Justice on the status of the Western Sahara held that while some of the region's tribes had historical ties to Morocco, they were insufficient to establish \"any tie of territorial sovereignty\" between the Western Sahara and the Kingdom of Morocco. In November of that year, the Green March into Western Sahara began when 350,000 unarmed Moroccans, accompanied by the Moroccan Army armed with heavy weapons, converged on the southern city of Tarfaya and waited for a signal from King Hassan II of Morocco to cross into Western Sahara. As a result of pressure from France, the US, and the UK, Spain abandoned Western Sahara on November 14, 1975, going so far as to even exhume Spanish corpses from cemeteries. Morocco later virtually annexed the northern two-thirds of Western Sahara in 1976, and the rest of the territory in 1979, following Mauritania's withdrawal.\nOn February 27, 1976, the Polisario Front formally proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic and set up a government in exile, initiating a guerrilla war between the Polisario and Morocco, which continued until a 1991 cease-fire. As part of the 1991 peace accords, a referendum was to be held among indigenous people, giving them the option between independence or inclusion within Morocco. To date the referendum has never been held because of questions over who is eligible to vote.\nAncient and classical antiquity.\nPhoenician/Carthaginian colonies established or reinforced by Hanno the Navigator in the 5th century BC have vanished with virtually no trace. The desertification of the Sahara during the \"transitional arid phase\" ca. 300 BC - 300 AD\" made contact with some parts with the outside world very difficult before the introduction of the camel into these areas, from the third century of the Christian era on.\nContacts with Roman Empire.\nPlinius wrote that the coastal area north of the river Senegal and south of the Atlas Mountains was populated, during Augustus times, by the \"Pharusii\" and \"Perorsi\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In the year 41 AD Suetonius Paullinus, afterwards Consul, was the first of the Romans who led an army across Mount Atlas. At the end of a ten days' march he reached the summit,\u2014which even in summer was covered with snow,\u2014and from thence, after passing a desert of black sand and burnt rocks, he arrived at a river called Gerj...he then penetrated into the country of the Canarii and Perorsi, the former of whom inhabited a woody region abounding in elephants and serpents, and the latter were Ethiopians, not far distant from the Pharusii and the river Daras (modern river Senegal)\".\nWhat is now Western Sahara was a dry savanna area during classical antiquity, where independent tribes like the Pharusii and the Perorsi led a semi-nomadic life facing growing desertification.\nRomans made explorations toward this area and probably reached, with Suetonius Paulinus, the area of Adrar. There is evidence (e.g., coins, fibulas) of Roman commerce in Akjoujt and Tamkartkart near Tichit.\nThe western Sahara population (in those first centuries of the Roman Empire) consisted of nomads (mainly of the Sanhaja tribal confederation) in the plains and sedentary populations in river valleys, in oases, and in towns like Awdaghust, Tichitt, Oualata, Taghaza, Timbuktu, Awlil, Azuki, and Tamdult.\nSome Berber tribes moved to Mauritania in the third and fourth century, and after the 13th century some Arabs entered the region as conquerors.\nIslamic era.\nIslam arrived in the 8th century AD between the Berber population who inhabited the western part of the Sahara. The Islamic faith quickly expanded, brought by Arab immigrants, who initially only blended superficially with the population, mostly confining themselves to the cities of present-day Morocco and Spain.\nThe Berbers increasingly used the traditional trade routes of the Sahara. Caravans transported salt, gold and slaves between North Africa and West Africa, and the control of trade routes became a major ingredient in the constant power struggle between various tribes. On more than one occasion, the Berber tribes of the Western Sahara would unite behind religious leaders to sweep the ruling leaders from power, sometimes founding dynasties of their own. This was the case with the Almoravids and Al-Andalus, and was also the case with the jihad of Nasir al-Din in the 17th century and the later Qadiriyyah movement of the Kunta in the 18th century.\nZawiyas.\nAn important role was played by the zawiyas. These zawiya tribes became the tribes of the teachers, specialists of religion, law and education.\nArabization of the mujahideen (13th and 14th century).\nIn the 13th and 14th century, these tribes migrated westwards along the Sahara's northern border to settle in the Fezzan (Libya), Ifriqiya (Tunisia), Tlemcen (Algeria), Jebel Saghro (Morocco), and Saguia el-Hamra (Western Sahara).\nOuadane, Idjil (near Atar), Azougui, Araouane, Taoudenni, and later Tindouf were important stopping-places. At the same time, the number of slaves kept in Western Sahara itself increased drastically.\nThe Maqil tribes, who entered the domains of the Sanhaja Berber tribe, sometimes intermarried with the Berber population; the Arabo-Berber people of the region are now known as Saharawi. An exonym sometimes used to describe the Banu Hassan tribes of present-day of the region was Moors. The Arabic dialect, Hassaniya, became the dominant mother-tongue of the Western Sahara and Mauritania. Berber vocabulary and cultural traits remain common, despite the fact that many Saharawi people today claim Arab ancestry.\nColonial era (1884\u20131975).\nWestern Sahara came under Spanish rule, despite attempts by the Moroccan sultan Hassan I to repel the European incursions on the territory in 1886. The oases of Tuat in the south-east went to the immense territory of the French Sahara. In 1898, in the aftermath of the Spanish\u2013American War, Spain attempted to sell Spanish Sahara to Austria-Hungary; Spain wished to recoup its losses from the conflict and several Austrian ministers wished to obtain an overseas colony to justify naval expansion. However, as Austria-Hungary operated as a dual monarchy with Austria and Hungary having joint control over financial and foreign policy matters, the Hungarian House of Magnates vetoed the purchase and the colony was retained by Spain.\nSahrawi tribes.\nThe modern ethnic group is thus an Arabized Berber people inhabiting the westernmost Sahara desert, in the area of modern Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria and most notably the Western Sahara, with some tribes traditionally migrating into northern Mali and Niger. As with most Saharan peoples, the tribes reflect a highly mixed heritage, combining Arab, Berber, and other influences, including black African ethnic and cultural characteristics.\nIn pre-colonial times, the tribal areas of the Sahara desert was generally considered \"bled es-Siba\" or \"the land of dissidence\" by the authorities of the established Islamic states of North Africa, such as the Sultan of Morocco and the Deys of Algeria. The Islamic governments of the pre-colonial sub-Saharan empires of Mali and Songhai appear to have had a similar relationship with these territories, which were at once the home of undisciplined raiding tribes and the main trade route for the Saharan caravan trade. Central governments had little control over the region, although some Hassaniya tribes would occasionally extended \"beya\" or allegiance to prestigious neighbouring rulers, to gain their political backing or, in some cases, as a religious ceremony.\nBest reference on Sahrawi population ethnography in the Spanish colonial era is the work of Spanish anthropologist Julio Caro Baroja, who in 1952\u201353 spent several months among native tribes all along the then Spanish Sahara.\nSpanish Sahara.\nIn 1884, Spain claimed a protectorate over the coast from Cape Bojador to Cap Blanc. Later, the Spanish extended their area of control. In 1958 Spain joined the previously separate districts of Saguia el-Hamra (in the north) and R\u00edo de Oro (in the south) to form the province of Spanish Sahara.\nRaids and rebellions by the Sahrawi population kept the Spanish forces out of much of the territory for a long time. Ma al-Aynayn started an uprising against the French in the 1910s, at a time when France had expanded its influence and control in North-West Africa. French forces finally beat him when he tried to conquer Marrakesh, but his sons and followers figured prominently in several rebellions which followed. Not until the second destruction of Smara in 1934, by joint Spanish and French forces, did the territory finally become subdued. Another uprising in 1956\u20131958, initiated by the Moroccan Army of Liberation, led to heavy fighting, but eventually the Spanish forces regained control - again with French aid. However, unrest simmered, and in 1967 the Harakat Tahrir arose to challenge Spanish rule peacefully. After the events of the Zemla Intifada in 1970, when Spanish police destroyed the organization and \"disappeared\" its founder, Muhammad Bassiri, anti-Spanish feeling or Sahrawi nationalism again took a militant turn.\nWestern Sahara conflict.\nFrom 1973 the colonizers gradually lost control over the countryside to the armed guerrillas of the Polisario Front, a nationalist organization. Successive Spanish attempts to form loyal Sahrawi political institutions (such as the Djema'a -many members of the Yemaa are today in Polisario Movement- and the PUNS party) to support its rule, and draw activists away from the radical nationalists, failed. As the health of the Spanish leader Francisco Franco deteriorated, the Madrid government slipped into disarray, and sought a way out of the Sahara conflict. The fall in 1974 of the Portuguese Estado Novo-government after unpopular wars in its own African provinces seems to have hastened the decision to pull out.\nArmed conflict (1975\u20131991).\nIn late 1975, Spain held meetings with Polisario leader El-Ouali, to negotiate the terms for a handover of power. But at the same time, Morocco and Mauritania began to put pressure on the Franco government: both countries argued that Spanish Sahara formed a historical part of their own territories. The United Nations became involved after Morocco asked for an opinion on the legality of its demands from the International Court of Justice (ICJ), and the UN also sent a visiting mission to examine the wishes of the population. The visiting mission returned its report on October 15, announcing \"an overwhelming consensus\" in favor of independence (as opposed to integration with Morocco or with Mauritania, or continued rule by Spain). The mission, headed by Simeon Ak\u00e9, also declared that the Polisario Front seemed the main Sahrawi organization of the territory - the only rival arrangements to what the mission described as Polisario's \"mass demonstrations\" came from the PUNS, which by this time also advocated independence. Polisario then made further diplomatic gains by ensuring the backing of the main Sahrawi tribes and of a number of formerly pro-Spanish Djema'a elders at the Ain Ben Tili conference of October 12.\nOn October 16, the ICJ delivered its verdict. To the dismay of both the Rabat and Nouakchott governments, the court found with a clear majority, that the historical ties of these countries to Spanish Sahara did \"not\" grant them the right to the territory. Furthermore, the Court declared that the concept of \"terra nullius\" (un-owned land) did not apply to the territory. The Court declared that the Sahrawi population, as the true owners of the land, held a right of self-determination. In other words, any proposed solution to the situation (independence, integration etc.), had to receive the explicit acceptance of the population to gain any legal standing. Neither Morocco nor Mauritania accepted this, and on October 31, 1975, Morocco sent its army into Western Sahara to attack Polisario positions. The public diplomacy between Spain and Morocco continued, however, with Morocco demanding bilateral negotiations over the fate of the territory.\nOn November 6, 1975 Morocco launched the Green March into Western Sahara. About 350,000 unarmed Moroccans accompanied by the Moroccan Army armed with heavy weapons converged on the city of Tarfaya in southern Morocco and waited for a signal from King Hassan II of Morocco to cross into Western Sahara. As a result of international pressure, Spain acceded to Moroccan demands, and entered bilateral negotiations. This led to the Madrid Agreement and the Western Sahara partition agreement, treaties that divided the administration of the territory between Morocco and Mauritania, but did not impact the sovereignty debate. Spain, Morocco and Mauritania did not consult the Sahrawi population, and the Polisario violently opposed the treaties. The developments chance in the region until the 1990s were strongly influenced by the power struggle of the Cold War. Algeria, Libya and Mali were allied to the Eastern bloc. Morocco was the only African country in the region that was allied to the West.\nAlgeria gave help to the Movimiento de Liberaci\u00f3n del Sahara, that in the late 1960s and early 1970s formed a section of new \"split youngs\". The majority of the Sahrawi people supported its patriotic actions and identified with this movement, which later was called Polisario, and gradually had more misunderstandings with the Autonomous and Central Government of the Metropoli for the signs of a \"vacilante\", or feeble foreign policy, made up by generals that had the \"\u00faltima palabra\" or \"last word\", feeling a possible betrayal of the \"Motherland\".\nOn November 14, 1975, Spain, Morocco and Mauritania signed the Madrid Accords, hence setting up a timetable for the retrieval of Spanish forces and ending Spanish occupation of Western Sahara. These accords were signed by the three parties in accordance with all international standards. In these accords, Morocco was set to annex back 2/3 of the northern part of Western Sahara, whereas the lower third would be given to Mauritania.\nPolisario established their own Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, and combined guerrilla warfare with their conventional military forces, the Sahrawi People's Liberation Army (SPLA).\nOn February 26, 1976 Spain's formal mandate over the territory ended when it handed administrative power on to Morocco in a ceremony in Laayoune. The day after, the Polisario proclaimed in Bir Lehlou the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) as a government in exile. Mauritania in its turn renamed the southern parts of R\u00edo de Oro as Tiris al-Gharbiyya, but proved unable to maintain control over the territory. Polisario made the weak Mauritanian army its main target, and after a bold raid on the Mauritanian capital Nouakchott (where a gunshot killed El-Ouali, the first president of the SADR), Mauritania succumbed to internal unrest. The presence of a large number of Sahrawi nationalists among the country's dominant Moorish population made the Mauritanian government's position yet more fragile, and thousands of Mauritanian Sahrawis defected to Polisario. In 1978 the army seized control of the Mauritanian government and Polisario declared a cease-fire, on the assumption that Mauritania would withdraw unconditionally. This eventually occurred in 1979, as Mauritania's new rulers agreed to surrender all claims and to recognize the SADR. Following Mauritania's withdrawal, however, Morocco extended its control to the rest of the territory, and the war continued.\nThrough the 1980s, the war stalemated through the construction of a desert sand berm, the Moroccan Wall. Sporadic fighting continued, and Morocco faced heavy burdens due to the economic costs of its massive troop deployments along the Wall. To some extent aid sent by Saudi Arabia, France and by the USA relieved the situation in Morocco, but matters gradually became unsustainable for all parties involved.\nCease-fire.\nIn 1991, Morocco and the Polisario Front agreed on a UN-backed cease-fire in the Settlement Plan. This plan, its further detail fleshed out in the 1997 Houston Agreement, hinged upon Morocco's agreement to a referendum on independence or unification with Morocco voted on by the Sahrawi population. The plan intended this referendum to constitute their exercise of self-determination, thereby completing the territory's yet unfinished process of decolonization. The UN dispatched a peace-keeping mission, the MINURSO, to oversee the cease-fire and make arrangements for the vote. Initially scheduled for 1992, the referendum has not taken place, due to the conflict over who has the right to vote.\nTwo subsequent attempts to resolve the problem by means of a negotiated political settlement by James Baker, acting as Personal Envoy of the UN Secretary General, the first in 2000 and the second in 2003, failed to gain acceptance, the first being rejected by the Polisario and second by Morocco. Both attempts, the first referred to as \"The Framework Agreement\" and the second commonly referred to as \"The Peace Plan\", contained the proposal of autonomy for the region under Moroccan sovereignty as core elements of the plans. Failure to gain acceptance by the parties to either proposal was a result of what each of the parties viewed as fundamental flaws in the respective proposals.\nThe Framework Agreement would have required the parties to agree on the specific terms of a political settlement based on the Autonomy/Sovereignty formula through direct negotiations. Baker presented the Peace Plan as a non-negotiable package that would have obliged each of the parties to accept its terms without further amendment. Both proposals contained elements that would have required popular endorsement of the solution through a referendum of the concerned populations. The UN Security Council declined to formally endorse either of the two proposals, which led eventually to Baker's resignation as Personal Envoy.\nThe prolonged cease-fire has held without major disturbances, but Polisario has repeatedly threatened to resume fighting if no breakthrough occurs. Morocco's withdrawal from both the terms of the original Settlement Plan and the Baker Plan negotiations in 2003 left the peace-keeping mission without a political agenda, which further increased the risks of renewed war.\nMeanwhile, the gradual liberalization of political life in Morocco during the 1990s belatedly reached Western Sahara around 2000. This spurred political protest, as former \"disappeared\" and other human rights-campaigners began holding illegal demonstrations against Moroccan rule. The subsequent crackdowns and arrests drew media attention to the Moroccan occupation, and Sahrawi nationalists seized on the opportunity: in May 2005, a wave of demonstrations subsequently dubbed by the Independence Intifada by Polisario supporters, broke out. These demonstrations, which continued into the following year, were the most intense in years, and engendered a new wave of interest in the conflict, as well as new fears of instability. Polisario demanded international intervention but declared that it could not stand idly by if the \"escalation of repression\" continued.\nIn 2007, Morocco requested U.N. action against a congress to be held by the Polisario Front in Tifariti from December 14 to December 16. Morocco claimed Tifariti was part of a buffer zone and holding the congress there violated a cease-fire between the two parties. Additionally, the Polisario Front had been reported as planning a vote on a proposal for making preparations for war; if passed, it would have been the first time in 16 years preparations for war had been part of the Polisario's strategy.\nIn October 2010, Gadaym Izik camp was set up near Laayoune as a protest by displaced Sahrawi people about their living conditions. It was home to more than 12,000 people. In November 2010, Moroccan security forces entered Gadaym Izik camp in the early hours of the morning, using helicopters and water cannons to force people to leave. The Polisario Front said Moroccan security forces had killed a 26-year-old protester at the camp, a claim denied by Morocco. Protesters in Laayoune threw stones at police and set fire to tires and vehicles. Several buildings, including a TV station, were also set afire. Moroccan officials said five security personnel had been killed in the unrest.\nIn 2020, the Polisario Front brought legal action against New Zealand's superannuation fund for accepting \"blood phosphate\" from the occupied region. In November a brief conflict broke out near the Southern village of Guerguerat, with Morocco claiming to want to end a blockade of a road to Mauritania, and to pave that road.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33222", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33222", "title": "Geography of Western Sahara", "text": " \nWestern Sahara is a territory in Northern Africa, bordered by the North Atlantic Ocean, Morocco proper, Algeria (Tindouf region), and Mauritania. Geographic coordinates: \nSize of Western Sahara.\nThe size of Western Sahara, a region located in North Africa, is a critical aspect of its geopolitical and environmental profile. The territory\u2019s vastness impacts its resource distribution, strategic importance, and the ongoing conflict over its sovereignty. Western Sahara is a significant area of study for its complex history and its role in regional and global geopolitics.\nArea.\nWestern Sahara encompasses approximately 266,000 square kilometers (102,703 square miles), which places it among the larger regions of Africa. This measurement provides a broad perspective on the land\u2019s scale, revealing its comparative size to other nations and regions. For instance, Western Sahara is slightly larger than the United Kingdom but smaller than some of Africa\u2019s largest countries, such as Algeria and Sudan. The size of Western Sahara is not merely a numerical fact; it is intrinsically linked to its physical geography and the strategic interests it holds for various stakeholders. The arid climate and extensive desert areas define much of its landscape, influencing the lifestyle of its inhabitants and the approaches taken by both local and international actors in addressing the territory's status and development.\nThe region\u2019s area also affects logistical considerations, such as the management of natural resources and the implementation of infrastructure projects. Its size presents both challenges and opportunities for resource exploration, environmental management, and territorial administration. Despite its vastness, much of Western Sahara remains sparsely populated, with the majority of its residents living in a few concentrated areas. This uneven distribution of population relative to the land area plays a significant role in the political and humanitarian issues faced by the region.\nGeographic context.\nWestern Sahara's geographic location is pivotal in understanding its significance. Situated in the northwest corner of Africa, it is bordered by Morocco to the north and east, Algeria to the northeast, Mauritania to the southeast, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. This strategic position places it at the intersection of several historical and cultural exchange routes, which have influenced its development and the broader regional dynamics.\nThe landscape of Western Sahara is dominated by desert terrain, with features such as sand dunes, rocky plateaus, and sparse vegetation. The coastal areas along the Atlantic Ocean provide a contrast to the inland desert, offering a more temperate climate and supporting limited but important marine and coastal ecosystems. The terrain\u2019s aridity and the lack of significant water resources have shaped the settlement patterns and economic activities within the region. Historical trade routes and migratory paths that traverse Western Sahara are a testament to its historical significance in connecting different parts of Africa and beyond.\nAdditionally, the desert environment poses unique challenges for infrastructure development and resource management. The region's natural resources, including phosphate deposits and potential offshore oil reserves, add another layer of complexity to the geopolitical stakes associated with its size and geography.\nLand.\nTerrain.\nThe terrain is mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or sandy surfaces rising to small mountains in south and northeast.\nElevation extremes:\n\"Lowest point:\" Sebjet Tah, , a depression in the northwest part of Western Sahara straddling the Morocco border\n\"Highest point:\" Unnamed elevation, , east of Awsard (Aousserd)\nNatural resources.\nPhosphates, iron ore, and fishing resources on Atlantic Ocean coast\nLand use.\n\"Arable land:\" 0.02%\nIrrigated land: N/A\nNatural hazards.\nHot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind can occur during winter and spring; widespread harmattan haze exists 60% of time, often severely restricting visibility. Flash flooding occurs during spring months.\nEnvironment.\nClimate.\nWestern Sahara has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BWh\"). Annual average rainfall is below everywhere. Along the Atlantic coast, average temperatures, both high and low, are constant and very moderated throughout the year because cool offshore ocean currents considerably cool off the climate, especially during the day. However, summertime is long and extremely hot and wintertime is short and very warm to truly hot further in the interior, where cooling marine influences aren't felt anymore. Average high temperatures exceed in summer during a prolonged period of time but can reach as high as or even more in places such as Smara, Tichla, Bir Gandus, Bir Anzarane, Aghouinite, Aousserd and others. Average high temperatures exceed in winter but average low temperatures can drop to in some places. The sky is usually clear and bright throughout the year and sunny weather is the norm.\nCurrent issues.\nSparse water and lack of arable land.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Western Sahara, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33223", "revid": "41261750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33223", "title": "Demographics of Western Sahara", "text": " \nAll demographic data of Western Sahara is widely regarded as being extremely prone to error. It is among the world's most sparsely populated territories and the last official census there was conducted by Spain in 1970. Currently, Western Sahara's political status is disputed between Morocco and the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, which is governed by the Polisario Front. About 80% of Western Sahara is under Moroccan occupation, while the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic controls the rest of the territory that lies to the east of the Moroccan-built Berm. The entirety of Western Sahara is classified by the United Nations as a non-self-governing territory that is still awaiting decolonization.\nHundreds of thousands of Moroccan settlers have migrated into occupied Western Sahara since the Green March in 1975. As of 2015[ [update]], it is estimated that Moroccan settlers account for at least two thirds of Western Sahara's entire population of 500,000 people. Under international law, Morocco's settlement schemes in the occupied territory constitute a direct violation of .\nThe dominant religion in Western Sahara is Sunni Islam. Major ethnic groups include Arabs and Berbers. The most common languages in the territory are Hassaniya Arabic and Moroccan Arabic.\nCIA World Factbook demographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nLanguages.\nModern Standard Arabic and Spanish are the official languages of the Polisario Front, based in Tindouf, Algeria. Hassaniya, an Arabic dialect, is the native language spoken in Western Sahara and in the refugee camps in Tindouf in Algeria. There is also a significant presence of Berber language speakers in the northern parts of the territory of Western Sahara.\nHassaniya, primarily spoken at home, is dominated by the Moroccan dialect spoken in the streets, workplace, and schools. This is because the great majority of the population consists of Moroccans who settled in Western Sahara. French is also commonly used by the Moroccan occupation. In the urban areas Moroccan Arabic is now spoken, as Morocco occupies most of the territory of Western Sahara and all of its cities, and considers it an inseparable part of the country. The Moroccan constitution stipulates two official languages for the Kingdom of Morocco, including Western Sahara: Berber (Tamazight) and Arabic.\nSpanish is common among Sahrawi people and especially among the Sahrawi diaspora, with the Sahrawi Press Service, official news service of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, being available in Spanish since 2001 and the Sahara Film Festival, Western Sahara's only film festival, showing mainly Spanish-language films. Spanish is used to document Sahrawi poetry and oral traditions and has also been used in Sahrawi literature. Despite Spanish having been used by the Sahrawi people for over a century, the Cervantes Institute does not provide support or Spanish-language education to Sahrawis in Western Sahara and the Sahrawi refugee camps in Algeria. A group of Sahrawi poets known as 'Generaci\u00f3n de la Amistad saharaui' produces Sahrawi literature in Spanish.\nReligions.\nSunni Islam is the major religion in Western Sahara. Sunni Muslims constitute about 99.9% of the population. Prior to 1975, there were over 20,000 Roman Catholics in Western Sahara, but as of 2007[ [update]] there were only around 100.\nNationality.\n\"Noun:\"\nWestern Saharan(s)\n&lt;br&gt;\"adjective:\"\nWestern Saharan\nPopulation.\n400,000 (November 2014 est.)\nAge structure.\n\"0\u201314 years:\"\n44.9% (male 92,418/female 89,570)\n&lt;br&gt;\"15\u201364 years:\"\n53.8% (male 105,191/female 108,803)\n&lt;br&gt;\"65 years and over:\"\n2.3% (male 3,881/female 5,337) (2010 est.)\nPopulation growth rate.\n3.097% (2011 est.)\nBirth rate.\n39.54 births/1,000 population (2010 est.)\nDeath rate.\n11.49 deaths/1,000 population (2010 est.)\nNet migration rate.\n\u22126.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2000 est.)\nMorocco has a policy of subsidizing Moroccan settlers in the territory.\nInfant mortality rate.\n69.66 deaths/1,000 live births (2010 est.)\nLife expectancy at birth.\n\"total population:\"\n54.32 years\n&lt;br&gt;\"male:\"\n52 years\n&lt;br&gt;\"female:\"\n56.73 years (2010 est.)\nTotal fertility rate.\n4.3 children born/woman (2011 est.)\nLiteracy.\n\"definition:\"\nNA\n&lt;br&gt;\"total population:\"\n50%\n&lt;br&gt;\"male:\"\n75%\n&lt;br&gt;\"female:\"\n25%\nRefugees.\nThe events triggered by the Moroccan and Mauritanian joint invasion of Western Sahara at the end of 1975 are directly linked to the large displacement of the Saharawi population, most of whom live as refugees in south-west Algeria. The major bulk of Saharawis became refugees during the war between the Polisario Front and Morocco. The south-western desert region near Tindouf offered a potential safe region. Algeria, in its rivalry with Morocco, offered the Sahrawis a safe place to settle and actively supported the Polisario.\nThe next Saharawi exodus, although on a smaller scale, took place in 1979 when Mauritania withdrew from the conflict and Morocco annexed the rest of Western Sahara. Exact figures cannot be provided for the numbers that fled the territory in those two waves, but the estimations are between 1/3 and 2/3 of the total population at that time. The current size of the population in the refugee camps is believed to be around 165,000.\nUsed by the Algerian government, this figure is the most widely quoted by NGOs and is also used by the UNHCR and the World Food Programme to raise funds for food aid to the refugees. In the 2004 WFP meeting in Rome, the number of refugees was officially recognized at 158,000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33224", "revid": "45959955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33224", "title": "Politics of Western Sahara", "text": "The politics of Western Sahara take place in a framework of an area claimed by both the partially recognized Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic and the Kingdom of Morocco.\nOccupied by Spain from 1884 to 1975, as Spanish Sahara, the territory has been listed with the United Nations as a case of incomplete decolonization since the 1960s, making it the last major territory to effectively remain a colony, according to the UN. The conflict is largely between the Kingdom of Morocco and the national liberation movement known as Polisario Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of the Saguia el-Hamra and R\u00edo de Oro), which in February 1976 formally proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), now basically administered by a government in exile in Tindouf, Algeria.\nFollowing to the Madrid Accords, the territory was partitioned between Morocco and Mauritania in November 1975, with Morocco acquiring the northern two-thirds. Mauritania, under pressure from the POLISARIO guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its portion in August 1979, with Morocco moving to annex that sector shortly thereafter and has since asserted administrative control over the majority of the territory. A portion is administered by the SADR. The Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic was seated as a member of the Organisation of African Unity in 1984, and was a founding member of the African Union. Guerrilla activities continued until a United Nations-monitored cease-fire was implemented September 6, 1991 via the mission MINURSO. The mission patrols the separation line between the two territories.\nBaker plan.\nThe \"Baker Plan\" (formally, \"Peace Plan for Self-Determination of the People of Western Sahara\") is a United Nations initiative to grant self-determination to Western Sahara. It was intended to replace the Settlement Plan of 1991, which was further detailed in the Houston Agreement of 1997.\nThe first draft of the plan, called \"Baker I\" or the \"Framework Agreement\", was circulated by the UN special envoy James Baker in 2000, but never presented formally to the Security Council. Although based on Baker's proposals, it was drafted by a Morocco-sponsored legal team. It offered the people of Western Sahara autonomy within the Moroccan state. Except for defense and foreign policy, all other decisions would be the responsibility of local government. Morocco accepted the plan, but the Polisario rejected it.\nThe second version, informally known as \"Baker II\", envisioned Saharan self-rule under a Western Sahara Authority for a period of five years, with a referendum on independence to follow. In this referendum, the entire present-day population of Western Sahara would participate, including people who had migrated from or been settled by Morocco post-1975, something which Polisario had so far refused. On the other hand, a provision that the interim local government (the Western Sahara Authority) would be elected only by a restricted voters' list (those identified as original inhabitants of the territory by MINURSO) alienated Morocco. After Morocco had voiced early objections to Baker II, the Polisario front reluctantly accepted the plan as a basis for negotiations. In July 2003, the UN Security Council endorsed the plan, something that it had not done with Baker's first draft, and unanimously called for the parties to implement it. Morocco, however, then rejected the plan, saying that it would no longer agree to any referendum that included independence as an option.\nSuffrage.\nThe population under Moroccan control participates in countrywide and regional Moroccan elections. A referendum on independence or integration with Morocco was agreed upon by Morocco and the Polisario Front in 1991, but it has yet to take place.\nThe population under SADR control and in the Sahrawi refugee camps of Tindouf, Algeria, participates in elections to the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33225", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33225", "title": "Economy of Western Sahara", "text": "Economy of a territory in northwestern Africa\nThe majority of the territory of Western Sahara is currently occupied by the Kingdom of Morocco. As such, the majority of the economic activity of Western Sahara happens in the framework of the economy of Morocco.\nIn the Moroccan-occupied territory, fishing and phosphate mining are the principal sources of income for the population. The territory lacks sufficient rainfall for sustainable agricultural production; hence, most of the food for the urban population must be imported. Trade and other economic activities are controlled by the Moroccan government.\nThe Free Zone (POLISARIO-administered territory) is mainly uninhabited. There is practically no economical infrastructure and the main activity is camel herding nomadism. The government-in-exile of the Polisario Front had also signed contracts for oil exploration, but there is no practical work, because the zones given are in the Moroccan-occupied part of the territory.\nKey agricultural products from Western Sahara include fruits and vegetables (grown in the few oases), as well as camels, sheep and goats.\nFishing and oil exploration contracts concerning Western Sahara are sources of political tension.\nDisputes over natural resources.\nFishing and oil exploration contracts concerning Western Sahara are sources of political tension. In 2015, a European court invalidated a trade deal between the European Union (EU) and Morocco that involved Western Sahara, prompting a diplomatic backlash from Morocco. In 2018, the European Court of Justice ruled that a fishing treaty between the EU and the Moroccan government did not include fishing grounds off the coast of Western Sahara. In April 2010, the Norwegian state-owned salmon company EWOS stopped the purchases of fish oil from Western Sahara and Morocco (with an amount of around 10 million euros annually, and estimated between 12,000 and 20,000 tons of fish oil in total), for \"not being in line with the Norwegian authorities' recommendations\".\nIn 2002, the petroleum companies TotalEnergies and Kerr-McGee were awarded contracts to explore for oil in the region. In December 2004, French oil company TotalEnergies decided not to renew their license off Western Sahara. In May 2006, Kerr-McGee decided to not renew the contract signed with the Moroccan Authorities. The US-based firm Kosmos Energy began a contract to explore offshore from Western Sahara in 2013, prompting criticism from activist groups such as Western Sahara Resource Watch. Desertec, a Munich-based solar energy company, declined to place a plant in Western Sahara for \"reputational reasons.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33226", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33226", "title": "Telecommunications in Western Sahara", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Western Sahara include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nMorocco claims the Western Sahara territory and administers Moroccan law through Moroccan institutions in the estimated 85 percent of the territory it occupies. The Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia el Hamra and Rio de Oro (Polisario), an organization that has sought independence for the former Spanish territory since 1973, disputes Morocco's claim to sovereignty over the territory. Because of this long running dispute, many traditional telecommunication statistics are not reported separately for the Western Sahara.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere is no indication that Internet access in the territory differs from that in internationally recognized Morocco, which was generally open. Morocco was listed as engaged in selective Internet filtering in the social, conflict/security, and Internet tools areas and as little or no evidence of filtering in the political area by the OpenNet Initiative (ONI) in August 2009. Freedom House listed Morocco's \"Internet Freedom Status\" as \"Partly Free\" in its 2013 \"Freedom on the Net\" report.\nMorocco considers the part of the territory that it occupies to be an integral component of the kingdom with the same laws and structures regarding civil liberties, political, and economic rights. Moroccan law prohibits citizens from criticizing Islam or the institution of the monarchy or to oppose the government's official position regarding territorial integrity and Western Sahara. Saharan media outlets and bloggers practice self-censorship on these issues, and there are no reports of government action against them for what they write. Human rights and Sahrawi bloggers affiliated with leftist political groups assume that authorities closely monitor their activities and feel the need to hide their identities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33227", "revid": "46428089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33227", "title": "Transport in Western Sahara", "text": " \nTransport in Western Sahara is very limited by sea, road and air with camels being the primary means of transportation in the desert area. Road transport by buses remain the major mode of transportation. The longest conveyor belt in the world is long, from the phosphate mines of Bu Craa to the coast south of Laayoune. The belt moves about 2,000 metric tons of rock containing phosphate every hour from the mines to El-Aaiun, where it is loaded and shipped.\nPortions of Western Sahara were a Spanish Colony until 1975 as the last colonial province in Africa. A war erupted between those countries and the Sahrawi national liberation movement, the Polisario Front, which proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) with a government in exile in Tindouf, Algeria. Mauritania withdrew in 1979, and Morocco eventually secured control of most of the territory, including all the major cities and natural resources. A UN brokered ceasefire was implemented from 1991 between Polisario and Moroccan forces.\nThe world's longest cargo train, the Mauritania Railway cargo train, crosses the southeastern corner of Western Sahara for a short distance. Transit through Western Sahara was disrupted during the war between Polisario and Moroccan forces before the ceasefire was implemented in 1991.\nBackground.\nPortions of Western Sahara were a Spanish Colony till 1975 as the last colonial province in Africa. A war erupted between those countries and the Sahrawi national liberation movement, the Polisario Front, which proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) with a government in exile in Tindouf, Algeria. Mauritania withdrew in 1979, and Morocco eventually secured control of most of the territory, including all the major cities and natural resources. \nPolisario was formed in 1973 to fight for the rights of Saharawi Arab African People. Polisario attacked Moroccan positions many times and have retaliated. Continued war was waged between Polisario and Morocco over prominence in the region backed by Algeria for Polisario and US, France and Saudi Arabia for Morocco. Polisario were successful in cutting the transport of Phosphorus across Western Sahara to the Atlantic Coast. The transport infrastructure of the region, including the border towns of Morocco was affected during the wars.\nRoad transport.\nWestern Sahara has no rail service, with the exception of a section of the Mauritania Railway; which (since the closure of the Choum Tunnel), cuts across the extreme south-eastern corner of the territory. The rail-route is considered the world's longest cargo train covering a distance of . Passengers with tickets ride in cramped cars while many illegal passengers, sometimes with livestock, ride on top of freight cars. \nThere are only of roads, of which are metalled. A small network of highways provides limited ground travel connections. N1 highway is a major roadway traversing along the Atlantic coastline of the country. There are a few roads in the north and only two roads in the south that branch off of N1. All other roads are local ones in the various cities and towns. Off road driving is considered dangerous since there are \"thousands of unexploded mines\" in the area. Highway Road plans in the region started by Algeria have been used to increase its own influence in the region. There are only 4 companies licensed to use buses in Western Sahara which are: CTM, Supratours, Satas and Sat; CTM and Supratours buses have daily service from Dakhla to Marrakech via Laayoune and Agadir.\nRail transport.\nSince the closure of the Choum Tunnel, a section of Mauritania Railway cuts through the Polisario Front-controlled part of the Western Sahara ().\nPorts.\nThe major port in Western Sahara is Ad Dakhla - small docking facility (Port Marchand Lassarga/Port-\u00celot) located in a shelter bay south of the airport, Cabo Bojador - small port with fishing boats store inland and Laayoune (El Aaiun) - major deep water port facility; used by vessels carrying phosphate, large fishing vessels and military patrol boats. The longest conveyor belt in the world is long, from the phosphate mines of Bu Craa to the coast south of Laayoune. \nThe belt moves about 2,000 metric tons of rock containing phosphate every hour from the mines to El-Aaiun, where it is loaded and shipped.\nAir transport.\nThere are six airfields, three with paved runways and three unpaved surfaces, and one helipad (military in Cape Bojador). Hassan I Airport, serving El Aai\u00fan (La\u00e2youne), is an international airport, but the carriers at the airport connect only to regional destinations (to Morocco or the Canary Islands). Dakhla Airport is located in Dakhla and has commercial operational flights. Smara Airport in Smara and La G\u00fcera Airport serving La G\u00fcera are other smaller airports in Western Sahara.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33228", "revid": "38983749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33228", "title": "Military of Western Sahara", "text": ""}
{"id": "33229", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33229", "title": "Political status of Western Sahara", "text": "Western Sahara, formerly the colony of Spanish Sahara, is a disputed territory claimed by both the Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia el-Hamra and R\u00edo de Oro), which is an independence movement based in Tindouf. The annexation of Western Sahara by Morocco took place in two stages, in 1976 and 1979, and is considered illegal under international law.\nWestern Sahara is listed by the United Nations (UN) as a non-decolonized territory and is thus included in the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories, which regards Spain as the \"de jure\" administering state. Under international law, Western Sahara is not a legal part of Morocco, and it remains under the international laws of military occupation.\nBackground.\nSince the Madrid Accords of 1975, most of Western Sahara has been occupied by Morocco as the Southern Provinces. The smallest and least resourced section, the Liberated Territories, is administered by the Polisario Front as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR). Mauritania administers the western half of the Ras Nouadhibou Peninsula. An UN-monitored cease-fire has been in effect since September 1991.\nNo other country than the United States, Israel and Paraguay has ever recognized Morocco's unilateral annexation of Western Sahara; however, certain countries have recognized that Morocco exerts \"de facto\" control of the region. Overall, the annexation has not garnered as much attention in the international community as many other disputed annexations (e.g. the Russian annexation of Crimea).\nIn order to resolve the sovereignty issue, the UN has attempted to hold a referendum through the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and is holding direct talks between the Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front. The UN recognizes neither Moroccan nor SADR sovereignty over Western Sahara.\nMoroccan settlers currently make up more than two thirds of the 500,000 inhabitants of Western Sahara. Under international law, Morocco's transfer of its own civilians into occupied territory is in direct violation of (cf. Israeli and Turkish settlers).\nPositions of the main parties.\nKingdom of Morocco.\nThe official position of the Kingdom of Morocco since 1963 is that all of Western Sahara is an integral part of the kingdom. The Moroccan government refers to Western Sahara only as \"Moroccan Sahara\", the \"Saharan provinces\", or the \"Southern Provinces\".\nAccording to the Moroccan government, in 1958 the Moroccan Army of Liberation fought Spanish colonizers and almost liberated what was then Spanish Sahara. The fathers of many of the Polisario leaders were among the veterans of the Moroccan Southern Army, for example the father of Polisario leader Mohammed Abdelaziz. Morocco is supported in this view by a number of former Polisario founders and leaders. The Polisario Front is considered by Morocco to be a Moroccan separatist movement, referring to the Moroccan origins of most of its founding members.\nOn 22 January 2020, Morocco's House of Representatives voted unanimously to add Western Sahara waters to the Moroccan maritime borders.\nPolisario Front and the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.\nThe Polisario Front, mainly backed by Algeria, is described by itself and its supporters as a national liberation movement that opposes Moroccan control of Western Sahara, whilst it is considered by Morocco and supporters of Morocco's claims over Western Sahara to be a separatist organization. It began as a movement of students who felt torn between the divergent Spanish and Moroccan influences on the country. The original goal of the Polisario, which was to end Spanish colonialism in the region, was achieved, but their neighbors, Morocco and Mauritania, seized sovereignty of the region, which the Polisario felt was entitled to self-determination and eventually independence. The Polisario engaged in guerrilla warfare with the Moroccan and Mauritanian forces. It evacuated the Sahrawi population to the Tindouf refugee camps due to Royal Moroccan Air Force bombing of the refugee camps on Sahrawi land with napalm and white phosphorus. The Polisario Front has called for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara to be decided through a referendum. Although the SADR is not recognized as a state by the UN, the Polisario is considered a direct participant in the conflict and as the legitimate representative of the Sahrawi people, recognized by the United Nations since 1979.\nThe Polisario Front argues that Morocco's position is due to economic interests (fishing, phosphate mining, and the potential for oil reserves) and political reasons (stability of the king's position and the governing elite in Morocco, deployment of most of the Moroccan Army in Western Sahara instead of in Morocco). The Polisario Front proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic in Bir Lehlou (Western Sahara), on 27 February 1976.\nMauritania.\nClaims on Western Sahara had proliferated since the 1960s, fueled by Mauritanian President Moktar Ould Daddah. Before Mauritania signed the Madrid Accords and after the withdrawal of the last Spanish forces, in late 1975, the Mauritanian Army invaded the southern part of Western Sahara, while the Moroccan Army did the same in the north.\nIn April 1976, Mauritania and Morocco partitioned the country into three parts, Mauritania getting the southern one, which was named Tiris al-Gharbiyya. Mauritania waged four years of war against Polisario guerrillas, conducting raids on Nouakchott, attacks on the Zouerate mine train and a coup d'\u00e9tat that deposed Ould Daddah. Mauritania finally withdrew in the summer of 1979, after signing the Algiers Agreement with the Polisario Front, recognizing the right of self-determination for the Sahrawi people, and renouncing any claims on Western Sahara. The Moroccan Army immediately took control of the former Mauritanian territory.\nMauritania recognized the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic on 27 February 1984.\nAlgeria.\nAlgeria has supported the independence of the whole of Western Sahara since 1975, when Spanish forces and settlers withdrew from the area. It is one of the few countries to do so in the Arab League. It has provided aid to the 'Polisario Front'. Algeria's role became indirect, through political and military support for the Polisario Front. Algeria recognized the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic on 6 March 1976. Its involvement in Western Sahara independence movement has interrupted the development of Algerian-Morocco diplomatic relations, which were restored in 1988.\nUnited Nations.\nWestern Sahara is on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. The UN has been involved since 1988 in trying to find a solution to the conflict through self-determination. In 1988, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front agreed to settle the dispute through a referendum under the auspices of the UN that would allow the people of Western Sahara to choose between independence or integration with Morocco. In 1991, the parties agreed upon the \"Settlement Plan\", contingent on the referendum being held the following year, but due to disputes over voter qualification, the vote was not held. In the following years, the UN argued for negotiations between Morocco and the Polisario Front to resolve the deadlock, culminating in the Manhasset negotiations in 2007\u20132008.\nAs of 2020, the mandate for MINURSO has been extended 47 times and it maintains its presence in the country, but has yet to fulfill its mission by organizing a referendum.\nPositions of other states.\nSome states are supportive of the \"right of self-determination of the Sahrawi people\", including the option of autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty. Some states have changed their opinion frequently or have given separate announcements of support for both Morocco and the Polisario Front/SADR (Egypt, Italy, Lesotho, Russia, Rwanda, Yemen, etc.).\nSome of the states announcing support of the \"right of self-determination\" currently recognize the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. Not all of the states that have terminated diplomatic relations with or withdrawn recognition of the SADR have announced their support for the Moroccan claims.\nThe majority of United Nations member states have not announced any position.\nStates supporting Morocco's autonomy proposal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0States that have recognised Western Sahara as part of the Kingdom of Morocco through official announcement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0States that have withdrawn, frozen or suspended their recognition of the SADR.\nPosition of United Nations Security Council permanent members.\nFrance claims neutrality on the Western Sahara issue, despite its military involvement in the Western Sahara War on the side of Morocco and Mauritania (see Operation Lamantin). In 2009 and 2010, France used the threat of its veto power to block the establishment of Human Rights monitoring by the MINURSO in Western Sahara. France has been a major backer of the Moroccan autonomy proposal and in the EU negotiated the concession of the advanced status to Morocco.\nOn 30 July 2024, coinciding with the 25th anniversary of Throne Day (Morocco), French President Emmanuel Macron sent a letter to King Mohammed VI of Morocco clarifying France's new position on the Western Sahara. He stated that he \"considers that the present and future of Western Sahara lie within the framework of Moroccan sovereignty\" and affirmed France's support for Morocco's autonomy plan proposed in 2007 by saying \"our support for the autonomy plan proposed by Morocco in 2007 is clear and unwavering,\" adding that this plan \"constitutes now the only basis to achieve a just, lasting, and negotiated political solution, in accordance with United Nations Security Council resolutions.\" Macron emphasized France's support for Morocco's efforts to promote economic and social development in the region. This marked a notable change of diplomatic stance; The French authorities previously argued that Morocco\u2019s plan for autonomy was a \u201cserious and credible\u201d basis for discussion, but not the only one.\nFrom 28 to 30 October 2024, Macron conducted his three-day state visit to Morocco's capital accompanied by a delegation of French ministers and business leaders. Notable cabinet members present included French Interior Minister Bruno Retailleau, Economy Minister Antoine Armand and Culture Minister Rachida Dati \u2013 herself of Moroccan origin. On the first day, the King and Macron jointly chaired the signing ceremony of 22 key deals between the nations, addressing: railway, aviation, education, and sustainable energy/infrastructure.\nOn 29 October 2024, in an address to the Moroccan Parliament, Macron said French companies \"will support the development\" of the Sahara, pledging \"investments and sustainable support initiatives to benefit local populations.\" This includes French-sponsored projects and initiatives in Dakhla, Western Sahara and the Guelmim-Oued Noun region\u2014more broadly\u2014amounting to 10 billion euros ($10.8 billion). As part of the objective \"to accelerate\" partnerships between France and Morocco, MGH Energy, a French company focused on decarbonizing transportation by air and sea, also plans to partner with a Moroccan gas retailer to produce fuel near Dakhla. In an effort to begin its first phase of operations by 2030, the company said it planned to invest 4.8 billion euros ($5.2 billion). 2030 also aligns with when Morocco hopes its Atlantic Ocean port under construction in Dakhla will open, stimulating an unprecedented flow of exports from Morocco and its neighbors in West Africa.\nThe Obama administration disassociated itself from the Moroccan autonomy plan in 2009, however, reversing the Bush-backed support of the Moroccan plan, and returning to a pre-Bush position, wherein the option of an independent Western Sahara is on the table again.\nIn April 2009, 229 members of the U.S. House of Representatives, a clear majority and more than 50 more than the number who signed the letter in 2007, called on President Obama to support Morocco's autonomy plan and to assist in drawing the conflict to a close. The signers included Democratic Majority Leader Steny Hoyer and Republican Minority Leader John Boehner. In addition to acknowledging that Western Sahara has become a recruiting post for radical Islamists, the letter affirmed that the conflict is \"the single greatest obstacle impending the security and cooperation necessary to combat\" terrorism in the Maghreb. The letter referenced UN Security Council Resolution 1813 (2008), and encouraged President Obama to follow the policy set by President Clinton and followed by President Bush. The congressmen expressed concerns about Western Sahara's viability. They referenced a UN fact-finding mission to Western Sahara which confirmed the State Department's view that the Polisario proposal, which ultimately stands for independence, would lead to a non-viable state. In closing, the letter stated, \"We remain convinced that the U.S. position, favoring autonomy for Western Sahara under Moroccan sovereignty is the only feasible solution. We urge you to both sustain this longstanding policy, and to make clear, in both words and actions, that the United States will work to ensure that the UN process continues to support this framework as the only realistic compromise that can bring this unfortunate and longstanding conflict to an end.\"\nCommenting on a 2004 free trade agreement with Morocco, US Trade Representative Robert Zoellick stated in a letter to Congressman Joe Pitts in response to his questioning, \"the United States and many other countries do not recognize Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara and have consistently urged the parties to work with the United Nations to resolve the conflict by peaceful means. The Free Trade Agreement will not include Western Sahara.\"\nIn April 2013, the United States proposed that MINURSO monitored human rights (as all the other UN mission since 1991) in Western Sahara, a move that Morocco strongly opposed, cancelling the annual African Lion military exercises with U.S. Army troops. Also in mid-April, United States Ambassador to Morocco Samuel L. Kaplan declared during a conference in Casablanca that the Moroccan autonomy plan \"can't be the only basis in these negotiations\", referring to the UN sponsored talks between the Polisario Front and Morocco.\nOn 10 December 2020, President Donald Trump announced that the United States would officially recognize Morocco's claims over Western Sahara, as a result of Morocco agreeing to normalize relations with Israel. In April 2021, the Biden administration stated that they would not reverse the decision. In November 2021, Antony Blinken said that the Biden administration \"[continues] to view Morocco\u2019s autonomy plan as serious, credible, and realistic, and one potential approach to satisfy the aspirations of the people of Western Sahara\".\nIn 2007, it was noted that the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) treated the status of Western Sahara as 'undetermined', and that its lack of reference to the partition and the existence of the Polisario-held areas suggested a tacit acceptance of Morocco as the administering power in the entire territory.\nOn 1 June 2025, during a joint press conference in Rabat, UK Foreign Secretary David Lammy stated that the United Kingdom would change its position to support Morocco's plan of limited autonomy for Western Sahara, calling it \"the most credible, viable and pragmatic\" solution to the conflict.\nStates which have not announced any position.\nThe following states and entities have not announced any position: \nPositions of international organizations.\nThe SADR is also a member of the Asian-African Strategic Partnership, formed at the 2005 Asian-African Conference, over Moroccan objections to SADR participation.\nIn 2006, the SADR participated in a conference of the Permanent Conference of Political Parties of the Latin American and the Caribbean.\nOn 22 February 1982, the SADR secured membership in the Organisation of African Unity.\nIn 1984, Morocco withdrew from the AU's predecessor, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in protest of the group's recognition of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR).\nThe African Union (formerly the OAU) has given the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic full recognition, and accepted it as a member state (which has led Morocco to leave the union.). Mohamed Abdelaziz, president of the SADR, has been Vice-president of the OUA in 1985, and of the AU in 2002.\nIn 2016, King Mohammed VI of Morocco declared his country's intention to become a member of the African Union. On the same day, twenty-eight African countries or about 52% of the 54 UN recognized member states of the African Union signed a petition to expel the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic from the African Union. At the same time, AU Commission Chairwoman Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma reaffirmed the AU's support for Western Sahara's independence.\nThe European Union supports the right of self-determination of the Sahrawi people (the MINURSO UN-sponsored referendum), but does not recognize the Polisario Front. Over practical issues such as fishing in the EEZ the EU deals with Morocco as the country currently exercising \"jurisdiction, but not sovereignty\" over Western Sahara territory. In addition, members of the EFTA trade bloc have made statements excluding Western Sahara from the Moroccan-EFTA free trade agreement. In December 2016, the European Court of Justice reaffirmed in \"Council v Front populaire pour la lib\u00e9ration de la saguia-el-hamra et du rio de oro (Front Polisario)\" that Morocco has no basis for sovereignty over Western Sahara and that trade deals with Morocco cannot apply to the occupied territory.\nSince 1966, the United Nations request for the celebration of a referendum for enabling the \"indigenous population\" to exercise freely their right to self-determination. Since 1979, the United Nations has recognized the Polisario Front as the representative of the people of Western Sahara, and considered Morocco as an occupying force.\nFormer United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan stressed, in his last report on Western Sahara, to the Security Council:\n\"The Security Council would not be able to invite parties to negotiate about Western Saharan autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty, for such wording would imply recognition of Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara, which was out of the question as long as no States Member of the United Nations had recognized that sovereignty\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33230", "revid": "47787258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33230", "title": "Wolfgang Petersen", "text": "German filmmaker (1941\u20132022)\nWolfgang Petersen (14 March 1941 \u2013 12 August 2022) was a German film and television director, screenwriter and producer. His international breakthrough was the war film (1981), which earned him Academy Award nominations for Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay. He subsequently directed the blockbuster fantasy film \"The NeverEnding Story\" (1984), based on the 1979 novel of the same name.\nAfter moving to the United States in the mid-1980s, Petersen directed his first American production, the science-fiction film \"Enemy Mine\" (1985). He directed a variety of major studio productions through the mid-2000s, including \"In the Line of Fire\" (1993), \"Outbreak\" (1995), \"Air Force One\" (1997), \"The Perfect Storm\" (2000), \"Troy\" (2004) and \"Poseidon\" (2006).\nIn addition to his Oscar nominations, Petersen won three Bambi Awards, a Bavarian Film Award and a German Film Award. He was also a founding member of the Deutsche Filmakademie.\nEarly life.\nPetersen was born on 14 March 1941 in the northern harbour city, just a few miles from the Netherlands, Emden, the son of a naval officer. From 1953 to 1960, Petersen attended the Gelehrtenschule des Johanneums in Hamburg.\nHe made his first films with an 8 mm camera while still at school. In the 1960s he was directing plays at Hamburg's Ernst Deutsch Theater. After studying theater in Berlin and Hamburg, Petersen attended the Film and Television Academy in Berlin (1966\u20131970).\nCareer.\nPetersen's first productions were for German television and it was during his work on the popular German \"Tatort\" (\"Crime Scene\") TV series that he first met and worked with the actor J\u00fcrgen Prochnow \u2014 who would later appear as the U-boat captain in Petersen's famous . The most famous of his \"Tatort\" episodes is \"Reifezeugnis\" (Maturity Certificate) from 1977 with the young Nastassja Kinski. He shot 6 \"Tatort\" episodes.\nPetersen made his first theatrical feature film in 1974, the psychological thriller \"One or the Other of Us\", based on the novel \"Einer von uns beiden\" by Horst Bosetzky and published anonymously under his pseudonym and starring J\u00fcrgen Prochnow. He next directed the 1977 film \"Die Konsequenz\", a black/white adaptation of Alexander Ziegler's autobiographical novel of homosexual love. In its time, the film was considered so radical that when first broadcast in Germany, the Bavarian network Bayerischer Rundfunk turned off the transmitters rather than broadcast it.\nHis next feature was the World War II epic , released in early 1982. The film chronicles the experiences of a German submarine crew engaged in the \"Battle of the Atlantic\". Though not an immediate financial success, the film received highly positive reviews and was nominated for six Academy Awards, two of which (for Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay) went to Petersen; he was also nominated for a BAFTA Award and DGA Award. The film starred J\u00fcrgen Prochnow as the U-boat Captain, who became a good example of Petersen's action characters, a man at war who confronts danger and fate at sea.\nAfter \"The NeverEnding Story\" (1984), Petersen's first English-language film, he directed \"Enemy Mine\" (1985), which was not a critical or box office success. He hit his stride in 1993 with the assassination thriller \"In the Line of Fire\". Starring Clint Eastwood as an angst-ridden presidential Secret Service guard, \"In the Line of Fire\" gave Petersen the box office clout he needed to direct another suspense thriller, \"Outbreak\" (1995), starring Dustin Hoffman. The 1997 Petersen blockbuster \"Air Force One\" did very well at the box office, with generally positive critical reviews from movie critics. For both \"Air Force One\" and \"Outbreak\", Petersen teamed up with the German cinematographer Michael Ballhaus, who has also worked frequently with director Martin Scorsese.\nBy 1998, Petersen was an established Hollywood director, with the power to both re-release his classic in a new director's cut and to helm star-studded action-thrillers. As such, he was originally considered to direct the first movie in the \"Harry Potter\" film series, \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\". Petersen pulled out of the running in March 2000.\nIn the 2000s, Petersen continued to direct two summer blockbusters, the films \"The Perfect Storm\" (2000) and \"Troy\" (2004). The success of the former helped his Radiant Productions company to sign a deal with Warner Bros. In 2003, he was set to direct a \"Batman vs. Superman\" film, but deciding to make \"Troy\" instead. \nPetersen's $160 million epic film \"Poseidon\", a re-telling of the 1969 Paul Gallico novel \"The Poseidon Adventure\" (previously adapted for the 1972 disaster film), was released by Warner Bros. in May 2006. The film performed poorly in the U.S., barely exceeding $60 million in domestic box office receipts by early August, but international sales surpassed $121 million.\nAlthough hired to direct the film adaptation of \"Ender's Game\" by Orson Scott Card that was scheduled for release in 2008, he later \"moved on\" from the project. His potential projects included a live-action adaptation of the 2006 anime film \"Paprika\" and a film adaptation of the science fiction novel \"Old Man's War\".\nAfter a ten-year hiatus, Petersen returned in 2016 as director of the heist comedy \"Vier gegen die Bank\", his first German-language film since in 1981.\nPersonal life.\nPetersen's first marriage was with actress Ursula Sieg; they had a son. In 1978, he married his assistant Maria Borgel. Petersen moved to Los Angeles in 1986 and subsequently acquired American citizenship.\nDeath.\nPetersen died of pancreatic cancer on 12 August 2022, at the age of 81, at his home in Brentwood, Los Angeles.\nFilmography.\nSource:\nTelevision.\nTV movies\nTV series\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33234", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33234", "title": "White matter", "text": "Areas of myelinated axons in the brain\nWhite matter refers to areas of the central nervous system that are mainly made up of myelinated axons, also called tracts. Long thought to be passive tissue, white matter affects learning and brain functions, modulating the distribution of action potentials, acting as a relay and coordinating communication between different brain regions.\nWhite matter is named for its relatively light appearance resulting from the lipid content of myelin. Its white color in prepared specimens is due to its usual preservation in formaldehyde. It appears pinkish-white to the naked eye otherwise, because myelin is composed largely of lipid tissue veined with capillaries. \nStructure.\nWhite matter.\nWhite matter is composed of bundles, which connect various grey matter areas (the locations of nerve cell bodies) of the brain to each other, and carry nerve impulses between neurons. Myelin acts as an insulator, which allows electrical signals to jump, rather than coursing through the axon, increasing the speed of transmission of all nerve signals.\nThe total number of long range fibers within a cerebral hemisphere is 2% of the total number of cortico-cortical fibers (across cortical areas) and is roughly the same number as those that communicate between the two hemispheres in the brain's largest white tissue structure, the corpus callosum. Sch\u00fcz and Braitenberg note \"As a rough rule, the number of fibres of a certain range of lengths is inversely proportional to their length.\"\nThe proportion of blood vessels in the white matter in nonelderly adults is 1.7\u20133.6%.\nGrey matter.\nThe other main component of the brain is grey matter (actually pinkish tan due to blood capillaries), which is composed of neurons. The substantia nigra is a third colored component found in the brain that appears darker due to higher levels of melanin in dopaminergic neurons than its nearby areas. White matter can sometimes appear darker than grey matter on a microscope slide because of the type of stain used. Cerebral and spinal white matter do not contain dendrites, neural cell bodies, or shorter axons, which can only be found in grey matter.\nLocation.\nWhite matter forms the bulk of the deep parts of the brain and the superficial parts of the spinal cord. Aggregates of grey matter such as the basal ganglia (caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, subthalamic nucleus, nucleus accumbens) and brainstem nuclei (red nucleus, cranial nerve nuclei) are spread within the cerebral white matter.\nThe cerebellum is structured in a similar manner as the cerebrum, with a superficial mantle of cerebellar cortex, deep cerebellar white matter (called the \"arbor vitae\") and aggregates of grey matter surrounded by deep cerebellar white matter (dentate nucleus, globose nucleus, emboliform nucleus, and fastigial nucleus). The fluid-filled cerebral ventricles (lateral ventricles, third ventricle, cerebral aqueduct, fourth ventricle) are also located deep within the cerebral white matter.\nMyelinated axon length.\nOne small study found that men have more white matter than women both in volume and in length of myelinated axons, and that volume and length reduced with age. At the age of 20, the total length of myelinated fibers in men is 176,000\u00a0km while that of a woman is 149,000\u00a0km. There is a decline in total length with age of about 10% each decade such that a man at 80 years of age has 97,200\u00a0km and a woman 82,000\u00a0km. Most of this reduction is due to the loss of thinner fibers. However, this reduction may correlate with men having larger brains than women\nand with brain size reducing with age.\nFunction.\nWhite matter is the tissue through which messages pass between different areas of grey matter within the central nervous system. The white matter is white because of the fatty substance (myelin) that surrounds the nerve fibers (axons). This myelin is found in almost all long nerve fibers, and acts as an electrical insulation. This is important because it allows the messages to pass quickly from place to place.\nUnlike grey matter, which peaks in development in a person's twenties, the white matter continues to develop, and peaks in middle age.\nResearch.\nMultiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common of the inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system which affect white matter. In MS lesions, the myelin sheath around the axons is deteriorated by inflammation. Alcohol use disorders are associated with a decrease in white matter volume.\nAmyloid plaques in white matter may be associated with Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Other changes that commonly occur with age include the development of leukoaraiosis, which is a rarefaction of the white matter that can be correlated with a variety of conditions, including loss of myelin pallor, axonal loss, and diminished restrictive function of the blood\u2013brain barrier.\nThere is also evidence that substance abuse may damage white matter microstructure, though prolonged abstinence may in certain cases reverse such white matter changes.\nWhite matter lesions on magnetic resonance imaging are linked to several adverse outcomes, such as cognitive impairment and depression. White matter hyperintensities are often found in patients with vascular dementia, particularly with small vessel/subcortical subtypes of vascular dementia.\nEnvironmental exposures can negatively impact on white matter. For example, exposure to air pollution in early childhood has been associated with microstructural changes in white matter: higher levels of ambient nitrogen dioxide in the first four years of life have been found to be linked to decreased white matter integrity.\nVolume.\nSmaller volumes (in terms of group averages) of white matter might be associated with larger deficits in attention, declarative memory, executive functions, intelligence, and academic achievement. However, volume change is continuous throughout one's lifetime due to neuroplasticity, and is a contributing factor rather than determinant factor of certain functional deficits due to compensating effects in other brain regions. The integrity of white matter declines due to aging. Nonetheless, regular aerobic exercise appears to either postpone the aging effect or in turn enhance the white matter integrity in the long run. Changes in white matter volume due to inflammation or injury may be a factor in the severity of obstructive sleep apnea.\nImaging.\nThe study of white matter has been advanced with the neuroimaging technique called diffusion tensor imaging where magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scanners are used. As of 2007, more than 700 publications have been published on the subject.\nA 2009 paper by Jan Scholz and colleagues used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to demonstrate changes in white matter volume as a result of learning a new motor task (e.g. juggling). The study is important as the first paper to correlate motor learning with white matter changes. Previously, many researchers had considered this type of learning to be exclusively mediated by dendrites, which are not present in white matter. The authors suggest that electrical activity in axons may regulate myelination in axons. Or, gross changes in the diameter or packing density of the axon might cause the change. A more recent DTI study by Sampaio-Baptista and colleagues reported changes in white matter with motor learning along with increases in myelination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33236", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33236", "title": "Word processor (electronic device)", "text": "Electronic device\nA word processor is an electronic device (later a computer software application) for text, composing, editing, formatting, and printing.\nThe word processor was a stand-alone office machine developed in the 1960s, combining the keyboard text-entry and printing functions of an electric typewriter with a recording unit, either tape or floppy disk (as used by the Wang machine) with a simple dedicated computer processor for the editing of text. Although features and designs varied among manufacturers and models, and new features were added as technology advanced, the first word processors typically featured a monochrome display and the ability to save documents on memory cards or diskettes. Later models introduced innovations such as spell-checking programs, and improved formatting options.\nAs the more versatile combination of personal computers and printers became commonplace, and computer software applications for word processing became popular, most business machine companies stopped manufacturing dedicated word processor machines. In 2009 there were only two U.S. companies, Classic and AlphaSmart, which still made them. Many older machines, however, remain in use. Since 2009, Sentinel has offered a machine described as a \"word processor\", but it is more accurately a highly specialised microcomputer used for accounting and publishing. In 2014, U.S. company Astrohaus launched the Freewrite series of electronic word processors.\nWord processing was one of the earliest applications for the personal computer in office productivity, and was the most widely used application on personal computers until the World Wide Web rose to prominence in the mid-1990s.\nAlthough the early word processors evolved to use tag-based markup for document formatting, most modern word processors take advantage of a graphical user interface providing some form of what-you-see-is-what-you-get (\"WYSIWYG\") editing. Most are powerful systems consisting of one or more programs that can produce a combination of images, graphics and text, the latter handled with type-setting capability. Typical features of a modern word processor include multiple font sets, spell checking, grammar checking, a built-in thesaurus, automatic text correction, web integration, HTML conversion, pre-formatted publication projects such as newsletters and to-do lists, and much more.\nMicrosoft Word is the most widely used word processing software according to a user tracking system built into the software. Microsoft estimates that roughly half a billion people use the Microsoft Office suite, which includes Word. Many other word processing applications exist, including WordPerfect (which dominated the market from the mid-1980s to early-1990s on computers running Microsoft's MS-DOS operating system, and still (2014) is favored for legal applications), Apple's Pages application, and open source applications such as OpenOffice.org Writer, LibreOffice Writer, AbiWord, KWord, and LyX. Web-based word processors such as Office Online or Google Docs are a relatively new category.\nCharacteristics.\nWord processors evolved dramatically once they became software programs rather than dedicated machines. They can usefully be distinguished from text editors, the category of software they evolved from.\nA text editor is a program that is used for typing, copying, pasting, and printing text (a single character, or strings of characters). Text editors do not format lines or pages. (There are extensions of text editors which can perform formatting of lines and pages: batch document processing systems, starting with TJ-2 and RUNOFF and still available in such systems as LaTeX and Ghostscript, as well as programs that implement the paged-media extensions to HTML and CSS). Text editors are now used mainly by programmers, website designers, computer system administrators, and, in the case of LaTeX, by mathematicians and scientists (for complex formulas and for citations in rare languages). They are also useful when fast startup times, small file sizes, editing speed, and simplicity of operation are valued, and when formatting is unimportant. Due to their use in managing complex software projects, text editors can sometimes provide better facilities for managing large writing projects than a word processor.\nWord processing added to the text editor the ability to control type style and size, to manage lines (word wrap), to format documents into pages, and to number pages. Functions now taken for granted were added incrementally, sometimes by purchase of independent providers of add-on programs. Spell checking, grammar checking and mail merge were some of the most popular add-ons for early word processors. Word processors are also capable of hyphenation, and the management and correct positioning of footnotes and endnotes.\nMore advanced features found in recent word processors include:\nLater desktop publishing programs were specifically designed with elaborate pre-formatted layouts for publication, offering only limited options for changing the layout, while allowing users to import text that was written using a text editor or word processor, or type the text in themselves.\nHistory.\nWord processors are descended from the Friden Flexowriter, which had two punched tape stations and permitted switching from one to the other (thus enabling what was called the \"chain\" or \"form letter\", one tape containing names and addresses, and the other the body of the letter to be sent). It did not wrap words, which was begun by IBM's Magnetic Tape Selectric Typewriter (later, Magnetic Card Selectric Typewriter).\nIBM Selectric.\nExpensive Typewriter, written and improved between 1961 and 1962 by Steve Piner and L. Peter Deutsch, was a text editing program that ran on a DEC PDP-1 computer at MIT. Since it could drive an IBM Selectric typewriter (a letter-quality printer), it may be considered the first-word processing program, but the term \"word processing\" itself was only introduced, by IBM's B\u00f6blingen Laboratory in the late 1960s.\nIn 1969, two software based text editing products (Astrotype and Astrocomp) were developed and marketed by Information Control Systems (Ann Arbor Michigan). Both products used the Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-8 mini computer, DECtape (4\u201d reel) randomly accessible tape drives, and a modified version of the IBM Selectric typewriter (the IBM 2741 Terminal). These 1969 products preceded CRT display-based word processors. Text editing was done using a line numbering system viewed on a paper copy inserted in the Selectric typewriter.\nEvelyn Berezin invented a Selectric-based word processor in 1969, and founded the Redactron Corporation to market the $8,000 machine. Redactron was sold to Burroughs Corporation in 1976, where the Redactron-II and -III were sold both as standalone units and as peripherals to the company's mainframe computers.\nBy 1971 word processing was recognized by the \"New York Times\" as a \"buzz word\". A 1974 \"Times\" article referred to \"the brave new world of Word Processing or W/P. That's International Business Machines talk\u00a0... I.B.M. introduced W/P about five years ago for its Magnetic Tape Selectric Typewriter and other electronic razzle-dazzle.\"\nIBM defined the term in a broad and vague way as \"the combination of people, procedures, and equipment which transforms ideas into printed communications,\" and originally used it to include dictating machines and ordinary, manually operated Selectric typewriters. By the early seventies, however, the term was generally understood to mean semiautomated typewriters affording at least some form of editing and correction, and the ability to produce perfect \"originals\". Thus, the \"Times\" headlined a 1974 Xerox product as a \"speedier electronic typewriter\", but went on to describe the product, which had no screen, as \"a word processor rather than strictly a typewriter, in that it stores copy on magnetic tape or magnetic cards for retyping, corrections, and subsequent printout\".\nMainframe systems.\nIn the late 1960s IBM provided a program called FORMAT for generating printed documents on any computer capable of running Fortran IV. Written by Gerald M. Berns, FORMAT was described in his paper \"Description of FORMAT, a Text-Processing Program\" (Communications of the ACM, Volume 12, Number 3, March, 1969) as \"a production program which facilitates the editing and printing of 'finished' documents directly on the printer of a relatively small (64k) computer system. It features good performance, totally free-form input, very flexible formatting capabilities including up to eight columns per page, automatic capitalization, aids for index construction, and a minimum of nontext [control elements] items.\" Input was normally on punched cards or magnetic tape, with up to 80capital letters and non-alphabetic characters per card. The limited typographical controls available were implemented by control sequences; for example, letters were automatically converted to lower case unless they followed a full stop, that is, the \"period\" character. Output could be printed on a typical line printer in all-capitals \u2014 or in upper and lower case using a special (\"TN\") printer chain \u2014 or could be punched as a paper tape which could be printed, in better than line printer quality, on a Flexowriter. A workalike program with some improvements, DORMAT, was developed and used at University College London.\nElectromechanical paper-tape-based equipment such as the Friden Flexowriter had long been available; the Flexowriter allowed for operations such as repetitive typing of form letters (with a pause for the operator to manually type in the variable information), and when equipped with an auxiliary reader, could perform an early version of \"mail merge\". Circa 1970 it began to be feasible to apply electronic computers to office automation tasks. IBM's Mag Tape Selectric Typewriter (MT/ST) and later Mag Card Selectric (MCST) were early devices of this kind, which allowed editing, simple revision, and repetitive typing, with a one-line display for editing single lines. The first novel to be written on a word processor, the IBM MT/ST, was Len Deighton's \"Bomber\", published in 1970.\nEffect on office administration.\n\"The New York Times\", reporting on a 1971 business equipment trade show, said\nThe \"buzz word\" for this year's show was \"word processing\", or the use of electronic equipment, such as typewriters; procedures and trained personnel to maximize office efficiency. At the IBM exhibition a girl typed on an electronic typewriter. The copy was received on a magnetic tape cassette which accepted corrections, deletions, and additions and then produced a perfect letter for the boss's signature\u00a0...\nIn 1971, a third of all working women in the United States were secretaries, and they could see that word processing would affect their careers. Some manufacturers, according to a \"Times\" article, urged that \"the concept of 'word processing' could be the answer to Women's Lib advocates' prayers. Word processing will replace the 'traditional' secretary and give women new administrative roles in business and industry.\"\nThe 1970s word processing concept did not refer merely to equipment, but, explicitly, to the use of equipment for \"breaking down secretarial labor into distinct components, with some staff members handling typing exclusively while others supply administrative support. A typical operation would leave most executives without private secretaries. Instead one secretary would perform various administrative tasks for three or more secretaries.\" A 1971 article said that \"Some [secretaries] see W/P as a career ladder into management; others see it as a dead-end into the automated ghetto; others predict it will lead straight to the picket line.\" The National Secretaries Association, which defined secretaries as people who \"can assume responsibility without direct supervision\", feared that W/P would transform secretaries into \"space-age typing pools\". The article considered only the organizational changes resulting from secretaries operating word processors rather than typewriters; the possibility that word processors might result in managers creating documents without the intervention of secretaries was not considered\u2014not surprising in an era when few managers, but most secretaries, possessed keyboarding skills.\nDedicated models.\nIn 1972, Stephen Bernard Dorsey, Founder and President of Canadian company Automatic Electronic Systems (AES), introduced the world's first programmable word processor with a video screen. The real breakthrough by Dorsey's AES team was that their machine stored the operator's texts on magnetic disks. Texts could be retrieved from the disks simply by entering their names at the keyboard. More importantly, a text could be edited, for instance a paragraph moved to a new place, or a spelling error corrected, and these changes were recorded on the magnetic disk.\nThe AES machine was actually a sophisticated computer that could be reprogrammed by changing the instructions contained within a few chips.\nIn 1975, Dorsey started Micom Data Systems and introduced the Micom 2000 word processor. The Micom 2000 improved on the AES design by using the Intel 8080 single-chip microprocessor, which made the word processor smaller, less costly to build and supported multiple languages.\nAround this time, DeltaData and Wang word processors also appeared, again with a video screen and a magnetic storage disk.\nThe competitive edge for Dorsey's Micom 2000 was that, unlike many other machines, it was truly programmable. The Micom machine countered the problem of obsolescence by avoiding the limitations of a hard-wired system of program storage. The Micom 2000 utilized RAM, which was mass-produced and totally programmable. The Micom 2000 was said to be a year ahead of its time when it was introduced into a marketplace that represented some pretty serious competition such as IBM, Xerox and Wang Laboratories.\nIn 1978, Micom partnered with Dutch multinational Philips and Dorsey grew Micom's sales position to number three among major word processor manufacturers, behind only IBM and Wang.\nSoftware models.\nThe Wang was not the first CRT-based machine nor were all of its innovations unique to Wang. In the early 1970s Linolex, Lexitron and Vydec introduced pioneering word-processing systems with CRT display editing. A Canadian electronics company, Automatic Electronic Systems, had introduced a product in 1972, but went into receivership a year later. In 1976, refinanced by the Canada Development Corporation, it returned to operation as AES Data, and went on to successfully market its brand of word processors worldwide until its demise in the mid-1980s. Its first office product, the AES-90, combined for the first time a CRT-screen, a floppy-disk and a microprocessor, that is, the very same winning combination that would be used by IBM for its PC seven years later. The AES-90 software was able to handle French and English typing from the start, displaying and printing the texts side-by-side, a Canadian government requirement. The first eight units were delivered to the office of the then Prime Minister, Pierre Elliot Trudeau, in February 1974.\nDespite these predecessors, Wang's product was a standout, and by 1978 it had sold more of these systems than any other vendor.\nThe phrase \"word processor\" rapidly came to refer to CRT-based machines similar to the AES 90. Numerous machines of this kind emerged, typically marketed by traditional office-equipment companies such as IBM, Lanier (marketing AES Data machines, re-badged), CPT, and NBI.\nAll were specialized, dedicated, proprietary systems, priced around $10,000. Cheap general-purpose computers were still for hobbyists.\nSome of the earliest CRT-based machines used cassette tapes for removable-memory storage until floppy diskettes became available for this purpose - first the 8-inch floppy, then the 5\u00bc-inch (drives by Shugart Associates and diskettes by Dysan).\nPrinting of documents was initially accomplished using IBM Selectric typewriters modified for ASCII-character input. These were later replaced by application-specific daisy wheel printers, first developed by Diablo, which became a Xerox company, and later by Qume. For quicker \"draft\" printing, dot-matrix line printers were optional alternatives with some word processors.\nWYSIWYG models.\nElectric Pencil, released in December 1976, was the first word processor software for microcomputers. Software-based word processors running on general-purpose personal computers gradually displaced dedicated word processors, and the term came to refer to software rather than hardware. Some programs were modeled after particular dedicated WP hardware. MultiMate, for example, was written for an insurance company that had hundreds of typists using Wang systems, and spread from there to other Wang customers. To adapt to the smaller, more generic PC keyboard, MultiMate used stick-on labels and a large plastic clip-on template to remind users of its dozens of Wang-like functions, using the shift, alt and ctrl keys with the 10 IBM function keys and many of the alphabet keys.\nOther early word-processing software required users to memorize semi-mnemonic key combinations rather than pressing keys labelled \"copy\" or \"bold\". (Many early PCs lacked cursor keys; WordStar famously used the E-S-D-X-centered \"diamond\" for cursor navigation, and modern vi-like editors encourage use of hjkl for navigation.) However, the price differences between dedicated word processors and general-purpose PCs, and the value added to the latter by software such as VisiCalc, were so compelling that personal computers and word processing software soon became serious competition for the dedicated machines. Word processing became the most popular use for personal computers, and unlike the spreadsheet (dominated by Lotus 1-2-3) and database (dBase) markets, WordPerfect, XyWrite, Microsoft Word, , and dozens of other word processing software brands competed in the 1980s; \"PC Magazine\" reviewed 57 different programs in one January 1986 issue. Development of higher-resolution monitors allowed them to provide limited WYSIWYG\u2014What You See Is What You Get, to the extent that typographical features like bold and italics, indentation, justification and margins were approximated on screen.\nThe mid-to-late 1980s saw the spread of laser printers, a \"typographic\" approach to word processing, and of true WYSIWYG bitmap displays with multiple fonts (pioneered by the Xerox Alto computer and Bravo word processing program), PostScript, and graphical user interfaces (another Xerox PARC innovation, with the Gypsy word processor which was commercialised in the Xerox Star product range). Standalone word processors adapted by getting smaller and replacing their CRTs with small character-oriented LCD displays. Some models also had computer-like features such as floppy disk drives and the ability to output to an external printer. They also got a name change, now being called \"electronic typewriters\" and typically occupying a lower end of the market, selling for under US$200.\nDuring the late 1980s and into the 1990s the predominant word processing program was WordPerfect. It had more than 50% of the worldwide market as late as 1995, but by 2000 Microsoft Word had up to 95% market share.\nMacWrite, Microsoft Word, and other word processing programs for the bit-mapped Apple Macintosh screen, introduced in 1984, were probably the first true WYSIWYG word processors to become known to many people until the introduction of Microsoft Windows. Dedicated word processors eventually became museum pieces.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33250", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33250", "title": "Wikipedia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "33254", "revid": "49779162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33254", "title": "WorldForge", "text": "Open source framework for online role-playing games\nThe WorldForge project is producing an open source framework for massively multiplayer online role-playing games. The intent lies in creating a widely used development framework and set of libraries by motivating interested developers to improve on the original source code.\nHistory.\nThe WorldForge Project began in October 1998, under the original name of \"Altima.\" It was originally envisioned to be an \"Alternative to \"Ultima Online\"\" and was mentioned in an article on the Slashdot news website, which became a major source of interested developers.\nThe original founder has since left the project along with most pre-Slashdot developers.\nDespite this, the community has become populous and able to sustain itself. A new governing system and selected coordinators has been established, fixing a new direction and a new goal.\nThis community has decided to work on something much more significant than a \"mere Ultima clone,\"\nand voted itself the new name \"WorldForge\". Avinash Gupta was the first leader of the project, followed by Bryce Harrington, but more recently developers have chosen not to select a leader,\nand instead rely on consensus among a small group of determined core developers to decide the\noverall direction of the project.\nThe WorldForge community has adopted the view that \"massive\" is unnecessary in a non-commercial\ngame and has focused instead on \"community\" environments; estimating on the order of a few hundred\nplayers per game world, rather than thousands. Because most WorldForge servers are run by volunteers without strong bandwidth and hardware capacities this direction also has practical reasons.\nGames.\nSeveral independent game projects have joined WorldForge, resulting in a lot of parallel development. The pig farming simulation \"Acorn\" is the only complete, if modest, game\nso far that has been released. Its significance lies in providing a proof of concept that the project can actually integrate and deliver software, artwork and media, as well as maintain a community capable of creativity and innovation. Development of Acorn ended in 2001 as the project has moved on to more ambitious new games.\nThe primary focus has shifted to a tactical building game called \"Mason\", which focuses on competitive construction and invention of buildings, traps, and mechanisms. The intent lies in developing powerful yet generic \"item invention\" algorithms capable of bringing a new dimension of dynamic content to interactive gaming, creating, in effect, a working physics model that enables\nplayers to build and operate objects within the game that were not originally intended by the\ncreators. Other games have been and will continue to be developed alongside \"Mason\".\nThis game is currently in alpha development and there are two available 3D clients. Mason includes all the functionality of Acorn.\nThe project is also beginning to branch out into other forms of entertainment (e.g. comics, paper-and-pencil gaming), as it finds that its processes and multi-disciplinary nature are equally applicable there.\nClients.\nThere are two currently functional 3D clients for Worldforge, Ember and Sear.\nBoth clients are fully capable of normal operation such as moving around the world and performing actions such as starting fires, planting trees, making stakes etc. However, Ember has more advanced entity editing capabilities suitable for world building.\nBoth clients are available for Linux and Windows, only Sear is currently available for Mac.\nServers.\nCyphesis currently handles the running of the world. It is intended to become an AI only server and Indri is supposed to model Physics. However work on Indri is currently moving slowly by while Cyphesis is being actively developed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33263", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33263", "title": "Widescreen", "text": "Aspect ratio of a displayed image\nWidescreen images are displayed within a set of aspect ratios (relationship of image width to height) used in film, television and computer screens. In film, a widescreen film is any film image with a width-to-height aspect ratio greater than 4:3 (1.33:1).\nFor TV, the original screen ratio for broadcasts was in (1.33:1). Largely between the 1990s and early 2000s, at varying paces in different countries, (e.g. 1920\u00d71080p 60p) widescreen displays came into increasingly common use by high definitions.\nWith computer displays, aspect ratios other than 4:3 (e.g. 1920\u00d71440) are also referred to as \"widescreen\". Widescreen computer displays were previously made in a 16:10 aspect ratio (e.g. 1920\u00d71200), but nowadays they are 16:9 (e.g. 1920\u00d71080, 2560\u00d71440, 3840\u00d72160).\nFilm.\nHistory.\nWidescreen was first used for \"The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight\" (1897). This was not only the longest film that had been released to date at 100 minutes, but also the first widescreen film being shot on 63\u00a0mm Eastman stock with five perforations per frame.\nWidescreen was first widely used in the late 1920s in some short films and newsreels, and feature films, notably Abel Gance's film \"Napoleon\" (1927) with a final widescreen sequence in what Gance called Polyvision. Claude Autant-Lara released a film \"Pour construire un feu\" (\"To Build a Fire\", 1928) in the early Henri Chr\u00e9tien widescreen process, later adapted by Twentieth Century-Fox for CinemaScope in 1952.\nThe experimental Natural Vision widescreen process developed by George K. Spoor and P. John Berggren used 63.5\u00a0mm film and had a 2:1 aspect ratio. In 1926, a Natural Vision film of Niagara Falls was released. In 1927, the Natural Vision process was used in the production of \"The American\" \"The Flag Maker\". It was directed by J. Stuart Blackton and starred Bessie Love and Charles Ray, but was never released theatrically.\nOn May 26, 1929, Fox Film Corporation released \"Fox Grandeur News\" and \"Fox Movietone Follies of 1929\" in New York City in the Fox Grandeur process. Other films shot in widescreen were the musical \"Happy Days\" (1929) which premiered at the Roxy Theater, New York City, on February 13, 1930, starring Janet Gaynor and Charles Farrell and a 12-year-old Betty Grable as a chorus girl; \"Song o' My Heart\", a musical feature starring Irish tenor John McCormack and directed by Frank Borzage (\"Seventh Heaven\", \"A Farewell to Arms\"), which was shipped from the labs on March 17, 1930, but never released and may no longer survive, according to film historian Miles Kreuger (the 35\u00a0mm version, however, debuted in New York on March 11, 1930); and the western \"The Big Trail\" (1930) starring John Wayne and Tyrone Power, Sr. which premiered at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood on October 2, 1930, all of which were also made in the 70\u00a0mm Fox Grandeur process.\nRKO Radio Pictures released \"Danger Lights\" with Jean Arthur, Louis Wolheim, and Robert Armstrong on August 21, 1930 in a 65\u00a0mm widescreen process known as NaturalVision, invented by film pioneer George K. Spoor. On November 13, 1930, United Artists released \"The Bat Whispers\" directed by Roland West in a 70\u00a0mm widescreen process known as Magnafilm. Warner Brothers released \"Song of the Flame\" and \"Kismet\" (both 1930) in a widescreen process they called Vitascope.\nIn 1930, after experimenting with the system called Fantom Screen for \"The Trail of '98\" (1928), MGM came out with a system called Realife. MGM filmed \"The Great Meadow\" (1930) in Realife. However, it is unclear whether it was released in that widescreen process due to declining interest of the movie-going public.\nBy 1932, the Great Depression had forced studios to cut back on needless expense and it was not until 1953 that wider aspect ratios were again used in an attempt to stop the fall in attendance due, partially, to the emergence of television in the U.S. However, a few producers and directors, among them Alfred Hitchcock, were reluctant to use the anamorphic widescreen size featured in such formats as Cinemascope. Hitchcock used VistaVision, a non-anamorphic widescreen process developed by Paramount Pictures and Technicolor which could be adjusted to present various flat aspect ratios.\nTypes.\nMasked (or flat) widescreen was introduced in April 1953. The negative is shot exposing the Academy ratio using spherical lenses, but the top and bottom of the picture are hidden or masked off by a metal aperture plate, cut to specifications of the theater's screen, in the projector. Alternatively, a hard matte in the printing or shooting stages may be used to mask off those areas while filming for composition purposes, but an aperture plate is still used to block off the appropriate areas in the theater. A detriment is that the film grain size is thus increased because only part of the image is being expanded to full height. Films are designed to be shown in cinemas in masked widescreen format but the full unmasked frame is sometimes used for television, known as an open matte. In such an instance, a photographer will compose for widescreen, but \"protect\" the full image from things such as microphones and other filming equipment. Standardized \"flat widescreen\" ratios are 1.66:1, 1.75:1, 1.85:1, and 2:1. The 1.85:1 aspect ratio has become the predominant aspect ratio for the format.\n35\u00a0mm anamorphic \u2013 This type of widescreen is used for CinemaScope, Panavision, and several other equivalent processes. The film is essentially shot \"squeezed\", so that the actors appear vertically elongated on the actual film. A special lens inside the projector unsqueezes the image so that it will appear normal. Films shot in CinemaScope or Panavision are usually projected at a aspect ratio, though the historical aspect ratio can be 2.66:1 (original separate magnetic sound aspect ratio), 2.55:1 (original four-track magnetic sound aspect ratio) or 2.35:1 (original mono optical sound aspect ratio, and much later \"stereo variable-area\" aspect ratio, also called Dolby Stereo). The negative is usually 2.66:1 or, in rare cases, 2.55:1 or 2.35:1. The sole purpose of the change to 2.39:1 and, later, to 2.40:1, was to better hide so-called \"negative assembly\" splices (splices employed in the composited camera negative. This was not a production change, rather it was a recommended projection change.)\nA Chilean film, \"Post Mortem\", used anamorphic lenses with 16\u00a0mm film, to be projected at an ultra-widescreen 2.66:1 for a unique look.\nSuper gauges \u2013 The full negative frame, including the area traditionally reserved for the sound track, is filmed using \"full\" aperture, which was standard for silent, but also common for most anamorphic negatives. The print is then shrunk and/or cropped in order to fit it back onto release prints, which include a sound track. The aspect ratio for Super 35, for example, can be set to virtually any projection standard.\nLarge gauge \u2013 A 70\u00a0mm film frame is not only twice as wide as a standard frame but also has greater height (five perfs versus four perfs). Shooting and projecting a film in 70\u00a0mm therefore gives more than four times the image area of non-anamorphic 35\u00a0mm film providing a major improvement in image quality. Few major dramatic narrative films have been filmed entirely on this format since the 1970s; the three most recent are Kenneth Branagh's \"Hamlet\", Paul Thomas Anderson's \"The Master\" and Quentin Tarantino's \"The Hateful Eight\". For many years, large budget pictures shot anamorphically used reserve stocks of 70\u00a0mm film for SFX shots involving CGI or blue-screen compositing as the anamorphic format creates problems with said effects. It has also been used to sometimes strike 70\u00a0mm blow-up prints for \"roadshow\" tours in select cities from the 35\u00a0mm camera negative in order to capitalize on the extra sound channels provided. The introduction of digital sound systems and diminishing number of installed 70\u00a0mm projectors has made a 70\u00a0mm release largely obsolete. However, blowups from 35\u00a0mm formats to IMAX have been used for a limited number of blockbuster films.\nParamount's VistaVision was a larger gauge precursor to 70\u00a0mm film. Introduced in 1954, it ran standard 35\u00a0mm film through the camera horizontally to achieve a widescreen effect using greater negative area, in order to create a finer-grained four-perforation 35\u00a0mm prints in an era where standard monopack stock could not produce finer results. Negative frames were eight perforations wide. Eight-perf photography is sometimes used for shooting special effects in order to produce a finer-grained matte that can be used in optical printing without image degradation, and is notable for its use in Lucasfilm's original three \"Star Wars\" films, among others. Another similar system with horizontal orientation was MGM's \"Arnoldscope\".\nMultiple lens camera/multiple projectors \u2013 The Cinerama system originally involved shooting with three lens camera, and projecting the three resulting films on a curved screen with three synchronized projectors, resulting in an ultrawide aspect ratio of 2.89. Later Cinerama movies were shot in 70\u00a0mm anamorphic (see below), and the resultant widescreen image was divided into three by optical printers to produce the final threefold prints.\nThe technical drawbacks of Cinerama are discussed in its own article. Only two narrative feature films, \"The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm\" and \"How the West Was Won\", were filmed in three-camera Cinerama, and several sequences from the latter were actually filmed in Ultra-Panavision. With the exception of a few films created sporadically for use in specialty Cinerama theaters, the format is effectively obsolete.\nA non-Cinerama, three-projector process was pioneered for the final reel of Abel Gance's epic film \"Napol\u00e9on\" (1927)\nThe process, called Polyvision by Gance, consisted of three 1.33 images side by side, so that the total aspect ratio of the image is 4:1. The technical difficulties in mounting a full screening of the film, however, make most theaters unwilling or unable to show it in this format.\nBetween 1956 and 1957, the Soviets developed Kinopanorama, which is identical in most respects to the original three-camera Cinerama.\nAnamorphic 70\u00a0mm \u2013 70\u00a0mm with anamorphic lenses, popularly known as \"Ultra Panavision\" or \"MGM Camera 65\", creates an even wider high-quality picture. This camera process was used for the remake of \"Ben-Hur\" (1959), resulting in an aspect ratio of 2.76:1, one of the widest projected images ever used for a feature film. The 70\u00a0mm anamorphic format was not commonly used, due to the very high production costs, although it was favored for epic films such as \"Ben-Hur\" in order to capture wide panoramic landscapes and high-budget scenes with thousands of extras and enormous sets. This system is obsolete.\nTelevision.\nThe original screen ratio for TV broadcasts was 4:3 (1.33:1). This was the same aspect ratio as most cinema screens and films at the time TV was first sold commercially. 1930s and 1940s films in 4:3, such as \"Gone with the Wind\", have always been displayed on television in 4:3, filling the entire frame.\nWhen preparing a film that was originally intended to be displayed in widescreen for TV broadcast the material was often edited with the sides truncated, using techniques such as center cut or pan and scan. Sometimes, in the case of Super 35, the full film negative was shown unmasked on TV (that is, with the hard matte removed). However, this causes the 4:3 image not to be what the director intended the audience to see, and sometimes boom mics, edited out of the shot when the picture is matted, can be visible. Current TVs feature a 16:9 aspect ratio, allowing them to display a 16:9 picture without letterboxing.\nJapan saw its first commercially available widescreen TV models in 1992 and TV networks began broadcasting in EDTV widescreen in 1995, starting with NTV.\nThe first widescreen TV sold in the United States was the Thomson Consumer Electronics RCA CinemaScreen, released in 1993. In Europe, the PAL and the French SECAM Standard Definition systems employed higher resolutions than the US NTSC Standard Definition system, which meant the quality issues of letterboxed or matted movies on TV were not as severe. There is also an extension to PAL, called PALplus, which allows specially equipped receivers to display a PAL picture as true 16:9 with a full 576 lines of vertical resolution, provided that the station employs the same system. Standard PAL receivers will receive such a broadcast as a 16:9 image letterboxed to 4:3, with a small amount of color noise in the black bars; this \"noise\" is actually the additional lines which are hidden inside the color signal. Clear-Vision supports an equivalent widescreen system for NTSC analogue broadcasting.\nDespite the existence of PALplus and support for widescreen in the DVB-based digital satellite, terrestrial and cable broadcasts in use across Europe, only Belgium, Ireland, the Netherlands, Austria, Germany, the Nordic countries and the UK have adopted widescreen on a large scale, with over half of all widescreen channels available by satellite in Europe targeting those areas. The UK, in particular, began moving to widescreen with the advent of digital terrestrial television in the late 1990s, and commercials were required to be delivered to broadcasters in widescreen as of 1 July 2000, on their widescreen \"C-Day\".\nWidescreen televisions are typically used in conjunction with Digital, High-Definition Television (HDTV) receivers, or Standard-Definition (SD) DVD players and other digital television sources. Digital material is provided to widescreen TVs either in high-definition format, which is natively 16:9 (1.78:1), or as an anamorphically-compressed standard-definition picture. Typically, devices decoding Digital Standard-Definition pictures can be programmed to provide anamorphic widescreen formatting, for 16:9 sets, and formatting for 4:3 sets. Pan-and-scan mode can be used on 4:3 if the producers of the material have included the necessary panning data; if this data is absent, letterboxing or centre cut-out is used.\nHD DVD and Blu-ray players were introduced in 2006. Toshiba ceased production of HD DVD players in early 2008. Consumer camcorders are also available in the HD-video format at fairly low prices. These developments will result in more options for viewing widescreen images on television monitors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33265", "revid": "359672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33265", "title": "Winston Churchill", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1940\u20131945; 1951\u20131955)\nSir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill (30 November 1874 \u2013 24 January 1965) was a British statesman, military officer, and writer who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1940 to 1945 (during the Second World War) and again from 1951 to 1955. For some 62 of the years between 1900 and 1964, he was a Member of Parliament (MP) and represented a total of five constituencies over that time. Ideologically an adherent to economic liberalism and imperialism, he was for most of his career a member of the Conservative Party, which he led from 1940 to 1955. He was a member of the Liberal Party from 1904 to 1924.\nOf mixed English and American parentage, Churchill was born in Oxfordshire into the wealthy, aristocratic Spencer family. He joined the British Army in 1895 and saw action in British India, the Mahdist War and the Second Boer War, gaining fame as a war correspondent and writing books about his campaigns. Elected a Conservative MP in 1900, he defected to the Liberals in 1904. In H. H. Asquith's Liberal government, Churchill was president of the Board of Trade and later Home Secretary, championing prison reform and workers' social security. As First Lord of the Admiralty before and during the First World War he oversaw the disastrous naval attack on the Dardanelles (a prelude to the Gallipoli campaign) and was demoted to Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. He resigned in November 1915 and joined the Royal Scots Fusiliers on the Western Front for six months. In 1917, he returned to government under David Lloyd George and served successively as Minister of Munitions, Secretary of State for War, Secretary of State for Air, and Secretary of State for the Colonies, overseeing the Anglo-Irish Treaty and British foreign policy in the Middle East. After two years out of Parliament, he was Chancellor of the Exchequer in Stanley Baldwin's Conservative government, returning sterling in 1925 to the gold standard, depressing the UK economy.\nOut of government during his so-called \"wilderness years\" in the 1930s, Churchill took the lead in calling for rearmament to counter the threat of militarism in Nazi Germany. At the outbreak of the Second World War he was re-appointed First Lord of the Admiralty. In May 1940, he became prime minister, succeeding Neville Chamberlain. Churchill formed a national government and oversaw British involvement in the Allied war effort against the Axis powers, resulting in victory in 1945. After the Conservatives' defeat in the 1945 general election, he became Leader of the Opposition. Amid the developing Cold War with the Soviet Union, he publicly warned of an \"iron curtain\" of Soviet influence in Europe and promoted European unity. Between his terms, he wrote several books recounting his experience during the war. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1953. He lost the 1950 election but was returned to office in 1951. His second term was preoccupied with foreign affairs, especially Anglo-American relations and preservation of what remained of the British Empire, with India no longer a part of it. Domestically, his government's priority was their extensive and successful housebuilding programme. In declining health, Churchill resigned in 1955, remaining an MP until 1964. Upon his death in 1965, he was given a state funeral.\nOne of the 20th century's most significant figures, Churchill remains popular in the UK. He is generally viewed as a victorious wartime leader who played an integral role in defending liberal democracy against the spread of fascism. A staunch imperialist, he has sometimes been criticised for comments on race, in addition to some wartime decisions such as area bombing. Historians rank Churchill as one of the greatest British prime ministers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nChildhood and schooling: 1874\u20131895.\nWinston Leonard Spencer Churchill was born on 30 November 1874 at his family's ancestral home, Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire. On his father's side, he was a member of the aristocracy as a descendant of John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough. His father, Lord Randolph Churchill, representing the Conservative Party, had been elected member of parliament (MP) for Woodstock in February 1874. His mother was Jennie, Lady Randolph Churchill, a daughter of Leonard Jerome, an American businessman.\nIn 1876, Churchill's paternal grandfather, John Spencer-Churchill, 7th Duke of Marlborough, was appointed Viceroy of Ireland. Randolph became his private secretary and the family relocated to Dublin. Winston's brother, Jack, was born there in 1880. For much of the 1880s, Randolph and Jennie were effectively estranged, and the brothers cared for by their nanny, Elizabeth Everest. When she died in 1895, Churchill wrote \"she had been my dearest and most intimate friend during the whole of the twenty years I had lived\".\nChurchill began boarding school at St George's in Ascot, Berkshire, aged 7, but he was not academic and his behaviour was poor. In 1884, he transferred to Brunswick School in Hove, where his academic performance improved. In April 1888, aged 13, he passed the entrance exam for Harrow School. His father wanted him to prepare for a military career, so his last three years at Harrow were in the army form. After two unsuccessful attempts to gain admittance to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he succeeded. He was accepted as a cadet in the cavalry, starting in September 1893. His father died in January 1895.\nCuba, India, and Sudan: 1895\u20131899.\nIn February 1895, Churchill was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the 4th Queen's Own Hussars regiment of the British Army, based at Aldershot. Eager to witness military action, he used his mother's influence to get posted to a war zone. In the autumn, he and friend Reggie Barnes, went to observe the Cuban War of Independence and became involved in skirmishes after joining Spanish troops attempting to suppress independence fighters. Churchill sent reports to the \"Daily Graphic\" in London. He proceeded to New York and wrote to his mother about \"what an extraordinary people the Americans are!\" With the Hussars, he went to Bombay in October 1896. Based in Bangalore, he was in India for 19 months, visiting Calcutta and joining expeditions to Hyderabad and the North West Frontier.\nIn India, Churchill began a self-education project, reading widely including Plato, Edward Gibbon, Charles Darwin and Thomas Babington Macaulay. The books were sent by his mother, with whom he shared frequent correspondence. To learn about politics, he asked her to send him copies of \"The Annual Register\", the political almanack. In an 1898 letter, he referred to his beliefs, saying: \"I do not accept the Christian or any other form of religious belief\". Churchill had been christened in the Church of England but underwent a virulently anti-Christian phase in his youth, and as an adult was an agnostic. In another letter to a cousin, he referred to religion as \"a delicious narcotic\" and expressed a preference for Protestantism over Roman Catholicism because he felt it \"a step nearer Reason\".\nInterested in parliamentary affairs, Churchill declared himself \"a Liberal in all but name\", adding he could never endorse the Liberal Party's support for Irish home rule. Instead, he allied himself to the Tory democracy wing of the Conservatives and on a visit home, gave his first speech for the party's Primrose League at Claverton Down. Mixing reformist and conservative perspectives, he supported the promotion of secular, non-denominational education while opposing women's suffrage.\nChurchill volunteered to join Bindon Blood's Malakand Field Force in its campaign against Mohmand rebels in the Swat Valley of north-west India. Blood accepted on condition he was assigned as a journalist, the beginning of Churchill's writing career. He returned to Bangalore in October 1897 and wrote his first book, \"The Story of the Malakand Field Force\", which received positive reviews. He wrote his only work of fiction, \"Savrola\", a Ruritanian romance. To keep occupied, Churchill embraced writing as what Roy Jenkins calls his \"whole habit\", especially through his career when he was out of office. Writing was his safeguard against recurring depression, which he referred to as his \"black dog\".\nUsing London contacts, Churchill got attached to General Herbert Kitchener's campaign in the Sudan as a 21st Lancers subaltern while, working as a journalist for \"The Morning Post\". After participating in one of the British Army's last cavalry charges in the Battle of Omdurman in September 1898, the 21st Lancers were stood down. In October, Churchill returned to England and began writing \"The River War\" about the campaign; it was published in 1899. He decided to leave the army as he was critical of Kitchener's actions, particularly the unmerciful treatment of enemy wounded and his desecration of Muhammad Ahmad's tomb.\nOn 2 December 1898, Churchill embarked for India to settle his military business and complete his resignation. He spent much time playing polo, the only ball sport in which he was ever interested. Having left the Hussars, he sailed from Bombay on 20 March 1899, determined to launch a career in politics.\nPolitics and South Africa: 1899\u20131901.\nChurchill spoke at Conservative meetings and was selected as one of the party's two candidates for the June 1899 Oldham by-election. While campaigning, he referred to himself as \"a Conservative and a Tory Democrat\". Although the seats had been held by the Conservatives, the result was a narrow Liberal victory.\nAs a journalist for the \"Morning Post\", Churchill anticipated the outbreak of the Second Boer War between Britain and the Boer republics, leading him to sail to South Africa. In October, he travelled to the conflict zone near Ladysmith, which was under siege by Boer troops, and then headed to Colenso. At the Battle of Chieveley, his train was derailed by Boer artillery shelling, and he was captured as a prisoner of war (POW) and interned in a POW camp in Pretoria. Churchill made a formal protest about his internment to the Transvaal Secretary of State, asserting his status as a non-combatant journalist, but he was told he had invalidated that by carrying a revolver. In December, Churchill escaped and evaded his captors by stowing aboard freight trains and hiding in a mine. He made it to safety in Portuguese East Africa. His escape attracted much publicity.\nIn January 1900, Churchill briefly rejoined the army as a lieutenant in the South African Light Horse regiment, joining Redvers Buller's fight to relieve the Siege of Ladysmith and take Pretoria. He was among the first British troops into both places. With his cousin Charles Spencer-Churchill, 9th Duke of Marlborough, he demanded and received the surrender of 52 Boer prison camp guards. Throughout the war, he publicly chastised anti-Boer prejudices, calling for them to be treated with \"generosity and tolerance\", and afterwards urged the British to be magnanimous in victory. In July, having resigned his lieutenancy, he returned to Britain. His \"Morning Post\" dispatches had been published as \"London to Ladysmith via Pretoria\" and sold well.\nChurchill rented a flat in London's Mayfair, using it as his base for six years. He stood again as a Conservative candidate at Oldham in the October 1900 general election, securing a narrow victory to become a Member of Parliament aged 25. In the same month, he published \"Ian Hamilton's March\", a book about his South African experiences, which became the focus of a lecture tour in November through Britain, America, and Canada. Members of Parliament were unpaid and the tour was a financial necessity. In America, Churchill met Mark Twain, William McKinley, and Theodore Roosevelt, who he did not get on with. In spring 1901, he gave lectures in Paris, Madrid, and Gibraltar.\nConservative MP: 1901\u20131904.\nIn February 1901, Churchill took his seat in the House of Commons, where his maiden speech gained widespread coverage. He associated with a group of Conservatives known as the Hughligans, but was critical of the Conservative government on various issues, especially increases in army funding. He believed additional military expenditure should go to the navy. This upset the Conservative front bench but was supported by Liberals, with whom he increasingly socialised, particularly Liberal Imperialists like H. H. Asquith. Churchill later wrote that he \"drifted steadily to the left\". He privately considered \"the gradual creation by an evolutionary process of a Democratic or Progressive wing to the Conservative Party\", or alternately a \"Central Party\" to unite the Conservatives and Liberals.\nBy 1903, there was division between Churchill and the Conservatives, largely because he opposed their promotion of protectionism. As a free trader, he helped found the Free Food League. Churchill sensed that the animosity of party members would prevent him gaining a Cabinet position under a Conservative government. The Liberal Party was attracting growing support, and so his defection in 1904 may have been influenced by ambition. He increasingly voted with the Liberals. For example, he opposed an increase in military expenditure, supported a Liberal bill to restore legal rights to trade unions, and opposed the introduction of import tariffs. Arthur Balfour's government announced protectionist legislation in October 1903. Two months later, incensed by Churchill's criticism of the government, the Oldham Conservative Association informed him it would not support his candidature at the next election.\nIn May 1904, Churchill opposed the government's proposed Aliens Bill, designed to curb Jewish immigration. He stated that the bill would \"appeal to insular prejudice against foreigners, to racial prejudice against Jews, and to labour prejudice against competition\" and expressed himself in favour of \"the old tolerant and generous practice of free entry and asylum to which this country has so long adhered and from which it has so greatly gained\". On 31 May 1904, he crossed the floor to sit as a member of the Liberal Party.\nLiberal MP: 1904\u20131908.\nAs a Liberal, Churchill attacked government policy and gained a reputation as a radical under the influences of John Morley and David Lloyd George. In December 1905, Balfour resigned as prime minister and King Edward\u00a0VII invited the Liberal leader Henry Campbell-Bannerman to replace him. Hoping to secure a working majority, Campbell-Bannerman called a general election in January 1906, which the Liberals won in a massive landslide. Churchill won the Manchester North West seat, and his biography of his father was published, for which he received an advance payment of \u00a38,000. It was generally well received. The first biography of Churchill himself, written by the Liberal MacCallum Scott, was also published around this time.\nIn the new government, Churchill became Under-Secretary of State for the Colonial Office, a junior ministerial position he had requested. He worked beneath the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Victor Bruce, 9th Earl of Elgin, and took Edward Marsh as his secretary; Marsh remained his secretary for 25 years. Churchill's first task was helping to draft a constitution for the Transvaal; and he helped oversee the formation of a government in the Orange River Colony. In dealing with southern Africa, he sought to ensure equality between the British and Boers. He announced a gradual phasing out of the use of Chinese indentured labourers in South Africa; he and the government decided a sudden ban would cause too much upset and might damage the colony's economy. He expressed concerns about the relations between European settlers and the black African population; after the Zulu launched their Bambatha Rebellion in Natal, Churchill complained about the \"disgusting butchery of the natives\" by Europeans.\nAsquith government: 1908\u20131915.\nPresident of the Board of Trade: 1908\u20131910.\nWith Campbell-Bannerman terminally ill, Asquith became prime minister in April 1908. He appointed Churchill as President of the Board of Trade. Aged 33, Churchill was the youngest Cabinet member since 1866. Newly appointed Cabinet ministers were legally obliged to seek re-election at a by-election. On 24 April, Churchill lost the Manchester North West by-election to the Conservative candidate by 429 votes. On 9 May, the Liberals stood him in the safe seat of Dundee, where he won comfortably.\nChurchill proposed marriage to Clementine Hozier; they were married on 12 September 1908 at St Margaret's, Westminster and honeymooned in Baveno, Venice, and Veve\u0159\u00ed Castle in Moravia. They lived at 33 Eccleston Square, London, and their first daughter, Diana, was born in 1909. The success of their marriage was important to Churchill's career as Clementine's unbroken affection provided him with a secure and happy background.\nOne of Churchill's first tasks as a minister was to arbitrate in an industrial dispute among ship-workers and employers, on the River Tyne. He afterwards established a Standing Court of Arbitration to deal with industrial disputes, establishing a reputation as a conciliator. He worked with Lloyd George to champion social reform. He promoted what he called a \"network of State intervention and regulation\" akin to that in Germany.\nContinuing Lloyd George's work, Churchill introduced the Mines Eight Hours Bill, which prohibited miners from working more than an eight-hour day. In 1909, he introduced the Trade Boards Bill, creating Trade Boards which could prosecute exploitative employers. Passing with a large majority, it established the principle of a minimum wage and the right to have meal breaks. In May 1909, he proposed the Labour Exchanges Bill to establish over 200 Labour Exchanges through which the unemployed would be assisted in finding employment. He promoted the idea of an unemployment insurance scheme, which would be part-funded by the state.\nTo ensure funding for their reforms, Lloyd George and Churchill denounced Reginald McKenna's policy of naval expansion, refusing to believe war with Germany was inevitable. As Chancellor, Lloyd George presented his \"People's Budget\" on 29 April 1909, calling it a war budget to eliminate poverty. With Churchill as his closest ally, Lloyd George proposed unprecedented taxes on the rich to fund Liberal welfare programmes. The budget was vetoed by the Conservative peers who dominated the House of Lords. His social reforms under threat, Churchill became president of the Budget League, and warned that upper-class obstruction could anger working-class Britons and lead to class war. The government called the January 1910 general election, which resulted in a Liberal victory; Churchill retained his seat at Dundee. He proposed abolition of the House of Lords in a cabinet memo, suggesting it be succeeded by a unicameral system, or smaller second chamber that lacked an in-built advantage for the Conservatives. In April, the Lords relented and the People's Budget passed. Churchill continued to campaign against the House of Lords and assisted passage of the Parliament Act 1911 which reduced and restricted its powers.\nHome Secretary: 1910\u20131911.\nIn February 1910, Churchill was promoted to Home Secretary, giving him control over the police and prison services; he implemented a prison reform programme. Measures included a distinction between criminal and political prisoners, with rules for the latter being relaxed. There were educational innovations like the establishment of libraries, and a requirement to stage entertainments four times a year. The rules on solitary confinement were relaxed, and Churchill proposed abolition of automatic imprisonment of those who failed to pay fines. Imprisonment of people aged between 16 and 21 was abolished except for the most serious offences. Churchill reduced (\"commuted\") 21 of the 43 death (\"capital\") sentences passed while he was Home Secretary.\nA major domestic issue was women's suffrage. Churchill supported giving women the vote, but would only back a bill to that effect if it had majority support from the (male) electorate. His proposed solution was a referendum, but this found no favour with Asquith and women's suffrage remained unresolved until 1918. Many suffragettes believed Churchill was a committed opponent, and targeted his meetings for protest. In November 1910, the suffragist Hugh Franklin attacked Churchill with a whip; Franklin was imprisoned for six weeks.\nIn November 1910, Churchill had to deal with the Tonypandy riots, in which coal miners in the Rhondda Valley violently protested against working conditions. The Chief Constable of Glamorgan requested troops to help police quell the rioting. Churchill, learning that the troops were already travelling, allowed them to go as far as Swindon and Cardiff, but blocked their deployment; he was concerned their use lead to bloodshed. Instead he sent 270 London police, who were not equipped with firearms, to assist. As the riots continued, he offered the protesters an interview with the government's chief industrial arbitrator, which they accepted. Privately, Churchill regarded the mine owners and striking miners as \"very unreasonable\". \"The Times\" and other media outlets accused him of being soft on the rioters; in contrast, many in the Labour Party, which was linked to the trade unions, regarded him as too heavy-handed. Churchill incurred the long-term suspicion of the labour movement.\nAsquith called a general election in December 1910, and the Liberals were re-elected with Churchill secure in Dundee. In January 1911, Churchill became involved in the Siege of Sidney Street; three Latvian burglars had killed police officers and hidden in a house in the East End of London, surrounded by police. Churchill stood with the police though he did not direct their operation. After the house caught fire, he told the fire brigade not to proceed into the house because of the threat posed by the armed men. Afterwards, two of the burglars were found dead. Although he faced criticism for his decision, he said he \"thought it better to let the house burn down rather than spend good British lives in rescuing those ferocious rascals\".\nIn March 1911, Churchill introduced the second reading of the Coal Mines Bill; when implemented, it imposed stricter safety standards. He formulated the Shops Bill to improve working conditions of shop workers; it faced opposition from shop owners and only passed in a much emasculated form. In April, Lloyd George introduced the first health and unemployment insurance legislation, the National Insurance Act 1911, which Churchill had been instrumental in drafting. In May, Clementine gave birth to their second child, Randolph, named after Winston's father. In response to escalating civil strife in 1911, Churchill sent troops into Liverpool to quell protesting dockers and rallied against a national railway strike.\nDuring the Agadir Crisis of April 1911, when there was a threat of war between France and Germany, Churchill suggested an alliance with France and Russia to safeguard the independence of Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands to counter possible German expansionism. The Crisis had a profound effect on Churchill and he altered his views about the need for naval expansion.\nFirst Lord of the Admiralty.\nIn October 1911, Asquith appointed Churchill First Lord of the Admiralty, and he took up official residence at Admiralty House. He created a naval war staff and, over the next two and a half years, focused on naval preparation, visiting naval stations and dockyards, seeking to improve morale, and scrutinising German naval developments. After Germany passed its 1912 Naval Law to increase warship production, Churchill vowed that for every new German battleship, Britain would build two. He invited Germany to engage in a mutual de-escalation, but this was refused.\nChurchill pushed for higher pay and greater recreational facilities for naval staff, more submarines, and a renewed focus on the Royal Naval Air Service, encouraging them to experiment with how aircraft could be used for military purposes. He coined the term \"seaplane\" and ordered 100 to be constructed. Some Liberals objected to his level of naval expenditure; in December 1913 he threatened to resign if his proposal for 4 new battleships in 1914\u201315 was rejected. In June 1914, he convinced the House of Commons to authorise the government purchase of a 51% share in the profits of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, to secure oil access for the navy.\nThe central issue in Britain was Irish Home Rule and, in 1912, Asquith's government introduced the Home Rule Bill. Churchill supported it and urged Ulster Unionists to accept it as he opposed the Partition of Ireland. Concerning the possibility of partition, Churchill stated: \"Whatever Ulster's right may be, she cannot stand in the way of the whole of the rest of Ireland. Half a province cannot impose a permanent veto on the nation. Half a province cannot obstruct forever the reconciliation between the British and Irish democracies\". Speaking in the House of Commons on 16 February 1922, Churchill said: \"What Irishmen all over the world most desire is not hostility against this country, but the unity of their own\".\nFollowing a Cabinet decision, he boosted the naval presence in Ireland to deal with any Unionist uprising. Seeking a compromise, Churchill suggested Ireland remain part of a federal UK, but this angered Liberals and Irish nationalists.\nAs First Lord, Churchill was tasked with overseeing Britain's naval effort when the First World War began in August 1914. The navy transported 120,000 troops to France and began a blockade of Germany's North Sea ports. Churchill sent submarines to the Baltic Sea to assist the Russian Navy and sent the Marine Brigade to Ostend, forcing a reallocation of German troops. In September, Churchill assumed full responsibility for Britain's aerial defence. On 7 October, Clementine gave birth to their third child, Sarah. In October, Churchill visited Antwerp to observe Belgian defences against the besieging Germans and promised reinforcements. Soon afterwards, Antwerp fell to the Germans and Churchill was criticised in the press. He maintained that his actions had prolonged resistance and enabled the Allies to secure Calais and Dunkirk. In November, Asquith called a War Council including Churchill. Churchill set the development of the tank on the right track and financed its creation with Admiralty funds.\nChurchill was interested in the Middle Eastern theatre, and wanted to relieve pressure on the Russians in the Caucasus by staging attacks against Turkey in the Dardanelles. He hoped that the British could even seize Constantinople. Approval was given and, in March 1915, an Anglo-French task force attempted a naval bombardment of Turkish defences. In April, the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, including the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC), began its assault at Gallipoli. Both campaigns failed and Churchill was held by many MPs, particularly Conservatives, to be responsible. In May, Asquith agreed under parliamentary pressure to form an all-party coalition government, but the Conservatives' condition of entry was that Churchill must be removed from the Admiralty. Churchill pleaded his case with Asquith and Conservative leader Bonar Law but had to accept demotion.\nMilitary service, 1915\u20131916.\nOn 25 November 1915, Churchill resigned from the government, although he remained an MP. Asquith rejected his request to be appointed Governor-General of British East Africa. Churchill decided to return to active service with the Army and was attached to the 2nd Grenadier Guards, on the Western Front. In January 1916, he was temporarily promoted to lieutenant-colonel and given command of the 6th Royal Scots Fusiliers. The battalion was moved to a sector of the Belgian Front near Ploegsteert. For three months, they faced continual shelling, though no German offensive. Churchill narrowly escaped death when, during a visit by his cousin the Duke of Marlborough, a large piece of shrapnel fell between them. In May, the 6th Royal Scots Fusiliers were merged into the 15th Division. Churchill did not request a new command, instead securing permission to leave active service. His temporary promotion ended on 16 May 1916, when he returned to the rank of major.\nBack in the House of Commons, Churchill spoke out on war issues, calling for conscription to be extended to the Irish, greater recognition of soldiers' bravery, and for the introduction of steel helmets. It was in November 1916 that he penned \"The greater application of mechanical power to the prosecution of an offensive on land\", but it fell on deaf ears. He was frustrated at being out of office, but was repeatedly blamed for the Gallipoli disaster by the pro-Conservative press. Churchill argued his case before the Dardanelles Commission, whose report placed no blame on him personally for the campaign's failure.\nLloyd George government: 1916\u20131922.\nMinister of Munitions: 1917\u20131919.\nIn October 1916, Asquith resigned as prime minister and was succeeded by Lloyd George who, in May 1917, sent Churchill to inspect the French war effort. In July, Churchill was appointed Minister of Munitions. He negotiated an end to a strike in munitions factories along the Clyde and increased munitions production. In his October 1917 letter to his Cabinet colleagues, he penned the plan of attack for the next year, that would bring final victory to the Allies. He ended a second strike, in June 1918, by threatening to conscript strikers into the army. In the House of Commons, Churchill voted in support of the Representation of the People Act 1918, which gave some women the right to vote. In November 1918, four days after the Armistice, Churchill's fourth child, Marigold, was born.\nSecretary of State for War and Air: 1919\u20131921.\nLloyd George called a general election for 14 December 1918. During the campaign, Churchill called for nationalisation of the railways, a control on monopolies, tax reform, and the creation of a League of Nations to prevent wars. He was returned as MP for Dundee and, though the Conservatives won a majority, Lloyd George was retained as prime minister. In January 1919, Lloyd George moved Churchill to the War Office as both Secretary of State for War and Secretary of State for Air.\nChurchill was responsible for demobilising the army, though he convinced Lloyd George to keep a million men conscripted for the British Army of the Rhine. Churchill was one of the few government figures who opposed harsh measures against Germany, and he cautioned against demobilising the German Army, warning they might be needed as a bulwark against Soviet Russia. He was outspoken against Vladimir Lenin's Bolshevik government in Russia. He initially supported using British troops to assist the anti-Bolshevik White forces in the Russian Civil War, but soon recognised the people's desire to bring them home. After the Soviets won the civil war, Churchill proposed a \"cordon sanitaire\" around the country.\nIn the Irish War of Independence, he supported the use of the paramilitary Black and Tans to combat Irish revolutionaries. After British troops in Iraq clashed with Kurdish rebels, Churchill authorised two squadrons to the area, proposing they be equipped with \"poison gas\" to be used to \"inflict punishment upon recalcitrant natives without inflicting grave injury upon them\", although this was never implemented. He saw the occupation of Iraq as a drain on Britain and proposed, unsuccessfully, that the government should hand control back to Turkey.\nSecretary of State for the Colonies: 1921\u20131922.\nChurchill became Secretary of State for the Colonies in February 1921. The following month, the first exhibit of his paintings took place in Paris, with Churchill exhibiting under a pseudonym. In May, his mother died, followed in August by his daughter Marigold, from sepsis. Churchill was haunted by Marigold's death for the rest of his life.\nChurchill was involved in negotiations with Sinn F\u00e9in leaders and helped draft the Anglo-Irish Treaty. He was responsible for reducing the cost of occupying the Middle East, and was involved in the installations of Faisal I of Iraq and Abdullah I of Jordan. Churchill travelled to Mandatory Palestine where, as a supporter of Zionism, he refused an Arab Palestinian petition to prohibit Jewish migration. He did allow temporary restrictions following the Jaffa riots.\nIn September 1922, the Chanak Crisis erupted as Turkish forces threatened to occupy the Dardanelles neutral zone, which was policed by the British army based in Chanak. Churchill and Lloyd George favoured military resistance to any Turkish advance but the majority Conservatives in the coalition government opposed it. A political debacle ensued which resulted in the Conservative withdrawal from the government, precipitating the November 1922 general election.\nAlso in September, Churchill's fifth and last child, Mary, was born, and in the same month he purchased Chartwell, in Kent, which became his family home. In October 1922, he underwent an appendectomy. While he was in hospital, Lloyd George's coalition was dissolved. In the general election, Churchill lost his Dundee seat to Edwin Scrymgeour, a prohibitionist candidate. Later, he wrote that he was \"without an office, without a seat, without a party, and without an appendix\". He was elevated as one of 50 members of the Order of the Companions of Honour, as named in Lloyd George's 1922 Dissolution Honours list.\nOut of Parliament: 1922\u20131924.\nChurchill spent much of the next six months at the Villa R\u00eave d'Or near Cannes, where he devoted himself to painting and writing his memoirs. He wrote an autobiographical history of the war, \"The World Crisis\". The first volume was published in April 1923 and the rest over the next ten years. After the 1923 general election was called, seven Liberal associations asked Churchill to stand as their candidate, and he selected Leicester West, but did not win. A Labour government led by Ramsay MacDonald took power. Churchill had hoped they would be defeated by a Conservative-Liberal coalition. He strongly opposed the MacDonald government's decision to loan money to Soviet Russia and feared the signing of an Anglo-Soviet Treaty.\nIn March 1924, alienated by Liberal support for Labour, Churchill stood as an independent anti-socialist candidate in the Westminster Abbey by-election but was defeated. In May, he addressed a Conservative meeting in Liverpool and declared there was no longer a place for the Liberal Party in politics. He said that Liberals must back the Conservatives to stop Labour and ensure \"the successful defeat of socialism\". In July, he agreed with Conservative leader Stanley Baldwin that he would be selected as a Conservative candidate in the next general election, which was held on 29 October. Churchill stood at Epping, but described himself as a \"Constitutionalist\". The Conservatives were victorious, and Baldwin formed the new government. Although Churchill had no background in finance or economics, Baldwin appointed him as Chancellor.\nChancellor of the Exchequer: 1924\u20131929.\nBecoming Chancellor on 6 November 1924, Churchill formally rejoined the Conservative Party a year later. As Chancellor, he intended to pursue his free trade principles in the form of \"laissez-faire\" economics, as under the Liberal social reforms. In April 1925, he controversially, albeit reluctantly, restored the gold standard in his first budget, at its 1914 parity, against the advice of leading economists including John Maynard Keynes. The return to gold is held to have caused deflation and resultant unemployment with a devastating impact on the coal industry. Churchill presented five budgets in all to April 1929. Among his measures were reduction of the state pension age from 70 to 65; immediate provision of widow's pensions; reduction of military expenditure; income tax reductions and imposition of taxes on luxury items.\nDuring the General Strike of 1926, Churchill edited the \"British Gazette\", the government's anti-strike propaganda newspaper. After the strike ended, he acted as an intermediary between striking miners and their employers. He called for the introduction of a legally binding minimum wage. In a House of Commons speech in 1926 Churchill made his feelings on the issue of Irish unity clear. He stated that Ireland should be united within itself but also \"united to the British Empire.\" In early 1927, Churchill visited Rome where he met Mussolini, whom he praised for his stand against Leninism.\nThe \"Wilderness Years\": 1929\u20131939.\n\"Marlborough\" and the India Question: 1929\u20131932.\nIn the 1929 general election, Churchill retained his Epping seat, but the Conservatives were defeated, and MacDonald formed his second Labour government. Out of office, Churchill was prone to depression (his \"black dog\") but addressed it by writing. He began work on \"\", a biography of his ancestor John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough. He had developed a reputation for being a heavy drinker, although Jenkins believes that was often exaggerated.\nHoping that the Labour government could be ousted, he gained Baldwin's approval to work towards establishing a Conservative-Liberal coalition, although many Liberals were reluctant. In October 1930, after his return from a trip to North America, Churchill published his autobiography, \"My Early Life\", which sold well and was translated into multiple languages. In January 1931, Churchill resigned from the Conservative Shadow Cabinet because Baldwin supported the government's decision to grant Dominion Status to India. Churchill believed that enhanced home rule status would hasten calls for full independence. He was particularly opposed to Mohandas Gandhi, whom he considered \"a seditious Middle Temple lawyer, now posing as a fakir\". His views enraged Labour and Liberal opinion, though he was supported by many grassroot Conservatives.\nThe October 1931 general election was a landslide victory for the Conservatives. Churchill nearly doubled his majority in Epping, but was not given a ministerial position. The Commons debated Dominion Status for India on 3 December and Churchill insisted on dividing the House, but this backfired as only 43 MPs supported him. He embarked on a lecture tour of North America, hoping to recoup financial losses sustained in the Wall Street crash. On 13 December, he was crossing Fifth Avenue in New York when he was knocked down by a car, suffering a head wound from which he developed neuritis. To further his convalescence, he and Clementine took ship to Nassau for three weeks, but Churchill became depressed about his financial and political losses. He returned to America in late January 1932 and completed most of his lectures before arriving home on 18 March.\nHaving worked on \"Marlborough\" for much of 1932, Churchill in August decided to visit his ancestor's battlefields. In Munich, he met Ernst Hanfstaengl, a friend of Nazi leader Adolf Hitler, who was then rising in prominence. Hanfstaengl tried to arrange a meeting between Churchill and Hitler, but Hitler was unenthusiastic: \"What on earth would I talk to him about?\" Soon after visiting Blenheim, Churchill was affected by paratyphoid fever and spent two weeks at a sanatorium in Salzburg. He returned to Chartwell on 25 September, still working on \"Marlborough\". Two days later, he collapsed after a recurrence of paratyphoid which caused an ulcer to haemorrhage. He was taken to a London nursing home and remained there until late October.\nWarnings about Germany and the abdication crisis: 1933\u20131936.\nAfter Hitler came to power in January 1933, Churchill was quick to recognise the menace of such a regime, and expressed alarm that the British government had reduced air force spending, and warned that Germany would soon overtake Britain in air force production. Armed with data provided clandestinely by senior civil servants, Desmond Morton and Ralph Wigram, Churchill was able to speak with authority about what was happening in Germany, especially the development of the Luftwaffe. He spoke of his concerns in a radio broadcast in November 1934, having denounced the intolerance and militarism of Nazism in the House of Commons. While Churchill regarded Mussolini's regime as a bulwark against the threat of communist revolution, he opposed the Italian invasion of Ethiopia, despite describing the country as a primitive, uncivilised nation. He admired the exiled king of Spain Alfonso XIII and feared Communism was making inroads during the Spanish Civil War. He referred to Franco's army as the \"anti-red movement\", but later became critical of Franco as too close to Mussolini and Hitler.\nBetween October 1933 and September 1938, the four volumes of \"Marlborough: His Life and Times\" were published and sold well. In December 1934, the India Bill entered Parliament and was passed in February 1935. Churchill and 83 other Conservative MPs voted against it. In June 1935, MacDonald resigned and was succeeded as prime minister by Baldwin. Baldwin then led the Conservatives to victory in the 1935 general election; Churchill retained his seat, but was again left out of the government. In January 1936, Edward\u00a0VIII succeeded his father, George\u00a0V, as monarch. His desire to marry an American divorcee, Wallis Simpson, caused the abdication crisis. Churchill supported Edward and clashed with Baldwin on the issue. Afterwards, although Churchill immediately pledged loyalty to George\u00a0VI, he wrote that the abdication was \"premature and probably quite unnecessary\".\nAnti-appeasement: 1937\u20131939.\nIn May 1937, Baldwin resigned and was succeeded as prime minister by Neville Chamberlain. At first, Churchill welcomed Chamberlain's appointment but, in February 1938, matters came to a head after Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden resigned over Chamberlain's appeasement of Mussolini, a policy which Chamberlain was extending towards Hitler. In 1938, Churchill warned the government against appeasement and called for collective action to deter German aggression. Following the Anschluss, Churchill spoke in the House of Commons:\nHe began calling for a mutual defence pact among European states threatened by German expansionism, arguing this was the only way to halt Hitler. In September, Germany mobilised to invade the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia. Churchill visited Chamberlain and urged him to tell Germany that Britain would declare war if the Germans invaded Czechoslovak territory; Chamberlain was unwilling to do this. On 30 September, Chamberlain signed the Munich Agreement, agreeing to allow German annexation of the Sudetenland. Speaking in the House of Commons on 5 October, Churchill called the agreement \"a total and unmitigated defeat\". Following the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, Churchill and his supporters called for the foundation of a national coalition. His popularity increased as a result.\nFirst Lord of the Admiralty: September 1939 to May 1940.\nPhoney War and the Norwegian Campaign.\nOn 3 September 1939, the day Britain declared war on Germany, Chamberlain reappointed Churchill as First Lord of the Admiralty and he joined Chamberlain's war cabinet. Churchill was a highest-profile minister during the so-called \"Phoney War\". Churchill was ebullient after the Battle of the River Plate on 13 December 1939 and welcomed home the crews, congratulating them on \"a brilliant sea fight\". On 16 February 1940, Churchill ordered Captain Philip Vian of the destroyer to board the German supply ship in Norwegian waters freeing 299 British merchant seamen who had been captured by the . These actions, and his speeches, enhanced Churchill's reputation. He was concerned about German naval activity in the Baltic and wanted to send a naval force, but this was soon changed to a plan, codenamed \"Operation Wilfred\", to mine Norwegian waters and stop iron ore shipments from Narvik to Germany. Due to disagreements, \"Wilfred\" was delayed until 8 April 1940, the day before the German invasion of Norway.\nNorway Debate and Chamberlain's resignation.\nAfter the Allies failed to prevent the German occupation of Norway, the Commons held a debate from 7 to 9 May on the government's conduct of the war. This became known as the Norway Debate, one of the most significant events in parliamentary history. On the second day, the Labour opposition called for a division which was in effect a vote of no confidence in Chamberlain's government. Churchill was called upon to wind up the debate, which placed him in the difficult position of having to defend the government without damaging his prestige. Although the government won the vote, its majority was drastically reduced amid calls for a national government.\nEarly on 10 May, German forces invaded Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands as a prelude to their assault on France. Since the division vote, Chamberlain had been trying to form a coalition, but Labour declared on the Friday they would not serve under his leadership, although they would accept another Conservative. The only two candidates were Churchill and Lord Halifax, the Foreign Secretary. The matter had already been discussed at a meeting on the 9th between Chamberlain, Halifax, Churchill, and David Margesson, the government Chief Whip. Halifax admitted he could not govern effectively as a member of the House of Lords, so Chamberlain advised the King to send for Churchill, who became prime minister. Churchill later wrote of a profound sense of relief, as he now had authority over the whole scene. He believed his life so far had been \"a preparation for this hour and for this trial\".\nPrime Minister: 1940\u20131945.\nDunkirk to Pearl Harbor: May 1940 to December 1941.\nWar ministry created.\nChurchill began his premiership by forming a war cabinet: Chamberlain as Lord President of the Council, Labour leader Clement Attlee as Lord Privy Seal (later Deputy Prime Minister), Halifax as Foreign Secretary and Labour's Arthur Greenwood as a minister without portfolio. In practice, these five were augmented by the service chiefs and ministers who attended most meetings. The cabinet changed in size and membership as the war progressed, a key appointment being the leading trades unionist Ernest Bevin as Minister of Labour and National Service. In response to criticisms, Churchill created and assumed the position of Minister of Defence, making him the most powerful wartime prime minister in history. He drafted outside experts into government to fulfil vital functions, especially on the Home Front. These included friends like Lord Beaverbrook and Frederick Lindemann, who became the government's scientific advisor.\nIn May, Churchill had still been unpopular with many Conservatives and most of the Labour Party. Chamberlain remained Conservative Party leader until, dying of cancer, he retired in October. By that time, Churchill had won over his doubters and his succession as leader was a formality.\nResolve to fight on.\nAt the end of May, with the British Expeditionary Force in retreat to Dunkirk and the Fall of France imminent, Halifax proposed the government should explore a peace settlement using the still-neutral Mussolini as an intermediary. There were high-level meetings from 26 to 28 May, including with the French premier Paul Reynaud. Churchill's resolve was to fight on, even if France capitulated, but his position remained precarious until Chamberlain resolved to support him. Churchill had the full support of the two Labour members but knew he could not survive as prime minister if both Chamberlain and Halifax were against him. By gaining the support of his outer cabinet, Churchill outmanoeuvred Halifax and won Chamberlain over.\nChurchill succeeded as an orator despite being handicapped from childhood with a speech impediment. He had a lateral lisp and was unable to pronounce the letter \"s\", verbalising it with a slur. He worked on his pronunciation by repeating phrases designed to cure his problem with the sibilant \"s\". He was ultimately successful, turning the impediment into an asset, as when he called Hitler a \"Nar-zee\" (rhymes with \"khazi\"; emphasis on the \"z\"), rather than a Nazi (\"ts\"). His first speech as prime minister, delivered to the Commons on 13 May, was the \"blood, toil, tears and sweat\" speech. Churchill made it plain to the nation that a long road lay ahead and that victory was the final goal:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would say to the House... that I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat. We have before us an ordeal of the most grievous kind. You ask, what is our policy? I will say: it is to wage war, by sea, land and air, with all our might and with all the strength that God can give us; to wage war against a monstrous tyranny, never surpassed in the dark, lamentable catalogue of human crime. That is our policy. You ask, what is our aim? I can answer in one word: it is victory, victory at all costs, victory in spite of all terror, victory, however long and hard the road may be; for without victory, there is no survival.\nChurchill's use of rhetoric hardened public opinion against a peaceful resolution \u2013 Jenkins says Churchill's speeches were \"an inspiration for the nation, and a catharsis for Churchill himself\".\nOperation Dynamo and the Battle of France.\nThe Dunkirk evacuation of 338,226 Allied servicemen, ended on 4 June when the French rearguard surrendered. The total was far in excess of expectations and gave rise to a popular view Dunkirk had been a miracle, even a victory. Churchill himself referred to \"a miracle of deliverance\" in his \"we shall fight on the beaches\" speech to the Commons that afternoon. The speech ended on a note of defiance, with a clear appeal to the United States:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We shall go on to the end. We shall fight in France, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air. We shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be. We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills. We shall never surrender, and even if, which I do not for a moment believe, this island or a large part of it were subjugated and starving, then our Empire beyond the seas, armed and guarded by the British Fleet, would carry on the struggle, until, in God's good time, the New World, with all its power and might, steps forth to the rescue and the liberation of the Old.\nGermany initiated \"Fall Rot\", in France, the following day, and Italy entered the war on the 10th. The Wehrmacht occupied Paris on the 14th and completed their conquest of France on 25 June. It was now inevitable that Hitler would attack and probably try to invade Great Britain. Faced with this, Churchill addressed the Commons on 18 June with one of his most famous speeches, ending with this peroration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What General Weygand called the \"Battle of France\" is over. I expect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin. Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this island or lose the war. Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duty and so bear ourselves that if the British Commonwealth and Empire lasts for a thousand years, men will still say: \"This was their finest hour\".\nChurchill ordered the commencement of the Western Desert campaign on 11 June, a response to the Italian declaration of war. This went well at first while Italy was the sole opposition and Operation Compass was a success. In early 1941, however, Mussolini requested German support. Hitler sent the Afrika Korps to Tripoli under Erwin Rommel, who arrived not long after Churchill had halted \"Compass\" so he could reassign forces to Greece where the Balkans campaign was entering a critical phase.\nIn other initiatives through June and July 1940, Churchill ordered the formation of the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and Commandos. The SOE was ordered to promote and execute subversive activity in Nazi-occupied Europe, while the Commandos were charged with raids on military targets there. Hugh Dalton, the Minister of Economic Warfare, took political responsibility for the SOE and recorded that Churchill told him: \"And now go and set Europe ablaze\".\nBattle of Britain and the Blitz.\nOn 20 August 1940, at the height of the Battle of Britain, Churchill addressed the Commons to outline the situation. In the middle of it, he made a statement that created a famous nickname for the RAF fighter pilots involved in the battle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The gratitude of every home in our Island, in our Empire, and indeed throughout the world, except in the abodes of the guilty, goes out to the British airmen who, undaunted by odds, unwearied in their constant challenge and mortal danger, are turning the tide of the World War by their prowess and by their devotion. Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.\nThe Luftwaffe altered its strategy from 7 September 1940 and began the Blitz, which was intensive through October and November. Churchill's morale was high and told his private secretary John Colville, in November, he thought the threat of invasion was past. He was confident Great Britain could hold its own, given the increase in output, but was realistic about its chances of winning the war without American intervention.\nLend-Lease.\nIn September 1940, the British and American governments concluded the destroyers-for-bases deal, by which 50 American destroyers were transferred to the Royal Navy in exchange for free US base rights in Bermuda, the Caribbean and Newfoundland. An added advantage for Britain was that its military assets in those bases could be redeployed elsewhere. Churchill's good relations with President Franklin D. Roosevelt helped secure vital food, oil and munitions via the North Atlantic shipping routes. It was for this reason that Churchill was relieved when Roosevelt was re-elected in 1940. Roosevelt set about implementing a new method of providing necessities to Great Britain, without the need for monetary payment. He persuaded Congress that repayment for this costly service would take the form of defending the US. The policy was known as Lend-Lease and was formally enacted on 11 March 1941.\nOperation Barbarossa.\nHitler launched his invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941. Churchill had known since April, from Enigma decrypts at Bletchley Park, that the attack was imminent. He had tried to warn Joseph Stalin via the ambassador to Moscow, Stafford Cripps, but Stalin did not trust Churchill. The night before the attack, already intending to address the nation, Churchill alluded to his hitherto anti-communist views by saying to Colville: \"If Hitler invaded Hell, I would at least make a favourable reference to the Devil\".\nAtlantic Charter.\nIn August 1941, Churchill made his first transatlantic crossing of the war on board and met Roosevelt in Placentia Bay, Newfoundland. On 14 August, they issued the joint statement known as the Atlantic Charter. This outlined the goals of both countries for the future of the world and is seen as the inspiration for the 1942 Declaration by United Nations, itself the basis of the UN, founded in 1945.\nPearl Harbor to D-Day: December 1941 to June 1944.\nPearl Harbor and United States entry into the war.\nIn December 1941, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor was followed by their invasion of Malaya and, on the 8th, Churchill declared war on Japan. With the hope of using Irish ports for counter-submarine operations, Churchill sent a telegram to Irish Prime Minister \u00c9amon de Valera in which he obliquely offers Irish unity: \"Now is your chance. Now or never! A nation once again! I will meet you wherever you wish.\" No meeting took place and there is no record of a response. Churchill went to Washington to meet Roosevelt for the Arcadia Conference. This was important for \"Europe first\", the decision to prioritise victory in Europe over victory in the Pacific, taken by Roosevelt while Churchill was still in the mid-Atlantic. The Americans agreed with Churchill that Hitler was the main enemy and defeat of Germany was key to Allied success. It was also agreed that the first joint Anglo-American strike would be Operation Torch, the invasion of French North Africa. Originally planned for the spring 1942, it was launched in November 1942 when the crucial Second Battle of El Alamein was underway.\nOn 26 December, Churchill addressed a joint meeting of the United States Congress. Later that night, he suffered a heart attack, which was diagnosed by his physician, Sir Charles Wilson, as a coronary deficiency, requiring several weeks' bed rest. Churchill insisted he did not need bed rest and journeyed to Ottawa by train, where he gave a speech to the Canadian Parliament that included the \"some chicken, some neck\" line in which he recalled French predictions in 1940 that \"Britain alone would have her neck wrung like a chicken\". He arrived home mid-January, having flown from Bermuda to Plymouth in the first transatlantic air crossing by a head of government, to find there was a crisis of confidence in his government and him; he decided to face a vote of confidence in the Commons, which he won easily.\nWhile he was away, the Eighth Army, having relieved the Siege of Tobruk, had pursued Operation Crusader against Rommel's forces in Libya, successfully driving them back to a defensive position at El Agheila in Cyrenaica. On 21 January 1942, however, Rommel launched a surprise counter-attack which drove the Allies back to Gazala. Elsewhere, British success in the Battle of the Atlantic was compromised by the Kriegsmarine's introduction of its M4 4-rotor Enigma, whose signals could not be deciphered by Bletchley Park for nearly a year. At a press conference in Washington, Churchill had to play down his increasing doubts about the security of Singapore, given Japanese advances.\nFall of Singapore and loss of Burma.\nChurchill already had grave concerns about the quality of British troops after the defeats in Norway, France, Greece and Crete. Following the fall of Singapore to the Japanese on 15 February 1942, he felt his misgivings were confirmed and said: \"(this is) the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British military history\". On 11 February the Kriegsmarine pulled off its audacious \"Channel Dash\", a massive blow to British naval prestige. The combined effect of these events was to sink Churchill's morale to its lowest point of the war.\nThe Bengal Famine.\nMeanwhile, the Japanese had occupied most of Burma by the end of April 1942. Counter-offensives were hampered by the monsoon season and disordered conditions in Bengal and Bihar, as well as a severe cyclone which devastated the region in October 1942. A combination of factors, including the curtailment of essential rice imports from Burma, poor administration, wartime inflation and large-scale natural disasters such as flooding and crop disease led to the Bengal famine of 1943, in which an estimated 2.1\u20133.8 million people died.\nFrom December 1942, food shortages had prompted senior officials to ask London for grain imports, although the colonial authorities failed to recognise the seriousness of the famine and responded ineptly. Churchill's government was criticised for refusing to approve more imports, a policy it ascribed to an acute shortage of shipping. When the British realised the full extent of the famine in September 1943, Churchill ordered the transportation of 130,000 tons of grain and the cabinet agreed to send 200,000 tons by the end of the year. During the last quarter of 1943, 100,000 tons of rice and 176,000 tons of wheat were imported, compared to averages of 55,000 and 54,000 tons respectively earlier in the year.\nIn October, Churchill wrote to the Viceroy of India, Lord Wavell, charging him with the responsibility of ending the famine. In February 1944, as preparation for Operation Overlord placed greater demands on Allied shipping, Churchill cabled Wavell saying: \"I will certainly help you all I can, but you must not ask the impossible\". Grain shipment requests continued to be turned down by the government throughout 1944, and Wavell complained to Churchill in October that \"the vital problems of India are being treated by His Majesty's Government with neglect, even sometimes with hostility and contempt\". The impact of British policies on the famine death toll remains controversial.\nInternational conferences in 1942.\nOn 20 May 1942, the Soviet Foreign minister, Vyacheslav Molotov, arrived in London to sign a treaty of friendship. Molotov wanted it done on the basis of territorial concessions regarding Poland and the Baltic countries. Churchill and Eden worked for a compromise and a twenty-year treaty was formalised, with the question of frontiers placed on hold. Molotov also sought a Second Front in Europe; Churchill confirmed preparations were in progress and made no promises on a date.\nChurchill felt pleased with these negotiations. However, Rommel had launched his counter-offensive, \"Operation Venice\", to begin the Battle of Gazala on 26 May. The Allies were driven out of Libya and suffered a defeat in the fall of Tobruk on 21 June. Churchill was with Roosevelt when the news reached him, and was shocked by the surrender of 35,000 troops which was, apart from Singapore, \"the heaviest blow\" he received in the war. The Axis advance was halted at the First Battle of El Alamein in July and the Battle of Alam el Halfa in September. Both sides were exhausted and in need of reinforcements and supplies.\nChurchill returned to Washington on 17 June. He and Roosevelt agreed on the implementation of \"Operation Torch\" as the necessary precursor to an invasion of Europe. Roosevelt had appointed General Dwight D. Eisenhower as commanding officer of the European Theater of Operations, United States Army (ETOUSA). Having received the news from North Africa, Churchill obtained shipment from America to the Eighth Army of 300 Sherman tanks and 100 howitzers. He returned to Britain on 25 June and had to face another motion of no confidence, this time in his direction of the war, but again he won easily.\nIn August, despite health concerns, Churchill visited British forces in North Africa, raising morale, en route to Moscow for his first meeting with Stalin. He was accompanied by Roosevelt's special envoy Averell Harriman. He was in Moscow 12\u201316 August and had lengthy meetings with Stalin. Though they got along well personally, there was little chance of real progress given the state of the war. Stalin was desperate for the Allies to open the Second Front in Europe, as Churchill had discussed with Molotov in May, and the answer was the same.\nEl Alamein and Stalingrad.\nWhile he was in Cairo in August, Churchill appointed Field Marshal Alexander as Field Marshal Auchinleck's successor as Commander-in-Chief of the Middle East Theatre. Command of the Eighth Army was given to General William Gott but he was shot down and killed while flying to Cairo, and General Montgomery succeeded him.\nAs 1942 drew to a close, the tide of war began to turn with Allied victories in El Alamein, successful North Africa landings going on and Stalingrad. Until November, the Allies had been on the defensive, but afterwards, the Germans were. Churchill ordered church bells to be rung throughout Great Britain for the first time since 1940. On 10 November, knowing El Alamein was a victory and Operation Torch yet a success, he delivered one of his most memorable speeches at Mansion House in London: \"This is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning\".\nInternational conferences in 1943.\nIn January 1943, Churchill met Roosevelt at the Casablanca Conference. It was attended by General Charles de Gaulle from the Free French Forces. Stalin had hoped to attend but declined because of Stalingrad. Although Churchill expressed doubts on the matter, the so-called Casablanca Declaration committed the Allies to securing \"unconditional surrender\". From Morocco, Churchill went to Cairo, Adana, Cyprus, Cairo again and Algiers. He arrived home on 7 February having been out of the country for a month. He addressed the Commons on the 11th and became seriously ill with pneumonia the following day, necessitating more than a month of convalescence: he moved to Chequers. He returned to work in London on 15 March.\nChurchill made two transatlantic crossings during the year, meeting Roosevelt at the third Washington Conference in May and the first Quebec Conference in August. In November, Churchill and Roosevelt met Chinese Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek at the Cairo Conference. The most important conference of the year was 28 November to 1 December at Tehran, where Churchill and Roosevelt met Stalin in the first of the \"Big Three\" meetings, preceding those at Yalta and Potsdam. Roosevelt and Stalin co-operated in persuading Churchill to commit to opening of second front in western Europe and it was agreed Germany would be divided after the war, but no decisions were made about how. On their way back, Churchill and Roosevelt held a Second Cairo Conference with Turkish president \u0130smet \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc, but were unable to gain commitment from Turkey to join the Allies.\nChurchill went to Tunis, arriving on 10 December, initially as Eisenhower's guest (soon afterwards, Eisenhower took over as Supreme Allied Commander of the new SHAEF). Churchill became seriously ill with atrial fibrillation and was forced to remain in Tunis, until after Christmas while specialists were drafted in to ensure recovery. Clementine and Colville arrived to keep him company; Colville had just returned to Downing Street after two years in the RAF. On 27 December, the party went on to Marrakesh for convalescence. Feeling much better, Churchill flew to Gibraltar on 14 January 1944 and sailed home on the . He was back in London on 18 January and surprised MPs by attending Prime Minister's Questions in the Commons. Since 12 January 1943, when he set off for Casablanca, Churchill had been abroad or seriously ill for 203 of the 371 days.\nInvasions of Sicily and Italy.\nIn the autumn of 1942, after Churchill's meeting with Stalin, he was approached by Eisenhower, commanding the North African Theater of Operations, US Army (NATOUSA), and his aides on the subject of where the Western Allies should launch their first strike in Europe. According to General Mark W. Clark, the Americans admitted a cross-Channel operation in the near future was \"utterly impossible\". As an alternative, Churchill recommended \"slit(ting) the soft belly of the Mediterranean\" and persuaded them to invade Sicily and then mainland Italy, after they had defeated the Afrika Korps. After the war, Clark still agreed Churchill's analysis was correct, but added that, when the Allies landed at Salerno, they found Italy was \"a tough old gut\".\nThe invasion of Sicily began on 9 July and was completed by 17 August. Churchill was not keen on \"Overlord\" as he feared an Anglo-American army in France might not be a match for the fighting efficiency of the Wehrmacht. He preferred peripheral operations, including a plan called Operation Jupiter for an invasion of Norway. Events in Sicily had an unexpected impact in Italy. King Victor Emmanuel sacked Mussolini on 25 July and appointed Marshal Badoglio as prime minister. Badoglio opened negotiations with the Allies which resulted in the Armistice of Cassibile on 3 September. In response, the Germans activated Operation Achse and took control of most of Italy.\nAlthough he still preferred Italy to Normandy as the Allies' main route into the Third Reich, Churchill was concerned about the strong German resistance at Salerno and, after the Allies successfully gained their bridgehead at Anzio but still failed to break the stalemate, he caustically said that instead of \"hurling a wildcat onto the shore\", the Allied force had become a \"stranded whale\". The big obstacle was Monte Cassino and it was not until May 1944 when it was finally overcome, enabling the Allies to advance on Rome, which was taken on 4 June.\nPreparations for D-Day.\nThe difficulties in Italy caused Churchill to change heart about strategy; when the Anzio stalemate developed after his return to England from North Africa, he threw himself into the planning of \"Overlord\" and set up meetings with SHAEF and the British Chiefs of Staff. These were attended by Eisenhower or his chief of staff General Walter Bedell Smith. Churchill was especially taken by the Mulberry harbours, but was keen to make the most of Allied airpower which by 1944, had become overwhelming. Churchill never lost his apprehension about the invasion, and underwent mood fluctuation as D-Day approached. Jenkins says he faced potential victory with much less buoyancy than when he defiantly faced the prospect of defeat four years earlier.\nNeed for post-war reform.\nChurchill could not ignore the need for post-war reforms. The Beveridge Report with its five \"Giant Evils\" was published in November 1942 and assumed great importance amid popular acclaim. Even so, Churchill spent most of his focus on the war, and saw reform in terms of tidying up. His attitude was demonstrated in a radio broadcast on 26 March 1944. He was obliged to devote most of it to reform and showed a distinct lack of interest. Colville said Churchill had broadcast \"indifferently\" and Harold Nicolson said that, to many people, Churchill came across the air as \"a worn and petulant old man\". In the end, however, it was demand for reform that decided the 1945 general election. Labour was perceived as the party that would deliver Beveridge. Attlee, Bevin and Labour's other coalition ministers, were seen as working towards reform and earned the trust of the electorate.\nDefeat of Germany: June 1944 to May 1945.\nD-Day: Allied invasion of Normandy.\nChurchill was determined to be actively involved in the Normandy invasion and hoped to cross the Channel on D-Day (6 June 1944) or at least D-Day+1. His desire caused unnecessary consternation at SHAEF, until he was effectively vetoed by the King. Churchill expected an Allied death toll of 20,000 on D-Day but fewer than 8,000 died in all of June. He made his first visit to Normandy on 12 June to visit Montgomery, whose HQ was five miles inland. That evening, as he was returning to London, the first V-1 flying bombs were launched. On 22\u201323 July, Churchill went to Cherbourg and Arromanches where he saw the Mulberry Harbour.\nQuebec Conference, September 1944.\nChurchill met Roosevelt at the Second Quebec Conference in September 1944. They reached agreement on the Morgenthau Plan for the Allied occupation of Germany, the intention of which was not only to demilitarise, but de-industrialise. Eden opposed it and was able to persuade Churchill to disown it. US Secretary of State Cordell Hull opposed it and convinced Roosevelt it was infeasible.\nMoscow Conference, October 1944.\nAt the fourth Moscow conference in October 1944, Churchill and Eden met Stalin and Molotov. This conference has gained notoriety for the so-called \"Percentages agreement\" in which Churchill and Stalin effectively agreed the post-war fate of the Balkans. By then, the Soviet armies were in Rumania and Bulgaria. Churchill suggested a scale of predominance throughout the whole region so as not to, as he put it, \"get at cross-purposes in small ways\". He wrote down some suggested percentages of influence per country and gave it to Stalin who ticked it. The agreement was that Russia would have 90% control of Romania and 75% control of Bulgaria. The United Kingdom and United States would have 90% control of Greece. Hungary and Yugoslavia would be 50% each. In 1958, five years after the account of this meeting was published (in \"The Second World War\"), Soviet authorities denied Stalin had accepted such an \"imperialist proposal\".\nYalta Conference, February 1945.\nFrom 30 January to 2 February 1945, Churchill and Roosevelt met for their Malta Conference ahead of the second \"Big Three\" event at Yalta from 4 to 11 February. Yalta had massive implications for the post-war world. There were two predominant issues: the question of setting up the United Nations Organisation, on which much progress was made; and the more vexed question of Poland's post-war status, which Churchill saw as a test case for Eastern Europe. Churchill faced criticism for the agreement on Poland. For example, 27 Tory MPs voted against him when the matter was debated in the Commons at the end of the month. Jenkins, however, maintains that Churchill did as well as possible in difficult circumstances, not least the fact that Roosevelt was seriously ill and could not provide Churchill with meaningful support.\nAnother outcome of Yalta was the so-called Operation Keelhaul. The Western Allies agreed to the forcible repatriation of all Soviet citizens in the Allied zones, including prisoners of war, to the Soviet Union and the policy was later extended to all Eastern European refugees, many of whom were anti-communist. Keelhaul was implemented between August 1946 and May 1947.\nArea bombing controversy.\nOn the nights of 13\u201315 February 1945, 1,200 British and US bombers attacked Dresden, which was crowded with wounded and refugees from the Eastern Front. The attacks were part of an area bombing campaign initiated by Churchill in January with the intention of shortening the war. Churchill came to regret the bombing because initial reports suggested an excessive number of civilian casualties close to the end of the war, though an independent commission in 2010 confirmed a death toll of about 24,000. On 28 March, he decided to restrict area bombing and sent a memo to General Ismay for the Chiefs of Staff Committee:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The destruction of Dresden remains a serious query against the conduct of Allied bombing... I feel the need for more precise concentration upon military objectives... rather than on mere acts of terror and wanton destruction, however impressive.\nHistorian Frederick Taylor has pointed out that the number of Soviets who died from German bombing was roughly equivalent to the number of Germans who died from Allied raids. Jenkins asks if Churchill was moved more by foreboding than by regret, but admits it is easy to criticise with the hindsight of victory. He adds that the area bombing campaign was no more reprehensible than President Truman's use of the second atomic bomb on Nagasaki six months later. Andrew Marr, quoting Max Hastings, says that Churchill's memo was a \"calculated political attempt...to distance himself...from the rising controversy surrounding the area offensive\".\nVE Day (Victory in Europe Day).\nOn 7 May 1945 at the SHAEF headquarters in Reims the Allies accepted Germany's surrender. The next day was Victory in Europe Day (VE Day) when Churchill broadcast to the nation that Germany had surrendered and that a final ceasefire would come into effect at one minute past midnight that night. Churchill went to Buckingham Palace where he appeared on the balcony with the Royal Family before a huge crowd of celebrating citizens. He went from the palace to Whitehall where he addressed another large crowd: \"God bless you all. This is your victory. In our long history, we have never seen a greater day than this. Everyone, man or woman, has done their best\".\nHe asked Bevin to come forward and share the applause. Bevin said: \"No, Winston, this is your day\", and proceeded to conduct the people in the singing of \"For He's a Jolly Good Fellow\". In the evening, Churchill made another broadcast correctly asserting that the defeat of Japan would follow in the coming months.\nLater in the month France attempted to put down a nationalist uprising in the Syria. Churchill intervened and on 31 May gave de Gaulle an ultimatum to desist, but this was ignored. In what became known as the Levant Crisis, British forces from Transjordan were mobilised to restore order. The French, outnumbered, had no option but to return to their bases. De Gaulle felt humiliated, and a diplomatic row broke out\u00a0\u2013 Churchill reportedly told a colleague that de Gaulle was \"a great danger to peace and for Great Britain\".\nOperation Unthinkable.\nIn May 1945, Winston Churchill commissioned the Chiefs of Staff Committee to provide its thoughts on a possible military campaign against the USSR, code-named Operation Unthinkable. One plan involved a surprise attack on Soviet troops stationed in Germany to impose \"the will of the United States and the British Empire\" on the Soviets. The hypothetical start date for the Allied invasion of Soviet-held Europe was set for 1 July 1945.\nCaretaker government: May 1945 to July 1945.\nWith a general election looming, and with Labour ministers refusing to continue the coalition, Churchill resigned as prime minister on 23 May 1945. Later that day, he accepted the King's invitation to form a new government, known officially as the National Government but sometimes called the caretaker ministry. It contained Conservatives, National Liberals and a few non-party figures such as Sir John Anderson and Lord Woolton, but not Labour or Archibald Sinclair's Official Liberals. Churchill was formally reappointed on 28 May.\nPotsdam Conference.\nChurchill was Great Britain's representative at the Potsdam Conference when it opened on 17 July and was accompanied at its sessions by Eden and Attlee. They attended nine sessions in nine days before returning to England for their election counts. After the landslide Labour victory, Attlee returned with Bevin as the new Foreign Secretary and there were five days of discussion. Potsdam went badly for Churchill. Eden later described his performance as \"appalling\", saying he was unprepared and verbose. Churchill upset the Chinese, exasperated the Americans and was easily led by Stalin, whom he was supposed to be resisting.\nGeneral election, July 1945.\nChurchill mishandled the election campaign by resorting to party politics and trying to denigrate Labour. On 4 June, he committed a serious gaffe by saying in a radio broadcast that a Labour government would require \"some form of Gestapo\" to enforce its agenda. It backfired and Attlee made political capital by saying in his reply broadcast next day: \"The voice we heard last night was that of Mr Churchill, but the mind was that of Lord Beaverbrook\". Jenkins says that this broadcast was \"the making of Attlee\".\nAlthough polling day was 5 July, the results did not become known until 26 July, owing to the need to collect votes of those serving overseas. Clementine and daughter Mary had been at the count in Woodford, Churchill's new constituency, and had returned to Downing Street to meet him for lunch. Churchill was unopposed by the major parties in Woodford, but his majority over a sole independent candidate was much less than expected. He anticipated defeat by Labour and Mary later described the lunch as \"an occasion of Stygian gloom\". To Clementine's suggestion that defeat might be \"a blessing in disguise\", Churchill retorted: \"At the moment it seems very effectively disguised\".\nThat afternoon Churchill's doctor Lord Moran commiserated with him on the \"ingratitude\" of the public, to which Churchill replied: \"I wouldn't call it that. They have had a very hard time\". Having lost, despite enjoying personal support amongst the population, he resigned as prime minister and was succeeded by Attlee who formed the first majority Labour government. Many reasons have been given for Churchill's defeat, key being a widespread desire for reform and that the man who had led Britain in war was not seen as the man to lead in peace. Although the Conservative Party was unpopular, many electors appear to have wanted Churchill to continue as prime minister whatever the outcome, or to have wrongly believed this would be possible.\nLeader of the Opposition: 1945\u20131951.\n\"Iron Curtain\" speech.\nChurchill continued to lead the Conservative Party and served as Leader of the Opposition. In 1946, he was in America from early January to late March. It was on this trip he gave his \"Iron Curtain\" speech about the USSR and its creation of the Eastern Bloc. His view was that, though the Soviet Union did not want war with the western Allies, its entrenched position in Eastern Europe had made it impossible for the three great powers to provide the world with a \"triangular leadership\". Churchill's desire was closer collaboration between Britain and America. Within the same speech, he called for \"a special relationship between the British Commonwealth and Empire and the United States\", but emphasised the need for co-operation within the framework of the United Nations Charter.\nChurchill was an early proponent of pan-Europeanism, having called for a \"United States of Europe\" in a 1930 article. He supported the creations of the Council of Europe in 1949 and the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, but his support was always with the firm proviso that Britain must not actually join any federal grouping. \nLabour won the 1950 general election, but with a much-reduced majority. A fresh election was called the following year and the Conservatives won a majority.\nPrime Minister: 1951\u20131955.\nElection result and cabinet appointments.\nDespite losing the popular vote, the Conservatives won a majority of 17 seats in the October 1951 general election and Churchill became prime minister, remaining in office until his resignation on 5 April 1955. Eden was restored to Foreign Affairs. Future prime minister Harold Macmillan was appointed Minister of Housing and Local Government with a manifesto commitment to build 300,000 new houses per year, Churchill's only real domestic concern. He achieved the target and, in 1954, was promoted to Minister of Defence.\nHealth issues to eventual resignation.\nChurchill was nearly 77 when he took office and not in good health following minor strokes. By December 1951, George\u00a0VI had become concerned about Churchill's decline and intended asking him to stand down in favour of Eden, but the King had his own health issues and died on 6 February 1952. Churchill developed a friendship with Elizabeth\u00a0II and, in spring 1953, accepted the Order of the Garter at her request. He was knighted as Sir Winston on 24 April 1953. It was widely expected he would retire after the Queen's Coronation in June 1953 but, after Eden became seriously ill, Churchill increased his own responsibilities by taking over at the Foreign Office. Eden was incapacitated until the end of the year and was never completely well again. On the evening of 23 June 1953, Churchill suffered a serious stroke; the matter was kept secret and Churchill went to Chartwell to recuperate. He had recovered by November. He retired in April 1955 and was succeeded by Eden.\nForeign affairs.\nChurchill feared a global conflagration and firmly believed the only way to preserve peace and freedom was friendship and co-operation between Britain and America. He made four official transatlantic visits from January 1952 to July 1954. He enjoyed a good relationship with Truman, but difficulties arose over the planned European Defence Community (EDC), by which Truman hoped to reduce America's military presence in West Germany. Churchill wanted US military support of British interests in Egypt and the Middle East, but while Truman expected British military involvement in Korea, he viewed any US commitment to the Middle East as maintaining British imperialism. The Americans recognised the British Empire was in terminal decline and had welcomed the Attlee government's policy of decolonisation. Churchill believed Britain's position as a world power depended on the empire's continued existence.\nChurchill had been obliged to recognise Colonel Nasser's revolutionary government of Egypt, which took power in 1952. Much to Churchill's dismay, agreement was reached in October 1954 on the phased evacuation of British troops from their Suez base. Britain agreed to terminate its rule in Anglo-Egyptian Sudan by 1956, though this was in return for Nasser's abandonment of Egyptian claims over the region. Elsewhere, the Malayan Emergency, a guerrilla war fought by Communist fighters against Commonwealth forces, had begun in 1948 and continued until 1960. Churchill's government maintained the military response to the crisis and adopted a similar strategy for the Mau Mau Uprising in British Kenya (1952\u20131960).\nChurchill was uneasy about the election of Eisenhower as Truman's successor. After Stalin died in March 1953, Churchill sought a summit meeting with the Soviets, but Eisenhower refused out of fear the Soviets would use it for propaganda. By July, Churchill was deeply regretting that the Democrats had not been returned. Churchill believed Eisenhower did not fully comprehend the danger posed by the H-bomb and he greatly distrusted Eisenhower's Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles. Churchill hosted Eisenhower at the Three-Powers Bermuda Conference, with French Prime Minister Joseph Laniel, in December; they met again in June/July 1954 at the White House. In the end, the Soviets proposed a four-power summit, but it did not meet until July 1955, three months after Churchill's retirement.\nLater life: 1955\u20131965.\nRetirement: 1955\u20131964.\nElizabeth\u00a0II offered to create Churchill Duke of London, but he declined because of the objections of Randolph, who would have inherited the title. Although publicly supportive, Churchill was privately scathing about Eden's handling of the Suez Crisis and Clementine believed that many of his visits to the US in the following years were attempts to repair Anglo-American relations.\nChurchill remained an MP until he stood down at the 1964 general election. By the time of the 1959 general election, he seldom attended the House of Commons. Despite the Conservative landslide in 1959, his own majority fell by more than 1,000. He spent most of his retirement at Chartwell or at his London home in Hyde Park Gate, and became a habitu\u00e9 of high society at La Pausa on the French Riviera.\nIn June 1962, aged 87, Churchill had a fall in Monte Carlo and broke his hip. He was flown home to a London hospital where he remained for 3 weeks. Jenkins says Churchill was never the same after this. In 1963, US President John F. Kennedy, acting under authorisation granted by an Act of Congress, proclaimed him an honorary citizen of the United States, but he was unable to attend the White House ceremony. There has been speculation he became very depressed in his final years, but this was emphatically denied by his secretary Anthony Montague Browne, who was with him for his last 10 years. Montague Browne wrote that he never heard Churchill refer to depression and certainly did not suffer from it.\nDeath, funeral and memorials.\nChurchill suffered his final stroke on 10 January 1965 and died at his London home, 28 Hyde Park Gate, on 24 January, aged 90. Like the Duke of Wellington in 1852 and William Gladstone in 1898, Churchill was given a state funeral. His coffin lay in state at Westminster Hall for three days. The funeral ceremony was at St Paul's Cathedral on 30 January. Afterwards, the coffin was taken by boat along the River Thames to Waterloo Station and from there by a special train to the family plot at St Martin's Church, Bladon.\nWorldwide, numerous memorials have been dedicated to Churchill. His statue in Parliament Square was unveiled by his widow Clementine in 1973 and is one of only twelve in the square. Elsewhere in London, the Cabinet War Rooms have been renamed the Churchill War Rooms. Churchill College, Cambridge, was established as a national memorial to Churchill. In a 2002 BBC poll that attracted 447,423 votes, he was voted the greatest-ever Briton, his nearest rival being Isambard Kingdom Brunel some 56,000 votes behind.\nChurchill was the first of only eight people to be granted honorary citizenship of the United States. The United States Navy honoured him in 1999 by naming a as the . Other memorials in North America include the National Churchill Museum in Fulton, where he made the 1946 \"Iron Curtain\" speech; Churchill Square in Edmonton, Alberta; and the Winston Churchill Range, a mountain range northwest of Lake Louise, also in Alberta, which was renamed after Churchill in 1956.\nArtist, historian, and writer.\nChurchill was a prolific writer. His output included a novel (\"Savrola\"), two biographies, memoirs, histories, and press articles. Two of his most famous works were his six-volume memoir, \"The Second World War\", and the four-volume \"A History of the English-Speaking Peoples\". In recognition of his \"mastery of historical and biographical description\" and oratorial output, Churchill received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1953.\nHe used either \"Winston S. Churchill\" or \"Winston Spencer Churchill\" as his pen name to avoid confusion with the American novelist Winston Churchill, whom he had a friendly correspondence with. For many years, he relied on his press articles to assuage his financial worries.\nChurchill became an accomplished amateur artist beginning after his resignation from the Admiralty in 1915. Often using the pseudonym \"Charles Morin\", identical to that of the French landscape painter Charles Camille Morin, who had died in 1919, he completed hundreds of paintings, many of which are on show in Chartwell and in private collections.\nChurchill was an amateur bricklayer, constructing buildings and garden walls at Chartwell. He joined the Amalgamated Union of Building Trade Workers, but was expelled after he rejoined the Conservative Party. He bred butterflies. He was known for his love of animals and always had several pets, mainly cats but also dogs, pigs, lambs, bantams, goats and fox cubs among others. Churchill has been quoted as saying that \"Dogs look up to you, cats look down on you. Give me a pig! He looks you in the eye and treats you as an equal\".\nLegacy and assessments.\nPolitical ideology.\nAs a politician, Churchill was perceived by some to have been largely motivated by personal ambition rather than political principle. During his early career, he was often provocative and argumentative to an unusual degree; and his barbed rhetorical style earned him enemies in parliament. Others deemed him to be an honest politician who displayed particular loyalty to his family and close friends. Robert Rhodes James said he \"lacked any capacity for intrigue and was refreshingly innocent and straightforward\".\nUntil the outbreak of the Second World War, Churchill's approach to politics generated widespread \"mistrust and dislike\", largely on account of his two party defections. His biographers have variously categorised him, in terms of political ideology, as \"fundamentally conservative\", \"(always) liberal in outlook\", and \"never circumscribed by party affiliation\". He was nearly always opposed to socialism because of its propensity for state planning and his belief in free markets. The exception was during his wartime coalition when he was reliant upon the support of his Labour colleagues. Churchill had long been regarded as an enemy of the working class, and his response to the Rhondda Valley unrest and his anti-socialist rhetoric brought condemnation from socialists who saw him as a reactionary. His role in opposing the General Strike earned the enmity of strikers and most members of the Labour movement. Paradoxically, Churchill was supportive of trade unionism, which he saw as the \"antithesis of socialism\".\nOn the other hand, his detractors did not take Churchill's domestic reforms into account, for he was in many respects a radical and reformer, but always with the intention of preserving the existing social structure, displaying what Addison calls the attitude of a \"benevolent paternalist\". Jenkins, himself a senior Labour minister, remarked that Churchill had \"a substantial record as a social reformer\" for his work in his ministerial career. Similarly, Rhodes James thought that Churchill's achievements were \"considerable\".\nImperialism and racial views.\nChurchill was a staunch imperialist and monarchist, and consistently exhibited a \"romanticised view\" of the British Empire and reigning monarch, especially during his last term as premier. Churchill has been described as a \"liberal imperialist\" who saw British imperialism as a form of altruism that benefited its subject peoples. He advocated against black or indigenous self-rule in Africa, Australia, the Caribbean, the Americas and India, believing the British Empire maintained the welfare of those who lived in the colonies.\nWhen he was Home Secretary in 1910\u20131911, Churchill supported the forced sterilization of the \"feeble minded.\" In a letter to Prime Minister H. H. Asquith in February 1910, he wrote \" The unnatural and increasingly rapid growth of the Feeble-Minded and Insane classes [\u2026] constitutes a national and race danger which it is impossible to exaggerate. [\u2026] I feel that the source from which the stream of madness is fed should be cut off and sealed up before another year has passed.\"\nAccording to Addison, Churchill was opposed to immigration from the Commonwealth. Addison makes the point that Churchill opposed antisemitism (as in 1904, when he was critical of the proposed Aliens Bill) and argues he would never have tried \"to stoke up racial animosity against immigrants, or to persecute minorities\". In the 1920s, Churchill supported Zionism but believed that communism was the product of an international Jewish conspiracy. Although this belief was not unique among politicians, few had his stature, and the article he wrote on the subject was criticised by \"The Jewish Chronicle\".\nChurchill made disparaging remarks about non-white ethnicities throughout his life. Philip Murphy partly attributes the strength of this vitriol to an \"almost childish desire to shock\" his inner circle. Churchill's response to the Bengal famine was criticised by contemporaries as slow, a controversy later increased by the publication of private remarks made to Secretary for India Leo Amery, in which Churchill allegedly said aid would be inadequate because \"Indians [were] breeding like rabbits\". Philip Murphy says that, following the independence of India in 1947, Churchill adopted a pragmatic stance towards empire, although he continued to use imperial rhetoric. During his second term as prime minister, he was seen as a moderating influence on Britain's suppression of armed insurgencies in Malaya and Kenya; he argued that ruthless policies contradicted British values and international opinion.\nCultural depictions.\nWhile biographies by Addison, Gilbert, Jenkins and Rhodes James are among the most acclaimed works about Churchill, he has been the subject of numerous others. David Freeman counted 62 in English to the end of the 20th century. At a public ceremony in Westminster Hall on 30 November 1954, Churchill's 80th birthday, the joint Houses of Parliament presented him with a full-length portrait of himself, painted by Graham Sutherland. Churchill and Clementine reportedly hated it and she had it destroyed.\nBiographical films include \"Young Winston\" (1972), directed by Richard Attenborough and featuring Simon Ward in the title role; \"\" (1981), starring Robert Hardy; \"The Gathering Storm\" (2002), starring Albert Finney as Churchill; \"Into the Storm\" (2009), starring Brendan Gleeson as Churchill; \"Darkest Hour\" (2017), starring Gary Oldman as Churchill. John Lithgow played Churchill in \"The Crown\" (2016\u20132019). Finney, Gleeson, Oldman and Lithgow all won awards for their performances.\nFamily.\nChurchill married Clementine Hozier in September 1908. They remained married for 57 years until his death. Churchill was aware of the strain his career placed on their marriage. According to Colville, he had an affair in the 1930s with Doris Castlerosse, although this is discounted by Andrew Roberts.\nThe Churchills' first child, Diana, was born in July 1909; Randolph, in May 1911, Sarah, in October 1914, and Marigold, in November 1918. Marigold died in August 1921, from sepsis. On 15 September 1922, the Churchills' last child, Mary, was born. Later that month, the Churchills bought Chartwell, which would be their home until Winston's death in 1965.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrint sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOther references and online collections\nRecordings\nMuseums, archives and libraries"}
{"id": "33266", "revid": "14580247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33266", "title": "W\u0142adys\u0142aw Reymont", "text": "Polish novelist (1867\u20131925)\nW\u0142adys\u0142aw Stanis\u0142aw Reymont (; born Rejment; 7 May 1867 \u2013 5 December 1925) was a Polish novelist and the laureate of the 1924 Nobel Prize in Literature. His best-known work is the award-winning four-volume novel \"Ch\u0142opi\" (\"The Peasants\").\nBorn into an impoverished noble family, Reymont was educated to become a master tailor, but instead worked as a gateman at a railway station and then as an actor in a troupe. His intensive travels and voyages encouraged him to publish short stories, with notions of literary realism. Reymont's first successful and widely praised novel was \"The Promised Land\" from 1899, which brought attention to the bewildering social inequalities, poverty, conflictive multiculturalism and labour exploitation in the industrial city of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a (Lodz). The aim of the novel was to extensively emphasize the consequences of extreme industrialization and how it affects society as a whole. In 1900, Reymont was severely injured in a railway accident, which halted his writing career until 1904 when he published the first part of \"Ch\u0142opi\".\nW\u0142adys\u0142aw Reymont was popular in communist Poland due to his style of writing and the symbolism he used, including socialist concepts, romantic portrayal of the agrarian countryside and toned criticism of capitalism, all present in literary realism. His work is widely attributed to the Young Poland movement, which featured decadence and literary impressionism.\nSurname.\nReymont's baptism certificate gives his birth name as Stanis\u0142aw W\u0142adys\u0142aw Rejment. The change of surname from \"Rejment\" to \"Reymont\" was made by the author himself during his publishing debut, as it was supposed to protect him, in the Russian sector of partitioned Poland, from any potential trouble for having already published in Austrian Galicia a work not allowed under the Tsar's censorship. Kazimierz Wyka, an enthusiast of Reymont's work, believes that the alteration could also have been intended to remove any association with the word \"rejmentowa\u0107\", which in some local Polish dialects means \"to swear\".\nLife.\nReymont was born in the village of Kobiele Wielkie, near Radomsko, as one of the nine children of J\u00f3zef Rejment, an organist. His mother, Antonina Kupczy\u0144ska, had a talent for story-telling. She descended from the impoverished Polish nobility from the Krak\u00f3w region. Reymont spent his childhood in Tuszyn, near \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, to which his father had moved to work at a wealthier church parish. Reymont was defiantly stubborn; after a few years of education in the local school, he was sent by his father to Warsaw into the care of his eldest sister and her husband to teach him his vocation. In 1885, after passing his examinations and presenting \"a tail-coat, well-made\", he was given the title of journeyman tailor, his only formal certificate of education.\nTo his family's annoyance, Reymont did not work a single day as a tailor. Instead, he first ran away to work in a travelling provincial theatre and then returned in the summer to Warsaw for the \"garden theatres\". Without a penny to his name, he then returned to Tuszyn after a year, and, thanks to his father's connections, he took up employment as a gateman at a railway crossing near Koluszki for 16 rubles a month. He ran away twice more: in 1888 to Paris and London as a medium with a German spiritualist and then again to join a theatre troupe. After his lack of success (he was not a talented actor), he returned home again. Reymont also stayed for a time in Krosnowa near Lipce and for a time considered joining the Pauline Order in Cz\u0119stochowa. He also lived in Ko\u0142aczkowo, where he bought a mansion.\nWork.\nWhen his \"Korespondencje\" (\"Correspondence\") from Rog\u00f3w, Koluszki and Skierniewice was accepted for publication by \"G\u0142os\" (\"The Voice\") in Warsaw in 1892, he returned to Warsaw, with several unpublished short stories and just a few rubles. Reymont visited the editorial offices of newspapers and magazines, and eventually met other writers who became interested in his talent including \u015awi\u0119tochowski. In 1894 he went on an eleven-day pilgrimage to Cz\u0119stochowa and turned his experience there into a report entitled \"Pielgrzymka do Jasnej G\u00f3ry\" (Pilgrimage to the Luminous Mount) published in 1895, and considered his classic example of travel writing.\nRejmont sent his short stories to different magazines and, encouraged by good reviews, decided to write novels: \"Komediantka\" (\"The Deceiver\") (1895) and \"Fermenty\" (\"Ferments\") (1896). No longer poor, he would soon satisfy his passion for travel, visiting Berlin, London, Paris, and Italy. Then, he spent a few months in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a collecting material for a new novel ordered by the \"Kurier Codzienny\" (\"The Daily Courier\") from Warsaw. The earnings from this book \"Ziemia Obiecana\" (\"The Promised Land\") (1899) enabled him to go on his next trip to France where he socialized with other exiled Poles (Jan Lorentowicz, \u017beromski, Przybyszewski and Lucjan Rydel).\nHis earnings did not allow for this kind of life of travel. However, in 1900 he was awarded 40,000 rubles in compensation from the Warsaw\u2013Vienna Railway after an accident in which Reymont was severely injured. During the treatment he was looked after by Aurelia Szacnajder Szab\u0142owska, whom he married in 1902, having first paid for the annulment of her earlier marriage. Thanks to her discipline, he marginally restrained his travel-mania, but never gave up either his stays in France (where he partly wrote \"Ch\u0142opi\" between 1901 and 1908) or in Zakopane. Rejmont also journeyed to the United States in 1919 at the (Polish) government's expense. Despite his ambitions to become a landowner, which led to an unsuccessful attempt to manage an estate he bought in 1912 near Sieradz, the life of the land proved not to be for him. He would later buy a mansion in Ko\u0142aczkowo near Pozna\u0144 in 1920, but still spent his winters in Warsaw or France.\nNobel Prize.\nIn November 1924 he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature over rivals Thomas Mann, George Bernard Shaw and Thomas Hardy, after he had been nominated by Anders \u00d6sterling, member of the Swedish Academy. Public opinion in Poland supported this recognition for Stefan \u017beromski, but the prize went to the author of \"Ch\u0142opi\". \u017beromski was reportedly refused for his allegedly anti-German sentiments. However, Reymont could not take part in the award ceremony in Sweden due to a heart condition. The award and the check for 116,718 Swedish kronor were sent to Reymont in France, where he was being treated.\nIn 1925, somewhat recovered, he went to a farmers' meeting in Wierzchos\u0142awice near Krak\u00f3w, where Wincenty Witos welcomed him as a member of the Polish People's Party \"Piast\" and praised his writing skills. Soon afterward, Reymont's health deteriorated. He died in Warsaw in December 1925 and was buried in the Pow\u0105zki Cemetery. The urn holding his heart was laid in a pillar of the Holy Cross Church in Warsaw.\nReymont's literary output includes about 30 extensive volumes of prose. There are works of reportage: \"Pielgrzymka do Jasnej G\u00f3ry\" (\"Pilgrimage to Jasna G\u00f3ra\") (1894), \"Z ziemi che\u0142mskiej\" (\"From the Che\u0142m Lands\") (1910 \u2013 about the persecutions of the Uniates), \"Z konstytucyjnych dni\" (\"From the Days of the Constitution\") (about the revolution of 1905). Also, there are some sketches from the collection \"Za frontem\" (\"Beyond the Front\") (1919) and numerous short stories on life in the theatre and the village or on the railway: \"\u015amier\u0107\" (\"Death\") (1893), \"Suka\" (\"Bitch\") (1894), \"Przy robocie\" (\"At Work\") and \"W por\u0119bie\" (\"In the Clearing\") (1895), \"Tomek Baran\" (1897), \"Sprawiedliwie\" (\"Justly\") (1899) and a sketch for a novel \"Marzyciel\" (\"Dreamer\") (1908). There are also novels: \"Komediantka\", \"Fermenty\", \"Ziemia obiecana\", \"Ch\u0142opi\", \"Wampir\" (\"The Vampire\") (1911), which were sceptically received by the critics, and a trilogy written in the years 1911\u20131917: \"Rok 1794\" (\"1794\") (\"Ostatni Sejm Rzeczypospolitej\", \"Nil desperandum\" and \"Insurekcja\") (\"The Last Parliament of the Commonwealth\", \"Nil desperandum\" and \"Insurrection\").\nMajor books.\nCritics admit a number of similarities between Reymont and the Naturalists. They stress that this was not a \"borrowed\" Naturalism but rather a record of life as experienced by the writer. Moreover, Reymont never formulated an aesthetic of his writing. In that, he resembled other Polish autodidacts such as Miko\u0142aj Rej and Aleksander Fredro. With little higher education and inability to read another language, Reymont realized that it was his knowledge of grounded reality, not literary theory, that was his strong suit.\nHis novel \"Komediantka\" paints the drama of a rebellious girl from the provinces who joins a traveling theatre troupe and finds, instead of escape from the mendacity of her native surroundings, a nest of intrigue and sham. In \"Fermenty\", a sequel to \"Komediantka\", the heroine, rescued after a suicide attempt, returns to her family and accepts the burden of existence. Aware that dreams and ideas do not come true, she marries a \"nouveau riche\" who is in love with her.\n\"Ziemia Obiecana\" (\"The Promised Land\"), possibly Reymont's best-known novel, is a social panorama of the city of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a during the industrial revolution, full of dramatic detail, presented as an arena of the struggle for survival. In the novel, the city destroys those who accept the rules of the \"rat race\", as well as those who do not. The moral gangrene equally affects the three main characters, a German, a Jew, and a Pole. This dark vision of cynicism, illustrating the bestial qualities of men and the law of the jungle, where ethics, noble ideas and holy feelings turn against those who believe in them, are, as the author intended, at the same time a denunciation of industrialisation and urbanisation.\n\"Ziemia Obiecana\" has been translated into at least 15 languages and two film adaptations\u2014one in 1927, directed by A. W\u0119gierski and Aleksander Hertz, the other, in 1975, directed by Andrzej Wajda.\nIn \"Ch\u0142opi\", Reymont created a more complete and suggestive picture of country life than any other Polish writer. The novel impresses the reader with its authenticity of the material reality, customs, behaviour and spiritual culture of the people. It is authentic and written in the local dialect. Reymont uses dialect in dialogues and in narration, creating a kind of a universal language of Polish peasants. Thanks to this, he presents the colourful reality of the \"spoken\" culture of the people better than any other author. He set the action in Lipce, a real village which he came to know during his work on the railway near Skierniewice, and restricted the time of events to ten months in the unspecified \"now\" of the 19th century. It is not history that determines the rhythm of country life, but the \"unspecified time\" of eternal returns. The composition of the novel astonishes the reader with its strict simplicity and functionality.\nThe titles of the volumes signal a tetralogy in one vegetational cycle, which regulates the eternal and repeatable rhythm of village life. Parallel to that rhythm is a calendar of religion and customs, also repeatable. In such boundaries Reymont placed a colourful country community with sharply drawn individual portraits. The repertoire of human experience and the richness of spiritual life, which can be compared with the repertoire of Biblical books and Greek myths, has no doctrinal ideas or didactic exemplifications. The author does not believe in doctrines, but rather in his knowledge of life, the mentality of the people described, and his sense of reality. It is easy to point to moments of Naturalism (e.g., some erotic elements) or to illustrative motives characteristic of Symbolism. It is equally easy to prove the Realistic values of the novel. None of the \"isms\" however, would be enough to describe it. The novel was filmed twice (directed by E. Modzelewski in 1922 and by J. Rybkowski in 1973) and has been translated into at least 27 languages.\n\"Revolt\".\nReymont's last book, \"Bunt\" (\"Revolt\"), serialized in 1922 and published in book form in 1924, describes a revolt by animals which take over their farm in order to introduce \"equality\". The revolt quickly degenerates into abuse and bloody terror.\nThe story was a metaphor for the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and was banned from 1945 to 1989 in communist Poland, along with George Orwell's similar novella, \"Animal Farm\" (published in Britain in 1945). Reymont's novel was reprinted in Poland in 2004.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33267", "revid": "203434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33267", "title": "William DeVries", "text": "American physician (born 1943)\nWilliam Castle DeVries (born December 19, 1943) is an American cardiothoracic surgeon, mainly known for the first transplant of a TAH (total artificial heart) using the Jarvik-7 model.\nEarly years and medical school.\nWilliam DeVries was born December 19, 1943, in Brooklyn Navy Yard. His father, Henry DeVries, was a Dutch immigrant who died in combat on the destroyer in 1944 during the Battle of Hollandia, where he had enrolled as a naval surgeon. When his father died William was only six months old. He was raised by his grandmother and his mother who was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints until he was five. After his mother remarried, the family was enlarged by eight more children and they all moved to Ogden, Utah, where he attended Ben Lomond High School and where he was an athlete being on the basketball and track teams. During his childhood DeVries became an Eagle Scout. Because the family was meeting financial difficulties, William had to work throughout his high school years to help out. He also won the Utah state finals in high jumping and thanks to his sport abilities he went to the University of Utah on a track scholarship. During college he was part of the Sigma Chi fraternity. He graduated in 1966 with a bachelor's degree in molecular and Genetic biology. Later on he went to medical school also at the University of Utah and received his M.D. degree in 1970.\nBy the time he had finished with school, he had already built a family. He married his first wife, Ane Karen, during the last year of college and had four children. During college he was able to hold down three or four jobs and yet he graduated top of his class and received the award for the most outstanding graduate.\nIt was thanks to one of the jobs that he was involved in surgery. He assisted doctor Willem Johan Kolff during his work and during night he was paid to watch over the animals in the lab.\nIn 1969 after some advice from doctor Keith Reemtsma, he decided to leave Salt Lake City and to start his residency in another hospital. That is also the year in which doctor Denton Cooley attempted his first artificial heart transplant in a patient, in Houston. Doctor Cooley's work would be an inspiration for doctor DeVries, who would later succeed in the transplant of the TAH. After he left Utah, he attended a series of job interviews. The first one was at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. The day of the interview, on his way to the hospital, he witnessed a person being stabbed by another man, and helped the victim until he was carried to the emergency room. This episode was probably one of the reasons why he decided not to start his residency in Boston. The second interview he attended was at the Johns Hopkins hospital, but eventually he opted for a residency at the Duke University in North Carolina. At the end of his nine years surgical training, he headed back to Salt Lake City.\nThe artificial heart.\nIn 1979 Doctor DeVries went back to the University of Utah to become the chairman of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery; there, he used to perform two to five open-heart operations a week. At that time the university was known for being one of the country's few pioneering centers for advanced surgery on vital organs and their transplanting and implanting into animals and humans. In Salt Lake City he worked with doctor Robert Jarvik and doctor Kolff. By the time DeVries was back to Salt Lake City, the calves with artificial heart were able to live up to six, seven, even eight months. These results inspired him to take on with the work and so he started a series of long-term animal experiments. After two years of experiments, doctor DeVries and his colleagues tried to obtain the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) approval. At the beginning, nobody really paid much consideration to the work, but after a while it started to acquire new attention, things changed, and even the NIH started to be interested in the project. Therefore, DeVries started to look for a suitable patient for the first attempt. In 1982, the FDA gave the approval to experiment the device on a human, and so a panel of six members at the University of Utah Medical Center started searching for a patient. The group was composed of two cardiologists, a psychiatrist, a nurse, a social worker and DeVries; the decision had to be unanimous.\nThe first patient.\nThe first patient was a Seattle dental surgeon named Barney Clark, affected with an end-stage congestive heart failure. The seven-hour surgery was carried out on December 2, 1982, and it was successful. Doctor William DeVries, 38 years old at that time, was known to listen occasionally to rock music while performing surgery. In his first Jarvik-7 implant the operating room was hushed, except for the voice communications to the medical team and the quietly played strains of Joseph-Maurice Ravel's \"Bol\u00e9ro\". The patient lived, but DeVries found much harder to manage the device on a patient rather than on a healthy animal. This carried to some complications which led part of the researchers to ask DeVries to turn off the device. In fact they did not want to lose the NIH approval and consequently their funds. DeVries refused to shut down the device, this caught the attention of the media, and made DeVries achieve the cover of \"Time\" magazine (December 10, 1984). Eventually, they had to deal with the issue of money. To keep Mr. Clark alive, he decided to sell the rights of his story to a newspaper for $1 million . Mr. Clark lived for 112 days after the surgery, as complications kept occurring and this led to multiorgan failure and eventually death. Unfortunately Mr. Clark never recovered well enough to leave the hospital. In this period DeVries and his team had to face a series of issues due to the pressure of the media and the public. He was constantly obsessed with critics and legal issues concerning about what he was doing whether it was right or wrong. With the success of the first patient, DeVries wanted to go on with his trials, but there were not enough funds and medical insurance was never going to pay for such an experimental transplant. Consequently, DeVries found himself on a quest for fund raising, which, at the beginning did not succeed until Wendell Cherry, vice chairman of the Humana Inc. offered him to relocate in Louisville, Kentucky; in exchange Cherry offered to finance the next 100 implants.\nThe Jarvik-7.\nThe Jarvik-7 was a mechanical device, made of polyurethane and aluminium, which was used to replace the two ventricles of a human heart.\nThe pumping action came from air, compressed by an electrical unit located outside of the patient's body. The human-made organ had two separate ventricles grafted with Dacron sleeves to the native atria and great vessels. It was powered by a 400-pound (180\u00a0kg) air compressor, connected to the heart, through a tube coming out of the patient body. In order to give the patients the ability to move, it was also invented a portable power console which was the size of a briefcase. Since 1982, 350 patients have used the Jarvik-7 heart model, and its original design is still used for the modern Jarvik-7, although due to propriety passages the device name is now \"SynCardia\". In October 2004, the Jarvik-7 model was the first medical device to receive a full-FDA approval.\nIn Louisville, Kentucky.\nAfter the offer from Wendell Cherry, DeVries decided to move to Louisville in order to continue with his work on the TAH although he knew that the reason why the Humana Inc. had given him such a generous offer was mainly due to the publicity that this project was to offer them. \"Our name is now on every single newspaper in the world. This is the type of advertisement that you cannot buy. As far as I am concerned, you have made your money for the next hundred patients\" (Wendell Cherry). And even knowing this, DeVries accepted the deal because it was for medical advancement.\nBill Schroeder was his second candidate. The patient survived through the surgery, and initially did so well that when president Ronald Reagan phoned him, a week after the implant, he asked why his social security check was late. Unfortunately two weeks later mister Schroeder suffered of a series of infections and strokes that left him unable to speak. He lived for 620 days after the operation, during which he was able to leave the hospital and do a series of normal activities like traveling, attending a basketball game and even fishing. Over the following years DeVries implanted a total of four artificial-hearts, and always had someone with a TAH in his facility.\nThanks to his work, the TAH was used in many hospitals, not as a permanent solution for diseased heart patient, but as a \"bridge\" in order to assist the heart and wait for a final transplant.\nIn 1983, DeVries received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nDuring 1987, 49 diseased hearts had been substituted by surgeons all over the world with a Jarvik-7 model. In January 1988 DeVries was close to performing his fifth implantation, when a human donor heart was found for the patient. In January 1990 the approval was withdrawn, and the FDA ended the program. Before his retirement, in 1999, doctor DeVries decided, in 1988, to go back to traditional cardiovascular surgery. On December 29, 2000, he joined the United States Army Reserve as a lieutenant colonel, becoming at age 57 one of the oldest people to enter and complete the Officer Basic Course. After completion of that course, he was stationed at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington D.C. teaching surgical residents there and medical students from the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and the George Washington University School of Medicine.\nCollections of DeVries papers are held at the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland.\nMedia attention.\nThroughout his career, DeVries had to face a series of philosophical, religious, and practical objections to the artificial heart program. The media attention to the first implant was the largest ever directed to a medical case. Never before had a medical innovation aroused such a contentious debate. Throughout the time between the implant and the death of Barney Clark, the media followed the case so intensively that teams of reporters and television crews besieged the medical center, hankering for information on the patient. Criticism came not only from the medical world, but also from the public. Indeed, many people were disturbed by the idea of replacing the heart, considering it to have special and emotional meanings which could not be substituted by any human-made machine. The question asked by Una Loy, the wife of Barney Clark, is an example of this skepticism. Before her husband underwent surgery, she asked the doctor if after the transplant her husband would still be able to love her. Many were also disturbed by the fact that Clark was never able to leave the hospital. His life was extended somewhat, but he spent it in bed. The New York Times questioned whether the artificial heart research was useful or just a \"Dracula\" sucking funds away from other programs. DeVries felt that all this attention was slowing his work in Utah, and so decided to leave Salt Lake City for a position in Louisville.\nThanks to the Humana Inc. funds, DeVries implanted another artificial heart at the Humana Human Heart Institute International in a patient called Bill Schroeder. The whole case was followed by the media, and DeVries and the Humana were accused of publicity seeking; \"Life\" magazine called it \"the Bill Schroeder's show\". After the death of DeVries' second patient, the critics began to charge that the mechanical heart brought more complications than benefits. In fact, both Clark and Schroeder never fully recovered from the surgery and eventually died due to complications. DeVries felt that the best way to concede the dilemma was to have people understand that the TAH was not a permanent solution but just a temporary substitution for a diseased heart.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33269", "revid": "17692702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33269", "title": "William I", "text": "William I may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "33270", "revid": "50953097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33270", "title": "When Harry Met Sally...", "text": "1989 film by Rob Reiner\nWhen Harry Met Sally... is a 1989 American romantic comedy-drama film directed by Rob Reiner and written by Nora Ephron. Starring Billy Crystal, Meg Ryan, Carrie Fisher, and Bruno Kirby, it follows the title characters from the time they meet in Chicago and share a drive to New York City through twelve years of chance encounters in New York, and addresses the question \"Can men and women ever just be friends?\"\nIdeas for the film began when Reiner and Penny Marshall divorced. An interview Ephron conducted with Reiner provided the basis for Harry; Sally was based on Ephron and some of her friends. Crystal came on board and made his own contributions to the screenplay. Ephron supplied the structure of the film with much of the dialogue based on the real-life friendship between Reiner and Crystal. The soundtrack consists of standards from Harry Connick Jr., with a big band and orchestra arranged by Marc Shaiman. For his work on the soundtrack, Connick won his first Grammy Award for Best Jazz Male Vocal Performance.\nColumbia Pictures released \"When Harry Met Sally\" in selected cities, letting word of mouth generate interest, before gradually expanding distribution. The film grossed $92.8 million in North America, and was released to critical acclaim. Ephron received the BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay, as well as nominations for the Academy Award, WGA Award and Golden Globe. The film is ranked 23rd on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs list of the top comedy films in American cinema and number 60 on Bravo's \"100 Funniest Movies\". In early 2004, the film was adapted for the stage in a production starring Luke Perry and Alyson Hannigan. In 2022, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1977, Harry Burns and Sally Albright graduate from the University of Chicago. Harry is dating Sally's friend Amanda Reese, leading to Harry and Sally ride-sharing to New York City. Sally is attending journalism school there and Harry has a job waiting.\nDuring the drive, Harry and Sally discuss their differing ideas about relationships; Sally disagrees with Harry's assertion that men and women cannot be friends as \"the sex part gets in the way\". They stop at a diner, and when Harry tells Sally she is very attractive, she angrily accuses him of making a pass. They part company in New York, never intending to see each other again.\nFive years later in 1982, Harry and Sally find themselves on the same flight. Sally is dating Harry's neighbor Joe, and Harry is engaged to Helen, which surprises Sally, as it seems uncharacteristically optimistic of him. Harry suggests they become friends, forcing him to qualify his previous position about the impossibility of male-female friendships. They separate, concluding that they will not be friends.\nFive years later in 1987, Harry and Sally run into each other at a bookstore. They have coffee and talk about their previous relationships; Sally and Joe have broken up and Helen has left Harry for another man. They agree to pursue a friendship and have late-night phone conversations, go to dinner, and spend time together discussing their love lives.\nDuring a New Year's Eve party, Harry and Sally find themselves growing attracted to each other and share an awkward midnight kiss. They remain friends and set each other up with their respective best friends, Marie and Jess. When the four go out, neither Marie nor Jess is attracted to Harry or Sally and instead immediately fall for each other. Soon after, the two are engaged.\nOne night, Sally tearfully calls Harry to say that her ex, Joe, is getting married. Harry goes to Sally's apartment to comfort her but they end up having sex. Harry leaves the next morning, feeling awkward and filled with regret. Their friendship cools until they have a heated argument at Jess and Marie's wedding reception. Harry attempts to mend their relationship, but Sally feels that they can no longer be friends.\nAt a 1988 New Year's Eve party with Jess and Marie, Sally misses Harry. He is spending New Year's Eve at home, watching Dick Clark's 16th annual New Year's Rockin' Eve. Before midnight, Harry walks around the city. As Sally is about to leave the party, Harry appears and declares his love for her. She claims he is only there because he is lonely, but he lists the many reasons he loves her. Harry and Sally marry three months later, exactly 12 years and three months after their first meeting.\nThe film contains several interspersed segments of older couples discussing how they met. The true stories, gathered by Nora Ephron, are reenacted by actors. The final couple interviewed, before the closing credits, is Harry and Sally.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Billy Crystal as Harry Burns\nProduction.\nIn 1984, director Rob Reiner, producer Andrew Scheinman, and writer Nora Ephron met over lunch at the Russian Tea Room in New York City to develop a project. Reiner pitched an idea for a film that Ephron rejected. The second meeting transformed into a long discussion about Reiner and Scheinman's lives as single men. Reiner remembers, \"I was in the middle of my single life. I'd been divorced for a while. I'd been out a number of times, all these disastrous, confusing relationships one after another.\" The next time they all met, Reiner said that he had always wanted to do a film about two people who become friends and do not have sex because they know it will ruin their relationship but have sex anyway. Ephron liked the idea, and Reiner acquired a deal at a studio.\nFor materials, Ephron interviewed Reiner and Scheinman about their lives, creating the basis for Harry. Reiner was constantly depressed and pessimistic yet funny. Ephron also got bits of dialogue from these interviews. Sally was based on Ephron and some of her friends. She worked on several drafts over the years while Reiner made \"Stand by Me\" (1986) and \"The Princess Bride\" (1987). Billy Crystal \"experienced vicariously\" Reiner's (his best friend at the time) return to single life after divorcing comedian/filmmaker Penny Marshall and in the process was unconsciously doing research for the role of Harry. Tom Hanks, Richard Dreyfuss, Michael Keaton and Albert Brooks were all offered the role of Harry Burns but all of them turned it down, with Brooks feeling the movie was too reminiscent of Woody Allen's work.\nDuring the screenwriting process when Ephron did not feel like writing, she would interview people who worked for the production company. Some of the interviews appeared in the film as the interludes between certain scenes featuring couples talking about how they met, although the material was rewritten and reshot with actors. Ephron supplied the structure of the film with much of the dialogue based on the real-life friendship between Reiner and Crystal. For example, the scene depicting Sally and Harry in split-screen conversing with each other by telephone and simultaneously watching television and channel surfing was something that Crystal and Reiner did every night.\nOriginally, Ephron wanted to call the film \"How They Met\" and went through several different titles. Reiner even started a contest with the crew during principal photography: whoever came up with the title won a case of champagne. In order to get into the lonely mindset of Harry when he was divorced and single, Crystal stayed by himself in a separate room from the cast and crew while they were shooting in Manhattan. The script initially ended with Harry and Sally remaining friends and not pursuing a romantic relationship because she felt that was \"the true ending\", as did Reiner. Eventually, Ephron and Reiner realized that it would be a more appropriate ending for them to marry, though they admit that this was generally not a realistic outcome. Reiner related that the film originally had a sad ending before he met his second wife Michele, which inspired him to change the ending.\nWhen posed the film's central question, can men and women just be friends, Ryan replied, \"Yes, men and women can just be friends. I have a lot of platonic (male) friends, and sex doesn't get in the way.\" Crystal said, \"I'm a little more optimistic than Harry. But I think it is difficult. Men basically act like stray dogs in front of a supermarket. I do have platonic (women) friends, but not best, best, best friends.\" Reiner's mother Estelle and daughter Tracy both played roles in the film.\nKatz's Delicatessen scene.\nIn a scene featuring the two title characters having lunch at Katz's Delicatessen, a well-known Jewish deli in Manhattan, the couple are arguing about a man's ability to recognize when a woman is faking an orgasm. Sally claims that men cannot tell the difference, and to prove her point, she vividly (fully clothed) fakes one as other diners watch. The scene ends with Sally casually returning to her meal as a nearby patron (played by Reiner's mother) places her order, deadpan: \"I'll have what she's having.\" When Estelle Reiner died at age 94 in 2008, \"The New York Times\" referred to her as the woman \"who delivered one of the most memorably funny lines in movie history\". This scene was shot \"over and over again\", and Ryan demonstrated her fake orgasms for hours. Katz's Deli still hangs a sign above the table that says, \"Where Harry met Sally... hope you have what she had!\"\nThe memorable scene was born when the film started to focus too much on Harry. Crystal remembers saying, \"'We need something for Sally to talk about,' and Nora said, 'Well, faking orgasm is a great one,' and right away we said, 'Well, the subject is good,' and then Meg came on board and we talked with her about the nature of the idea and she said, 'Well, why don't I just fake one, just do one?'\" Ryan suggested that the scene take place in a restaurant, and it was Crystal who came up with the scene's classic punchline \u2013 \"I'll have what she's having.\" In 2005, the quote was listed 33rd on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes list of memorable movie lines. Reiner recalls that at a test screening, all of the women in the audience were laughing while all of the men were silent.\nIn late 2013, Improv Everywhere, the New York City initiative behind the annual No Pants Day in the subways and various flash-mob stunts, convened and filmed a re-enactment in Katz's Delicatessen. While a look-alike couple performed the scene, 30 others joined as if it was contagious. Surprised staff and customers responded in appreciation. The film and follow-up interviews are public. In October of the same year, Katz's invited Baron Von Fancy to display his ten-foot-high mural quoting the famous line in its pop-up gallery next door, The Space.\nIn February 2025, Ryan and Crystal recreated the scene as part of an advert for Hellmann's mayonnaise which aired during Super Bowl LIX. The \"I'll have what she's having\" line was delivered by Sydney Sweeney.\nSoundtrack.\nThe \"When Harry Met Sally...\" soundtrack album features American singer and pianist Harry Connick Jr. Bobby Colomby, the drummer for Blood, Sweat &amp; Tears, was a friend of Reiner's and recommended Harry Connick Jr., giving the director a tape of the musician's music. Reiner was struck by Connick's voice and how he sounded like a young Frank Sinatra. The movie's soundtrack album was released by Columbia Records in July 1989. The soundtrack consists of standards performed by Harry Connick Jr. with a big band and orchestra arranged by Marc Shaiman. Connick won his first Grammy for Best Jazz Male Vocal Performance.\nArrangements and orchestrations on \"It Had to Be You\", \"Where or When\", \"I Could Write a Book\", and \"But Not for Me\" are by Connick and Shaiman. Other songs were performed as piano/vocal solos, or with Connick's trio featuring Benjamin Jonah Wolfe on bass and Jeff \"Tain\" Watts on drums. Also appearing on the album are tenor saxophonist Frank Wess and guitarist Jay Berliner. The soundtrack went to #1 on the \"Billboard\" Traditional Jazz Chart and was within the top 50 on the \"Billboard\" 200. Connick also toured North America in support of this album. It went on to reach double-platinum status. The soundtrack features performances by Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald, Frank Sinatra, Ray Charles, Bing Crosby, and Harry Connick Jr.\nReception.\nBox office.\nColumbia Pictures released \"When Harry Met Sally...\" using the \"platform\" technique which involves opening a film in a few select cities then letting word of mouth generate interest before gradually expanding distribution over subsequent weeks. On its opening weekend, the movie grossed $1,094,453 in 41 theatres, the second highest-grossing opening weekend for a film on fewer than 50 screens, behind \"Star Wars\" (1977). Billy Crystal was worried that the film would flop at the box office because it was up against several summer blockbuster films, like \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" and \"Batman\". The film opened in early July and went into wide release on July 21, 1989, grossing $8.8\u00a0million in 775 theaters in its first weekend of national release. The film later expanded to 1,174 theaters, and ultimately grossed $92.8\u00a0million in North America, well above its $16\u00a0million budget.\nCritical response.\nOn the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, \"When Harry Met Sally...\" holds an approval rating of 89% based on 128 reviews, with an average rating of 8/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"Rob Reiner's touching, funny film set a new standard for romantic comedies, and he was ably abetted by the sharp interplay between Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 76 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare \"A+\" grade.\nThe film led Roger Ebert to call Reiner \"one of Hollywood's very best directors of comedy\", and said the film was \"most conventional, in terms of structure and the way it fulfills our expectations. But what makes it special, apart from the Ephron screenplay, is the chemistry between Crystal and Ryan.\"\nIn a review for \"The New York Times\", Caryn James called \"When Harry Met Sally...\" an \"often funny but amazingly hollow film\" that \"romanticized lives of intelligent, successful, neurotic New Yorkers\"; James characterized it as \"the sitcom version of a Woody Allen film, full of amusing lines and scenes, all infused with an uncomfortable sense of \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\"\".\nRita Kempley of \"The Washington Post\" praised Meg Ryan as the \"summer's Melanie Griffith \u2013 a honey-haired blonde who finally finds a showcase for her sheer exuberance. Neither naif nor vamp, she's a woman from a pen of a woman, not some Cinderella of a \"Working Girl\".\" Mike Clark of \"USA Today\" gave the film three out of four stars, writing, \"Crystal is funny enough to keep Ryan from all-out stealing the film. She, though, is smashing in an eye-opening performance, another tribute to Reiner's flair with actors.\" David Ansen provided one of the rare negative reviews of the film for \"Newsweek\". He criticized the casting of Crystal, \"Not surprisingly he handles the comedy superbly, but he's too cool and self-protective an actor to work as a romantic leading man\", and felt that as a film, \"of wonderful parts, it doesn't quite add up\".\nAccolades.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nHome media.\n\"When Harry Met Sally...\" was first released on VHS in late 1989, a few months after its theatrical release. It was later re-released on VHS in 1994 as part of a Billy Crystal collection, and in 1997 under the \"Contemporary Classics\" edition; the latter release included trailers that were not included in the original VHS release. It was released on DVD for the first time on January 9, 2001, and included an audio commentary by Reiner, a 35-minute \"Making Of\" documentary featuring interviews with Reiner, Ephron, Crystal, and Ryan, seven deleted scenes, and a music video for \"It Had To Be You\" by Harry Connick Jr. A Collector's Edition DVD was released on January 15, 2008, including a new audio commentary with Reiner, Ephron, and Crystal, eight deleted scenes, all new featurettes (\"It All Started Like This\", \"Stories Of Love\", \"When Rob Met Billy\", \"Billy On Harry\", \"I Love New York\", \"What Harry Meeting Sally Meant\", \"So Can Men And Women Really Be Friends?\"), and the original theatrical trailer. The film was released on Blu-ray on July 5, 2011, containing all of the special features found on the 2008 DVD release. In 2019, a 30th anniversary Blu-ray was released by Shout! Factory from a new 4K transfer of the original camera negative, containing special features from previous home media releases, as well as a new interview with director Rob Reiner and Billy Crystal. In 2012, critic Linda Holmes observed that significant portions of the soundtrack had been changed for the Amazon digital release.\nLegacy.\nOver the years, \"When Harry Met Sally...\" has become \"the quintessential contemporary feel-good relationship movie that somehow still rings true\". Before she died, Ephron still received letters from people obsessed with the film and still had \"people who say to me all the time, 'I was having a Harry-and-Sally relationship with him or her'.\" The film is 23rd on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs list of the top comedy films in American cinema and number\u00a060 on Bravo's \"100 Funniest Movies.\" \"Entertainment Weekly\" named it as one of the Top\u00a010 romantic movies of all time. The magazine also ranked it 12th on their Funniest Movies of the Past 25 Years list. The periodical also ranked it 7th on their 25 Best Romantic Movies of the Past 25 Years list and #3 on their Top 25 Modern Romances list. The film has inspired countless romantic comedies, including \"A Lot Like Love\", \"No Strings Attached\", \"Hum Tum\", and \"Definitely, Maybe\". In addition, the film helped popularize many ideas about love that have become household concepts now, such as the \"high-maintenance\" girlfriend and the \"transitional person\". \"You can find traces of 'When Harry Met Sally' DNA in virtually every romantic comedy that's been made since,\" The A.V. Club noted.\nIn June 2008, AFI revealed its \"Ten top Ten\"\u2014the best ten films in ten \"classic\" American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. \"When Harry Met Sally\" was acknowledged as the sixth best film in the romantic comedy genre. It is also ranked #15 on Rotten Tomatoes' 25 Best Romantic Comedies. In early 2004, the film was adapted for the stage in a Theatre Royal Haymarket production starring Luke Perry and Alyson Hannigan. Molly Ringwald and Michael Landes later replaced Hannigan and Perry for the second cast. In 2022, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33273", "revid": "42252444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33273", "title": "William Crossing", "text": "British writer\nWilliam Crossing (1847\u20131928) was a writer and chronicler of Dartmoor and the lives of its inhabitants. He lived successively in South Brent, Brentor and Mary Tavy but died in Plymouth, Devon.\nEarly life.\nCrossing was born in Plymouth on 14 November 1847. Early in his youth he was fond of Dartmoor, his early associations centring on the south-west of the moor, in the neighbourhood of Sheepstor, Walkhampton, Meavy, and Yannadon. He acquired a taste for antiquities from his mother. He later went on to explore Tavistock, Coryton, Lydford, Okehampton, and the northern borders of Dartmoor, as well as South Brent, on its southern verge.\nAfter finishing his schooling in Plymouth, he went to the Independent College at Taunton, and then returned to finish his education at the Mannamead School (later called Plymouth College).\nHis earliest literary efforts were in fiction: \"thrilling romances\", composed for the delectation of his schoolfellows. His first essay in poetry was at the age of fourteen, when a poem of his appeared in the pages of \"Young England\", December 1861.\nIn 1863 he went for a short coastal voyage to Wales, and gained a liking for the sea; in 1864 he joined a vessel bound for Canada, and had a narrow escape, nearly being crushed by an iceberg during the night. Returning from this voyage, he took to business pursuits in Plymouth, and then recommenced his Dartmoor explorations.\nLater life and writings.\nIn 1872 he married and settled down at South Brent. In 1871 he had begun making notes about his rambles, but without any systematic arrangement; after his marriage he seems to have become more methodical, and to have decided to write a book descriptive of the moorland district. He published numerous other works in the 1890s, and his \"Guide to Dartmoor\", illustrated by Philip Guy Stevens, in 1909. He was much afflicted by rheumatism in the last 25 years of his life, and in 1921 his wife died. From July 1925 to his death Crossing was an invalid. He died at Plymouth, 3 September 1928.\nHe is now considered one of the best authorities on Dartmoor and its antiquities, having made it the subject of his life's work. He was one of the earliest members of the Dartmoor Preservation Association, joining it immediately on its formation.\n It is quite probable that he effectively started the popularity of the modern pursuit of letterboxing. In his book \"Guide to Dartmoor\" he refers to what is likely to have been the first letter box. It was placed at Cranmere Pool on northern Dartmoor by a local guide in 1854. In Crossing's memory in 1938 a plaque and letterbox were placed at Duck's Pool on the southern moor by some individuals and members of a walking club known as Dobson's Moormen. He was buried with his wife at Mary Tavy: his house at Mary Tavy bears a commemorative tablet unveiled in 1952.\nThe style of Crossing's work in \"Guide to Dartmoor\" has similarities to the much more recent work of Alfred Wainwright. The hand-drawn sketches of views and rough maps of walks together with the descriptive nature of the walks are like those of the Wainwright guides to the Lake District (see Lakeland Guides).\nBooks.\nPosthumous works"}
{"id": "33274", "revid": "49129766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33274", "title": "Weighted arithmetic mean", "text": "Statistical amount\nThe weighted arithmetic mean is similar to an ordinary arithmetic mean (the most common type of average), except that instead of each of the data points contributing equally to the final average, some data points contribute more than others. The notion of weighted mean plays a role in descriptive statistics and also occurs in a more general form in several other areas of mathematics.\nIf all the weights are equal, then the weighted mean is the same as the arithmetic mean. While weighted means generally behave in a similar fashion to arithmetic means, they do have a few counterintuitive properties, as captured for instance in Simpson's paradox.\nExamples.\nBasic example.\nGiven two school with 20 students, one with 30 test grades in each class as follows:\nMorning class = {62, 67, 71, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 79, 80, 80, 81, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 89, 93, 98}\nAfternoon class = {81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 87, 88, 88, 89, 89, 89, 90, 90, 90, 90, 91, 91, 91, 92, 92, 93, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99}\nThe mean for the morning class is 80 and the mean of the afternoon class is 90. The unweighted mean of the two means is 85. However, this does not account for the difference in number of students in each class (20 versus 30); hence the value of 85 does not reflect the average student grade (independent of class). The average student grade can be obtained by averaging all the grades, without regard to classes (add all the grades up and divide by the total number of students):\nformula_1\nOr, this can be accomplished by weighting the class means by the number of students in each class. The larger class is given more \"weight\":\nformula_2\nThus, the weighted mean makes it possible to find the mean average student grade without knowing each student's score. Only the class means and the number of students in each class are needed.\nConvex combination example.\nSince only the \"relative\" weights are relevant, any weighted mean can be expressed using coefficients that sum to one. Such a linear combination is called a convex combination.\nUsing the previous example, we would get the following weights:\nformula_3\nformula_4\nThen, apply the weights like this:\nformula_5\nMathematical definition.\nFormally, the weighted mean of a non-empty finite tuple of data formula_6,\nwith corresponding non-negative weights formula_7 is\nformula_8\nwhich expands to:\nformula_9\nTherefore, data elements with a high weight contribute more to the weighted mean than do elements with a low weight. The weights may not be negative in order for the equation to work. Some may be zero, but not all of them (since division by zero is not allowed).\nThe formulas are simplified when the weights are normalized such that they sum up to 1, i.e., formula_10.\nFor such normalized weights, the weighted mean is equivalently:\nformula_11.\nOne can always normalize the weights by making the following transformation on the original weights:\nformula_12.\nThe ordinary mean formula_13 is a special case of the weighted mean where all data have equal weights.\nIf the data elements are independent and identically distributed random variables with variance formula_14, the \"standard error of the weighted mean\", formula_15, can be shown via uncertainty propagation to be:\nformula_16\nVariance-defined weights.\nFor the weighted mean of a list of data for which each element formula_17 potentially comes from a different probability distribution with known variance formula_18, all having the same mean, one possible choice for the weights is given by the reciprocal of variance:\nformula_19\nThe weighted mean in this case is:\nformula_20\nand the \"standard error of the weighted mean (with inverse-variance weights)\" is:\nformula_21\nNote this reduces to formula_22 when all formula_23.\nIt is a special case of the general formula in previous section,\nformula_24\nThe equations above can be combined to obtain:\nformula_25\nThe significance of this choice is that this weighted mean is the maximum likelihood estimator of the mean of the probability distributions under the assumption that they are independent and normally distributed with the same mean.\nStatistical properties.\nExpectancy.\nThe weighted sample mean, formula_26, is itself a random variable. Its expected value and standard deviation are related to the expected values and standard deviations of the observations, as follows. For simplicity, we assume normalized weights (weights summing to one).\nIf the observations have expected values\nformula_27\nthen the weighted sample mean has expectation\nformula_28\nIn particular, if the means are equal, formula_29, then the expectation of the weighted sample mean will be that value,\nformula_30\nVariance.\nSimple i.i.d. case.\nWhen treating the weights as constants, and having a sample of \"n\" observations from uncorrelated random variables, all with the same variance and expectation (as is the case for i.i.d random variables), then the variance of the weighted mean can be estimated as the multiplication of the unweighted variance by Kish's design effect (see proof):\n formula_31\nWith formula_32, formula_33, and formula_34\nHowever, this estimation is rather limited due to the strong assumption about the \"y\" observations. This has led to the development of alternative, more general, estimators.\nSurvey sampling perspective.\nFrom a \"model based\" perspective, we are interested in estimating the variance of the weighted mean when the different formula_35 are not i.i.d random variables. An alternative perspective for this problem is that of some arbitrary sampling design of the data in which units are selected with unequal probabilities (with replacement).\nIn Survey methodology, the population mean, of some quantity of interest \"y\", is calculated by taking an estimation of the total of \"y\" over all elements in the population (\"Y\" or sometimes \"T\") and dividing it by the population size \u2013 either known (formula_36) or estimated (formula_37). In this context, each value of \"y\" is considered constant, and the variability comes from the selection procedure. This in contrast to \"model based\" approaches in which the randomness is often described in the y values. The survey sampling procedure yields a series of Bernoulli indicator values (formula_38) that get 1 if some observation \"i\" is in the sample and 0 if it was not selected. This can occur with fixed sample size, or varied sample size sampling (e.g.: Poisson sampling). The probability of some element to be chosen, given a sample, is denoted as formula_39, and the one-draw probability of selection is formula_40 (If N is very large and each formula_41 is very small). For the following derivation we'll assume that the probability of selecting each element is fully represented by these probabilities. I.e.: selecting some element will not influence the probability of drawing another element (this doesn't apply for things such as cluster sampling design).\nSince each element (formula_35) is fixed, and the randomness comes from it being included in the sample or not (formula_38), we often talk about the multiplication of the two, which is a random variable. To avoid confusion in the following section, let's call this term: formula_44. With the following expectancy: formula_45; and variance: formula_46.\nWhen each element of the sample is inflated by the inverse of its selection probability, it is termed the formula_47-expanded \"y\" values, i.e.: formula_48. A related quantity is formula_49-expanded \"y\" values: formula_50. As above, we can add a tick mark if multiplying by the indicator function. I.e.: formula_51\nIn this \"design based\" perspective, the weights, used in the numerator of the weighted mean, are obtained from taking the inverse of the selection probability (i.e.: the inflation factor). I.e.: formula_52.\nVariance of the weighted sum (\"pwr\"-estimator for totals).\nIf the population size \"N\" is known we can estimate the population mean using formula_53.\nIf the sampling design is one that results in a fixed sample size \"n\" (such as in pps sampling), then the variance of this estimator is:\n formula_54\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nThe general formula can be developed like this:\n formula_55\nThe population total is denoted as formula_56 and it may be estimated by the (unbiased) Horvitz\u2013Thompson estimator, also called the \"formula_47\"-estimator. This estimator can be itself estimated using the \"pwr\"-estimator (i.e.: formula_49-expanded with replacement estimator, or \"probability with replacement\" estimator). With the above notation, it is: formula_59.\nThe estimated variance of the \"pwr\"-estimator is given by:\nformula_60\nwhere formula_61.\nThe above formula was taken from Sarndal et al. (1992) (also presented in Cochran 1977), but was written differently. The left side is how the variance was written and the right side is how we've developed the weighted version:\nformula_62\nAnd we got to the formula from above.\nAn alternative term, for when the sampling has a random sample size (as in Poisson sampling), is presented in Sarndal et al. (1992) as:\nformula_63\nWith formula_64. Also, formula_65 where formula_66 is the probability of selecting both i and j. And formula_67, and for i=j: formula_68.\nIf the selection probability are uncorrelated (i.e.: formula_69), and when assuming the probability of each element is very small, then:\n formula_70\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nWe assume that formula_71 and that\nformula_72\nVariance of the weighted mean (\u03c0-estimator for ratio-mean).\nThe previous section dealt with estimating the population mean as a ratio of an estimated population total (formula_73) with a known population size (formula_36), and the variance was estimated in that context. Another common case is that the population size itself (formula_36) is unknown and is estimated using the sample (i.e.: formula_37). The estimation of formula_36 can be described as the sum of weights. So when formula_78 we get formula_79. With the above notation, the parameter we care about is the ratio of the sums of formula_35s, and 1s. I.e.: formula_81. We can estimate it using our sample with: formula_82. As we moved from using N to using n, we actually know that all the indicator variables get 1, so we could simply write: formula_83. This will be the estimand for specific values of y and w, but the statistical properties comes when including the indicator variable formula_84.\nThis is called a Ratio estimator and it is approximately unbiased for \"R\".\nIn this case, the variability of the ratio depends on the variability of the random variables both in the numerator and the denominator - as well as their correlation. Since there is no closed analytical form to compute this variance, various methods are used for approximate estimation. Primarily Taylor series first-order linearization, asymptotics, and bootstrap/jackknife. The Taylor linearization method could lead to under-estimation of the variance for small sample sizes in general, but that depends on the complexity of the statistic. For the weighted mean, the approximate variance is supposed to be relatively accurate even for medium sample sizes. For when the sampling has a random sample size (as in Poisson sampling), it is as follows:\n formula_85.\nIf formula_86, then either using formula_87 or formula_88 would give the same estimator, since multiplying formula_89 by some factor would lead to the same estimator. It also means that if we scale the sum of weights to be equal to a known-from-before population size \"N\", the variance calculation would look the same. When all weights are equal to one another, this formula is reduced to the standard unbiased variance estimator.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nThe Taylor linearization states that for a general ratio estimator of two sums (formula_90), they can be expanded around the true value R, and give:\nformula_91\nAnd the variance can be approximated by:\nformula_92.\nThe term formula_93 is the estimated covariance between the estimated sum of Y and estimated sum of Z. Since this is the covariance of two sums of random variables, it would include many combinations of covariances that will depend on the indicator variables. If the selection probability are uncorrelated (i.e.: formula_94), this term would still include a summation of \"n\" covariances for each element \"i\" between formula_95 and formula_96. This helps illustrate that this formula incorporates the effect of correlation between y and z on the variance of the ratio estimators.\nWhen defining formula_97 the above becomes:\nformula_98\nIf the selection probability are uncorrelated (i.e.: formula_94), and when assuming the probability of each element is very small (i.e.: formula_71), then the above reduced to the following:\nformula_101\nA similar re-creation of the proof (up to some mistakes at the end) was provided by Thomas Lumley in crossvalidated.\nWe have (at least) two versions of variance for the weighted mean: one with known and one with unknown population size estimation. There is no uniformly better approach, but the literature presents several arguments to prefer using the population estimation version (even when the population size is known). For example: if all y values are constant, the estimator with unknown population size will give the correct result, while the one with known population size will have some variability. Also, when the sample size itself is random (e.g.: in Poisson sampling), the version with unknown population mean is considered more stable. Lastly, if the proportion of sampling is negatively correlated with the values (i.e.: smaller chance to sample an observation that is large), then the un-known population size version slightly compensates for that.\nFor the trivial case in which all the weights are equal to 1, the above formula is just like the regular formula for the variance of the mean (but notice that it uses the maximum likelihood estimator for the variance instead of the unbiased variance. I.e.: dividing it by n instead of (n-1)).\nBootstrapping validation.\nIt has been shown, by Gatz et al. (1995), that in comparison to bootstrapping methods, the following (variance estimation of ratio-mean using Taylor series linearization) is a reasonable estimation for the square of the standard error of the mean (when used in the context of measuring chemical constituents):\nformula_102\nwhere formula_103. Further simplification leads to\nformula_104\nGatz et al. mention that the above formulation was published by Endlich et al. (1988) when treating the weighted mean as a combination of a weighted total estimator divided by an estimator of the population size, based on the formulation published by Cochran (1977), as an approximation to the ratio mean. However, Endlich et al. didn't seem to publish this derivation in their paper (even though they mention they used it), and Cochran's book includes a slightly different formulation. Still, it's almost identical to the formulations described in previous sections.\nReplication-based estimators.\nBecause there is no closed analytical form for the variance of the weighted mean, it was proposed in the literature to rely on replication methods such as the Jackknife and Bootstrapping.\nOther notes.\nFor uncorrelated observations with variances formula_105, the variance of the weighted sample mean is\n formula_106\nwhose square root formula_107 can be called the \"standard error of the weighted mean (general case)\".\nConsequently, if all the observations have equal variance, formula_108, the weighted sample mean will have variance\n formula_109\nwhere formula_110. The variance attains its maximum value, formula_111, when all weights except one are zero. Its minimum value is found when all weights are equal (i.e., unweighted mean), in which case we have formula_112, i.e., it degenerates into the standard error of the mean, squared.\nBecause one can always transform non-normalized weights to normalized weights, all formulas in this section can be adapted to non-normalized weights by replacing all formula_113.\nRelated concepts.\nWeighted sample variance.\nTypically when a mean is calculated it is important to know the variance and standard deviation about that mean. When a weighted mean formula_114 is used, the variance of the weighted sample is different from the variance of the unweighted sample.\nThe \"biased\" weighted sample variance formula_115 is defined similarly to the normal \"biased\" sample variance formula_116:\nformula_117\nwhere formula_118 for normalized weights. If the weights are \"frequency weights\" (and thus are random variables), it can be shown that formula_115 is the maximum likelihood estimator of formula_14 for iid Gaussian observations.\nFor small samples, it is customary to use an unbiased estimator for the population variance. In normal unweighted samples, the \"N\" in the denominator (corresponding to the sample size) is changed to \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 (see Bessel's correction). In the weighted setting, there are actually two different unbiased estimators, one for the case of \"frequency weights\" and another for the case of \"reliability weights\".\nFrequency weights.\nIf the weights are \"frequency weights\" (where a weight equals the number of occurrences), then the unbiased estimator is:\nformula_121\nThis effectively applies Bessel's correction for frequency weights. For example, if values formula_122 are drawn from the same distribution, then we can treat this set as an unweighted sample, or we can treat it as the weighted sample formula_123 with corresponding weights formula_124, and we get the same result either way.\nIf the frequency weights formula_125 are normalized to 1, then the correct expression after Bessel's correction becomes\nformula_126\nwhere the total number of samples is formula_127 (not formula_36). In any case, the information on total number of samples is necessary in order to obtain an unbiased correction, even if formula_89 has a different meaning other than frequency weight.\nThe estimator can be unbiased only if the weights are not standardized nor normalized, these processes changing the data's mean and variance and thus leading to a loss of the base rate (the population count, which is a requirement for Bessel's correction).\nReliability weights.\nIf the weights are instead \"reliability weights\" (non-random values reflecting the sample's relative trustworthiness, often derived from sample variance), we can determine a correction factor to yield an unbiased estimator. Assuming each random variable is sampled from the same distribution with mean formula_130 and actual variance formula_131, taking expectations we have,\nformula_132\nwhere formula_133 and formula_134. Therefore, the bias in our estimator is formula_135, analogous to the formula_136 bias in the unweighted estimator (also notice that formula_137 is the effective sample size). This means that to unbias our estimator we need to pre-divide by formula_138, ensuring that the expected value of the estimated variance equals the actual variance of the sampling distribution. The final unbiased estimate of sample variance is:\nformula_139\nwhere formula_140. The degrees of freedom of this weighted, unbiased sample variance vary accordingly from \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 down to\u00a00. The standard deviation is simply the square root of the variance above.\nAs a side note, other approaches have been described to compute the weighted sample variance.\nWeighted sample covariance.\nIn a weighted sample, each row vector formula_141 (each set of single observations on each of the \"K\" random variables) is assigned a weight formula_142.\nThen the weighted mean vector formula_143 is given by\nformula_144\nAnd the weighted covariance matrix is given by:\nformula_145\nSimilarly to weighted sample variance, there are two different unbiased estimators depending on the type of the weights.\nFrequency weights.\nIf the weights are \"frequency weights\", the \"unbiased\" weighted estimate of the covariance matrix formula_146, with Bessel's correction, is given by:\nformula_147\nThis estimator can be unbiased only if the weights are not standardized nor normalized, these processes changing the data's mean and variance and thus leading to a loss of the base rate (the population count, which is a requirement for Bessel's correction).\nReliability weights.\nIn the case of \"reliability weights\", the weights are normalized:\n formula_148\n(If they are not, divide the weights by their sum to normalize prior to calculating formula_149:\n formula_150\nThen the weighted mean vector formula_143 can be simplified to\nformula_152\nand the \"unbiased\" weighted estimate of the covariance matrix formula_153 is:\nformula_154\nThe reasoning here is the same as in the previous section.\nSince we are assuming the weights are normalized, then formula_155 and this reduces to:\n formula_156\nIf all weights are the same, i.e. formula_157, then the weighted mean and covariance reduce to the unweighted sample mean and covariance above.\nVector-valued estimates.\nThe above generalizes easily to the case of taking the mean of vector-valued estimates. For example, estimates of position on a plane may have less certainty in one direction than another. As in the scalar case, the weighted mean of multiple estimates can provide a maximum likelihood estimate. We simply replace the variance formula_14 by the covariance matrix formula_159 and the arithmetic inverse by the matrix inverse (both denoted in the same way, via superscripts); the weight matrix then reads:\nformula_160\nThe weighted mean in this case is:\nformula_161\n(where the order of the matrix\u2013vector product is not commutative), in terms of the covariance of the weighted mean:\nformula_162\nFor example, consider the weighted mean of the point [1 0] with high variance in the second component and [0 1] with high variance in the first component. Then\n formula_163\n formula_164\nthen the weighted mean is:\n formula_165\nwhich makes sense: the [1 0] estimate is \"compliant\" in the second component and the [0 1] estimate is compliant in the first component, so the weighted mean is nearly [1 1].\nAccounting for correlations.\nIn the general case, suppose that formula_166, formula_159 is the covariance matrix relating the quantities formula_17, formula_26 is the common mean to be estimated, and formula_170 is a design matrix equal to a vector of ones formula_171 (of length formula_172). The Gauss\u2013Markov theorem states that the estimate of the mean having minimum variance is given by:\nformula_173\nand\nformula_174\nwhere:\nformula_175\nDecreasing strength of interactions.\nConsider the time series of an independent variable formula_176 and a dependent variable formula_177, with formula_172 observations sampled at discrete times formula_179. In many common situations, the value of formula_177 at time formula_179 depends not only on formula_17 but also on its past values. Commonly, the strength of this dependence decreases as the separation of observations in time increases. To model this situation, one may replace the independent variable by its sliding mean formula_183 for a window size formula_184.\nformula_185\nExponentially decreasing weights.\nIn the scenario described in the previous section, most frequently the decrease in interaction strength obeys a negative exponential law. If the observations are sampled at equidistant times, then exponential decrease is equivalent to decrease by a constant fraction formula_186 at each time step. Setting formula_187 we can define formula_184 normalized weights by\n formula_189\nwhere formula_149 is the sum of the unnormalized weights. In this case formula_149 is simply\n formula_192\napproaching formula_193 for large values of formula_184.\nThe damping constant formula_195 must correspond to the actual decrease of interaction strength. If this cannot be determined from theoretical considerations, then the following properties of exponentially decreasing weights are useful in making a suitable choice: at step formula_196, the weight approximately equals formula_197, the tail area the value formula_198, the head area formula_199. The tail area at step formula_172 is formula_201. Where primarily the closest formula_172 observations matter and the effect of the remaining observations can be ignored safely, then choose formula_195 such that the tail area is sufficiently small.\nWeighted averages of functions.\nThe concept of weighted average can be extended to functions. Weighted averages of functions play an important role in the systems of weighted differential and integral calculus.\nCorrecting for over- or under-dispersion.\nWeighted means are typically used to find the weighted mean of historical data, rather than theoretically generated data. In this case, there will be some error in the variance of each data point. Typically experimental errors may be underestimated due to the experimenter not taking into account all sources of error in calculating the variance of each data point. In this event, the variance in the weighted mean must be corrected to account for the fact that formula_204 is too large. The correction that must be made is\nformula_205\nwhere formula_206 is the reduced chi-squared:\nformula_207\nThe square root formula_208 can be called the \"standard error of the weighted mean (variance weights, scale corrected)\".\nWhen all data variances are equal, formula_23, they cancel out in the weighted mean variance, formula_210, which again reduces to the standard error of the mean (squared), formula_211, formulated in terms of the sample standard deviation (squared),\nformula_212\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33276", "revid": "48617839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33276", "title": "W. H. Auden", "text": "British-American poet (1907\u20131973)\nWystan Hugh Auden ( ; 21 February 1907 \u2013 29 September 1973) was a British-American poet. Auden's poetry is noted for its stylistic and technical achievement, its engagement with politics, morals, love, and religion, and its variety in tone, form, and content. Some of his best known poems are about love, such as \"Funeral Blues\"; on political and social themes, such as \"September 1, 1939\" and \"The Shield of Achilles\"; on cultural and psychological themes, such as \"The Age of Anxiety\"; and on religious themes, such as \"For the Time Being\" and \"Horae Canonicae\".\nAuden was born in York and grew up in and near Birmingham in a professional, middle-class family. He attended various English independent (or public) schools and studied English at Christ Church, Oxford. After a few months in Berlin in 1928\u201329, he spent five years (1930\u20131935) teaching in British private preparatory schools. In 1939, he moved to the United States; he became an American citizen in 1946, retaining his British citizenship. Auden taught from 1941 to 1945 in American universities, followed by occasional visiting professorships in the 1950s.\nAuden came to wide public attention in 1930 with his first book, \"Poems\"; it was followed in 1932 by \"The Orators\". Three plays written in collaboration with Christopher Isherwood between 1935 and 1938 built his reputation as a left-wing political writer. Auden moved to the United States partly to escape this reputation, and his work in the 1940s, including the long poems \"For the Time Being\" and \"The Sea and the Mirror\", focused on religious themes. He won the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry for his 1947 long poem \"The Age of Anxiety\", the title of which became a popular phrase describing the modern era. From 1956 to 1961, he was Professor of Poetry at Oxford; his lectures were popular with students and faculty and served as the basis for his 1962 prose collection \"The Dyer's Hand\".\nAuden was a prolific writer of prose essays and reviews on literary, political, psychological, and religious subjects, and he worked at various times on documentary films, poetic plays, and other forms of performance. Throughout his career he was both controversial and influential. Critical views on his work ranged from sharply dismissive (treating him as a lesser figure than W. B. Yeats and T. S. Eliot) to strongly affirmative (as in Joseph Brodsky's statement that he had \"the greatest mind of the twentieth century\"). After his death, his poems became known to a much wider public through films, broadcasts, and popular media.\nLife.\nChildhood.\nAuden was born at 54 Bootham, York, England, to George Augustus Auden (1872\u20131957), a physician, and Constance Rosalie Auden (n\u00e9e Bicknell; 1869\u20131941), who had trained (but never served) as a missionary nurse. He was the third of three sons; the eldest, George Bernard Auden (1900\u20131978), became a farmer, while the second, John Bicknell Auden (1903\u20131991), became a geologist. The Audens were minor gentry with a strong clerical tradition, originally of Rowley Regis, later of Horninglow, Staffordshire.\nAuden, whose grandfathers were both Church of England clergymen, grew up in an Anglo-Catholic household that followed a \"high\" form of Anglicanism, with doctrine and ritual resembling those of Catholicism. He traced his love of music and language partly to the church services of his childhood. He believed he was of Icelandic descent, and his lifelong fascination with Icelandic legends and Old Norse sagas is evident in his work.\nHis family moved to Homer Road in Solihull, near Birmingham, in 1908, where his father had been appointed the School Medical Officer and Lecturer (later Professor) of Public Health. Auden's lifelong psychoanalytic interests began in his father's library. From the age of eight he attended boarding schools, returning home for holidays. His visits to the Pennine landscape and its declining lead-mining industry figure in many of his poems; the remote decaying mining village of Rookhope was for him a \"sacred landscape\", evoked in a late poem, \"Amor Loci\". Until he was fifteen he expected to become a mining engineer, but his passion for words had already begun. He wrote later: \"words so excite me that a pornographic story, for example, excites me sexually more than a living person can do.\"\nEducation.\nAuden attended St Edmund's School, Hindhead, Surrey, where he met Christopher Isherwood, later famous in his own right as a novelist. At thirteen he went to Gresham's School in Holt, Norfolk; there, in 1922, when his friend Robert Medley asked him if he wrote poetry, Auden first realised his vocation was to be a poet. Soon after, he \"discover(ed) that he (had) lost his faith\" (through a gradual realisation that he had lost interest in religion, not through any decisive change of views). In school productions of Shakespeare, he played Katherina in \"The Taming of the Shrew\" in 1922, and Caliban in \"The Tempest\" in 1925, his last year at Gresham's. A review of his performance as Katherina noted that despite a poor wig, he had been able \"to infuse considerable dignity into his passionate outbursts\".\nHis first published poems appeared in the school magazine in 1923. Auden later wrote a chapter on Gresham's for Graham Greene's \"The Old School: Essays by Divers Hands\" (1934).\nIn 1925 he went up to Christ Church, Oxford, with a scholarship in biology; he changed to English by his second year, and was introduced to Old English poetry through the lectures of J. R. R. Tolkien. Friends he met at Oxford include Cecil Day-Lewis, Louis MacNeice, and Stephen Spender \u2013 Auden and these three were commonly though misleadingly identified in the 1930s as the \"Auden Group\" for their shared (but not identical) left-wing views. Auden left Oxford in 1928 with a third-class degree.\nAuden was reintroduced to Christopher Isherwood in 1925 by his fellow student A. S. T. Fisher. For the next few years Auden sent poems to Isherwood for comments and criticism; the two maintained a sexual friendship in intervals between their relations with others. In 1935\u201339 they collaborated on three plays and a travel book.\nFrom his Oxford years onward, Auden's friends uniformly described him as funny, extravagant, sympathetic, generous, and, partly by his own choice, lonely. In groups he was often dogmatic and overbearing in a comic way; in more private settings he was diffident and shy except when certain of his welcome. He was punctual in his habits, and obsessive about meeting deadlines, while living amidst physical disorder.\nBritain and Europe, 1928\u20131938.\nIn late 1928, Auden left Britain for nine months, going to Berlin, perhaps partly as an escape from English repressiveness. In Berlin, he first experienced the political and economic unrest that became one of his central subjects. Around the same time, Stephen Spender privately printed a small pamphlet of Auden's \"Poems\" in an edition of about 45 copies, distributed among Auden's and Spender's friends and family; this edition is usually referred to as \"Poems\" [1928] to avoid confusion with Auden's commercially published 1930 volume.\nOn returning to Britain in 1929 he worked briefly as a tutor. In 1930 his first published book, \"Poems\" (1930), was accepted by T. S. Eliot for Faber and Faber, and the same firm remained the British publisher of all the books he published thereafter. In 1930, he began five years as a schoolmaster in boys' schools: two years at the Larchfield Academy in Helensburgh, Scotland, then three years at the Downs School in the Malvern Hills, where he was a much-loved teacher. At the Downs, in June 1933, he experienced what he later described as a \"Vision of Agape\", while sitting with three fellow teachers at the school, when he suddenly found that he loved them for themselves, that their existence had infinite value for him; this experience, he said, later influenced his decision to return to the Anglican Church in 1940.\nDuring these years Auden's erotic interests focused, as he later said, on an idealised \"Alter Ego\" rather than on individual people. His relationships (and his unsuccessful courtships) tended to be unequal either in age or intelligence; his sexual relations were transient, although some evolved into long friendships. He contrasted these relationships with what he later regarded as the \"marriage\" (his word) of equals that he began with Chester Kallman in 1939, based on the unique individuality of both partners.\nIn 1935 Auden married Erika Mann (1905\u20131969), the bisexual novelist daughter of Thomas Mann, when it became apparent that the Nazis were intending to strip her of her German citizenship. Mann had asked Christopher Isherwood if he would marry her so she could become a British subject. He declined but suggested she approach Auden, who readily agreed to a marriage of convenience. Mann and Auden never lived together, but remained on good terms throughout their lives and were still married when Mann died in 1969. She left him a small bequest in her will. In 1936, Auden introduced actress Therese Giehse, Mann's lover, to the writer John Hampson, and they too married so that Giehse could leave Germany.\nFrom 1935 until he left Britain early in 1939, Auden worked as freelance reviewer, essayist, and lecturer, first with the GPO Film Unit, a documentary film-making branch of the post office, headed by John Grierson. Through his work for the Film Unit in 1935 he met and collaborated with Benjamin Britten, with whom he also worked on plays, song cycles, and a libretto. Auden's plays in the 1930s were performed by the Group Theatre, in productions that he supervised to varying degrees.\nHis work now reflected his belief that any good artist must be \"more than a bit of a reporting journalist\". In 1936, Auden spent three months in Iceland where he gathered material for a travel book \"Letters from Iceland\" (1937), written in collaboration with Louis MacNeice. In 1937, he went to Spain intending to drive an ambulance for the Republic in the Spanish Civil War, but was put to work writing propaganda at the Republican press and propaganda office, where he felt useless and left after a week. He returned to England after a brief visit to the front at Sarine\u00f1a. His seven-week visit to Spain affected him deeply, and his social views grew more complex as he found political realities to be more ambiguous and troubling than he had imagined. Again attempting to combine reportage and art, he and Isherwood spent six months in 1938 visiting China amid the Sino-Japanese War, working on their book \"Journey to a War\" (1939). On their way back to England they stayed briefly in New York and decided to move to the United States. Auden spent late 1938 partly in England, partly in Brussels.\nMany of Auden's poems during the 1930s and after were inspired by unconsummated love, and in the 1950s he summarised his emotional life in a famous couplet: \"If equal affection cannot be / Let the more loving one be me\" (\"The More Loving One\"). He had a gift for friendship and, starting in the late 1930s, a strong wish for the stability of marriage; in a letter to his friend James Stern he called marriage \"the \"only\" subject.\" Throughout his life, Auden performed charitable acts, sometimes in public, as in his 1935 marriage of convenience to Erika Mann, but, especially in later years, more often in private. He was embarrassed if they were publicly revealed, as when his gift to his friend Dorothy Day for the Catholic Worker movement was reported on the front page of \"The New York Times\" in 1956.\nUnited States and Europe, 1939\u20131973.\nAuden and Isherwood sailed to New York City in January 1939, entering on temporary visas. Their departure from Britain was later seen by many as a betrayal, and Auden's reputation suffered. In April 1939, Isherwood moved to California, and he and Auden saw each other only intermittently in later years. Around this time, Auden met the poet Chester Kallman, who became his lover for the next two years (Auden described their relation as a \"marriage\" that began with a cross-country \"honeymoon\" journey).\nIn 1941 Kallman ended their sexual relationship because he could not accept Auden's insistence on mutual fidelity, but he and Auden remained companions for the rest of Auden's life, sharing houses and apartments from 1953 until Auden's death. Auden dedicated both editions of his collected poetry (1945/50 and 1966) to Isherwood and Kallman.\nIn 1940\u201341 Auden lived in a house at 7 Middagh Street in Brooklyn Heights, that he shared with Carson McCullers, Benjamin Britten, and others, which became a famous centre of artistic life, nicknamed \"February House\". In 1940, Auden joined the Episcopal Church, returning to the Anglican Communion he had abandoned at fifteen. His reconversion was influenced partly by what he called the \"sainthood\" of Charles Williams, whom he had met in 1937, and partly by reading S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard and Reinhold Niebuhr; his existential, this-worldly Christianity became a central element in his life.\nAfter Britain declared war on Germany in September 1939, Auden told the British embassy in Washington that he would return to the UK if needed. He was told that, among those his age (32), only qualified personnel were needed. In 1941\u201342 he taught English at the University of Michigan. He was called for the draft in the United States Army in August 1942, but was rejected on medical grounds. He had been awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for 1942\u201343 but did not use it, choosing instead to teach at Swarthmore College in 1942\u201345.\nIn mid-1945, after the end of World War II in Europe, he was in Germany with the US Strategic Bombing Survey, studying the effects of Allied bombing on German morale, an experience that affected his postwar work as his visit to Spain had affected him earlier. On his return, he settled in Manhattan, working as a freelance writer, a lecturer at The New School for Social Research, and a visiting professor at Bennington, Smith, and other American colleges. In 1946, he became a naturalised citizen of the US.\nIn 1948 Auden began spending his summers in Europe, together with Chester Kallman, first in Ischia, Italy, where he rented a house. Starting in 1958 he began spending his summers in Kirchstetten, Austria, where he bought a farmhouse with the prize money of the \"Premio Feltrinelli\" awarded to him in 1957. He said that he shed tears of joy at owning a home for the first time. His later poetry, mostly written in Austria, includes his sequence \"Thanksgiving for a Habitat\" about his Kirchstetten home. Auden's letters and papers sent to his friend the translator Stella Musulin (1915\u20131996), available online, provide insights into his Austrian years.\nIn 1956\u201361 Auden was Professor of Poetry at Oxford University, where he was required to give three lectures each year. This fairly light workload allowed him to continue to spend winter in New York, where he lived at 77 St. Mark's Place in Manhattan's East Village, and to spend summer in Europe, spending only three weeks each year lecturing in Oxford. He earned his income mostly from readings and lecture tours, and by writing for \"The New Yorker,\" \"The New York Review of Books,\" and other magazines.\nIn 1963 Kallman left the apartment he shared in New York with Auden, and lived during the winter in Athens while continuing to spend his summers with Auden in Austria. Auden spent the winter of 1964-1965 in Berlin through an artist-in-residence program of the Ford Foundation.\nFollowing some years of lobbying by his friend David Luke, Auden's old college, Christ Church, in February 1972 offered him a cottage on its grounds to live in; he moved his books and other possessions from New York to Oxford in September 1972, while continuing to spend summers in Austria with Kallman. He spent only one winter in Oxford before his death in 1973.\nAuden died at 66 of heart failure at the Altenburgerhof Hotel in Vienna overnight on 28\u201329 September 1973, a few hours after giving a reading of his poems for the Austrian Society for Literature at the Palais P\u00e1lffy. He had intended to return to Oxford the following day. He was buried on 4 October in Kirchstetten, and a memorial stone was placed in Westminster Abbey in London a year later.\nWork.\nAuden published about four hundred poems, including seven long poems (two of them book-length). His poetry was encyclopaedic in scope and method, ranging in style from obscure twentieth-century modernism to the lucid traditional forms such as ballads and limericks, from doggerel through haiku and villanelles to a \"Christmas Oratorio\" and a baroque eclogue in Anglo-Saxon meters. The tone and content of his poems ranged from pop-song clich\u00e9s to complex philosophical meditations, from the corns on his toes to atoms and stars, from contemporary crises to the evolution of society.\nHe also wrote more than four hundred essays and reviews about literature, history, politics, music, religion, and many other subjects. He collaborated on plays with Christopher Isherwood and on opera libretti with Chester Kallman, and worked with a group of artists and filmmakers on documentary films in the 1930s and with the New York Pro Musica early music group in the 1950s and 1960s. About collaboration he wrote in 1964: \"collaboration has brought me greater erotic joy .\u00a0.\u00a0. than any sexual relations I have had.\"\nAuden controversially rewrote or discarded some of his most famous poems when he prepared his later collected editions. He wrote that he rejected poems that he found \"boring\" or \"dishonest\" in the sense that they expressed views he had never held but had used only because he felt they would be rhetorically effective. His rejected poems include \"Spain\" and \"September 1, 1939\". His literary executor, Edward Mendelson, argues in his introduction to \"Selected Poems\" that Auden's practice reflected his sense of the persuasive power of poetry and his reluctance to misuse it. (\"Selected Poems\" includes some poems that Auden rejected and early texts of poems that he revised.)\nEarly work, 1922\u20131939.\nUp to 1930.\nAuden began writing poems in 1922, at 15, mostly in the styles of 19th-century romantic poets, especially Wordsworth, and later poets with rural interests, especially Thomas Hardy. At 18 he discovered T.\u00a0S. Eliot and adopted an extreme version of Eliot's style. He found his own voice at 20 when he wrote the first poem later included in his collected work, \"From the very first coming down\". This and other poems of the late 1920s tended to be in a clipped, elusive style that alluded to, but did not directly state, their themes of loneliness and loss. Twenty of these poems appeared in his first book \"Poems\" (1928), a pamphlet hand-printed by Stephen Spender.\nIn 1928 he wrote his first dramatic work, \"Paid on Both Sides\", subtitled \"A Charade\", which combined style and content from the Icelandic sagas with jokes from English school life. This mixture of tragedy and farce, with a dream play-within-a-play, introduced the mixed styles and content of much of his later work. This drama and thirty short poems appeared in his first published book \"Poems\" (1930, 2nd edition with seven poems replaced, 1933); the poems in the book were mostly lyrical and gnomic meditations on hoped-for or unconsummated love and on themes of personal, social, and seasonal renewal; among these poems were \"It was Easter as I walked\", \"Doom is dark\", \"Sir, no man's enemy\", and \"This lunar beauty\".\nA recurrent theme in these early poems is the effect of \"family ghosts\", Auden's term for the powerful, unseen psychological effects of preceding generations on any individual life (and the title of a poem). A parallel theme, present throughout his work, is the contrast between biological evolution (unchosen and involuntary) and the psychological evolution of cultures and individuals (voluntary and deliberate even in its subconscious aspects).\n1931\u20131935.\nAuden's next large-scale work was \"The Orators: An English Study\" (1932; revised editions, 1934, 1966), in verse and prose, largely about hero-worship in personal and political life. In his shorter poems, his style became more open and accessible, and the exuberant \"Six Odes\" in \"The Orators\" reflect his new interest in Robert Burns. During the next few years, many of his poems took their form and style from traditional ballads and popular songs, and also from expansive classical forms like the \"Odes\" of Horace, which he seems to have discovered through the German poet H\u00f6lderlin. Around this time his main influences were Dante, William Langland, and Alexander Pope.\nDuring these years much of his work expressed left-wing views, and he became widely known as a political poet although he was privately more ambivalent about revolutionary politics than many reviewers recognised, and Mendelson argues that he expounded political views partly out of a sense of moral duty and partly because it enhanced his reputation, and that he later regretted having done so. He generally wrote about revolutionary change in terms of a \"change of heart\", a transformation of a society from a closed-off psychology of fear to an open psychology of love.\nHis verse drama \"The Dance of Death\" (1933) was a political extravaganza in the style of a theatrical revue, which Auden later called \"a nihilistic leg-pull.\" His next play \"The Dog Beneath the Skin\" (1935), written in collaboration with Isherwood, was similarly a quasi-Marxist updating of Gilbert and Sullivan in which the general idea of social transformation was more prominent than any specific political action or structure.\n\"The Ascent of F6\" (1937), another play written with Isherwood, was partly an anti-imperialist satire, partly (in the character of the self-destroying climber Michael Ransom) an examination of Auden's own motives in taking on a public role as a political poet. This play included the first version of \"Funeral Blues\" (\"Stop all the clocks\"), written as a satiric eulogy for a politician; Auden later rewrote the poem as a \"Cabaret Song\" about lost love (written to be sung by the soprano Hedli Anderson, for whom he wrote many lyrics in the 1930s). In 1935, he worked briefly on documentary films with the GPO Film Unit, writing his famous verse commentary for \"Night Mail\" and lyrics for other films that were among his attempts in the 1930s to create a widely accessible, socially conscious art.\n1936\u20131939.\nIn 1936 Auden's publisher chose the title \"Look, Stranger!\" for a collection of political odes, love poems, comic songs, meditative lyrics, and a variety of intellectually intense but emotionally accessible verse; Auden hated the title and retitled the collection for the 1937 US edition \"On This Island\". Among the poems included in the book are \"Hearing of harvests\", \"Out on the lawn I lie in bed\", \"O what is that sound\", \"Look, stranger, on this island now\" (later revised versions change \"on\" to \"at\"), and \"Our hunting fathers\".\nAuden was now arguing that an artist should be a kind of journalist, and he put this view into practice in \"Letters from Iceland\" (1937) a travel book in prose and verse written with Louis MacNeice, which included his long social, literary, and autobiographical commentary \"Letter to Lord Byron\". In 1937, after observing the Spanish Civil War he wrote a politically engaged pamphlet poem \"Spain\" (1937); he later discarded it from his collected works. \"Journey to a War\" (1939) a travel book in prose and verse, was written with Isherwood after their visit to the Sino-Japanese War. Auden's last collaboration with Isherwood was their third play, \"On the Frontier\", an anti-war satire written in Broadway and West End styles.\nAuden's shorter poems now engaged with the fragility and transience of personal love (\"Danse Macabre\", \"The Dream\", \"Lay your sleeping head\"), a subject he treated with ironic wit in his \"Four Cabaret Songs for Miss Hedli Anderson\" (which included \"Tell Me the Truth About Love\" and the revised version of \"Funeral Blues\"), and also the corrupting effect of public and official culture on individual lives (\"Casino\", \"School Children\", \"Dover\"). In 1938, he wrote a series of dark, ironic ballads about individual failure (\"Miss Gee\", \"James Honeyman\", \"Victor\"). All these appeared in \"Another Time\" (1940), together with poems including \"Dover\", \"As He Is\", and \"Mus\u00e9e des Beaux Arts\" (all of which were written before he moved to America in 1939), and \"In Memory of W. B. Yeats\", \"The Unknown Citizen\", \"Law Like Love\", \"September 1, 1939\", and \"In Memory of Sigmund Freud\" (all written in America).\nThe elegies for Yeats and Freud are partly anti-heroic statements, in which great deeds are performed, not by unique geniuses whom others cannot hope to imitate, but by otherwise ordinary individuals who were \"silly like us\" (Yeats) or of whom it could be said \"he wasn't clever at all\" (Freud), and who became teachers of others, not awe-inspiring heroes.\nMiddle period, 1940\u20131957.\n1940\u20131946.\nIn 1940 Auden wrote a long philosophical poem \"New Year Letter\", which appeared with miscellaneous notes and other poems in \"The Double Man\" (1941). At the time of his return to the Anglican Communion he began writing abstract verse on theological themes, such as \"Canzone\" and \"Kairos and Logos\". Around 1942, as he became more comfortable with religious themes, his verse became more open and relaxed, and he increasingly used the syllabic verse he had learned from the poetry of Marianne Moore.\nAuden's work in this era addresses the artist's temptation to use other persons as material for his art rather than valuing them for themselves (\"Prospero to Ariel\") and the corresponding moral obligation to make and keep commitments while recognising the temptation to break them (\"In Sickness and Health\"). From 1942 through 1947 he worked mostly on three long poems in dramatic form, each differing from the others in form and content: \"For the Time Being: A Christmas Oratorio\", \"The Sea and the Mirror: A Commentary on Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\"\" (both published in \"For the Time Being\", 1944), and \"The Age of Anxiety: A Baroque Eclogue\" (published separately in 1947). The first two, with Auden's other new poems from 1940 to 1944, were included in his first collected edition, \"The Collected Poetry of W.\u00a0H. Auden\" (1945), with most of his earlier poems, many in revised versions.\n1947\u20131957.\nAfter completing \"The Age of Anxiety\" in 1946 he focused again on shorter poems, notably \"A Walk After Dark\", \"The Love Feast\", and \"The Fall of Rome\". Many of these evoked the Italian village where he spent his summers between 1948 and 1957, and his next book, \"Nones\" (1951), had a Mediterranean atmosphere new to his work. A new theme was the \"sacred importance\" of the human body in its ordinary aspect (breathing, sleeping, eating) and the continuity with nature that the body made possible (in contrast to the division between humanity and nature that he had emphasised in the 1930s); his poems on these themes included \"In Praise of Limestone\" (1948) and \"Memorial for the City\" (1949). In 1947\u20131948, Auden and Kallman wrote the libretto for Igor Stravinsky's opera \"The Rake's Progress\", and later collaborated on two libretti for operas by Hans Werner Henze.\nAuden's first separate prose book was \"The Enchaf\u00e8d Flood: The Romantic Iconography of the Sea\" (1950), based on a series of lectures on the image of the sea in romantic literature. Between 1949 and 1954 he worked on a sequence of seven Good Friday poems, titled \"Horae Canonicae\", an encyclopaedic survey of geological, biological, cultural, and personal history, focused on the irreversible act of murder; the poem was also a study in cyclical and linear ideas of time. While writing this, he also wrote \"Bucolics\", a sequence of seven poems about man's relation to nature. Both sequences appeared in his next book, \"The Shield of Achilles\" (1955), with other short poems, including the book's title poem, \"Fleet Visit\", and \"Epitaph for the Unknown Soldier\".\nIn 1955\u201356 Auden wrote a group of poems about \"history\", the term he used to mean the set of unique events made by human choices, as opposed to \"nature\", the set of involuntary events created by natural processes, statistics, and anonymous forces such as crowds. These poems included \"T the Great\", \"The Maker\", and the title poem of his next collection \"Homage to Clio\" (1960).\nLater work, 1958\u20131973.\nIn the late 1950s Auden's style became less rhetorical while its range of styles increased. In 1958, having moved his summer home from Italy to Austria, he wrote \"Good-bye to the Mezzogiorno\"; other poems from this period include \": An Unwritten Poem\", a prose poem about the relation between love and personal and poetic language, and the contrasting \"Dame Kind\", about the anonymous impersonal reproductive instinct. These and other poems, including his 1955\u201366 poems about history, appeared in \"Homage to Clio\" (1960). His prose book \"The Dyer's Hand\" (1962) gathered many of the lectures he gave in Oxford as Professor of Poetry in 1956\u201361, together with revised versions of essays and notes written since the mid-1940s.\nAmong the new styles and forms in Auden's later work were the haiku and tanka that he began writing after translating the haiku and other verse in Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld's \"Markings\". A sequence of fifteen poems about his house in Austria, \"Thanksgiving for a Habitat\" (written in various styles that included an imitation of William Carlos Williams) appeared in \"About the House\" (1965), together with other poems that included his reflection on his lecture tours, \"On the Circuit\". In the late 1960s he wrote some of his most vigorous poems, including \"River Profile\" and two poems that looked back over his life, \"Prologue at Sixty\" and \"Forty Years On\". All these appeared in \"City Without Walls\" (1969). His lifelong passion for Icelandic legend culminated in his verse translation of \"The Elder Edda\" (1969). Among his later themes was the \"religionless Christianity\" he learned partly from Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the dedicatee of his poem \"Friday's Child\".\n\"A Certain World: A Commonplace Book\" (1970) was a kind of self-portrait made up of favourite quotations with commentary, arranged in alphabetical order by subject. His last prose book was a selection of essays and reviews, \"Forewords and Afterwords\" (1973). His last books of verse, \"Epistle to a Godson\" (1972) and the unfinished \"Thank You, Fog\" (published posthumously, 1974) include reflective poems about language (\"Natural Linguistics\", \"Aubade\"), philosophy and science (\"No, Plato, No\", \"Unpredictable but Providential\"), and his own aging (\"A New Year Greeting\", \"Talking to Myself\"\u2014which he dedicated to his friend Oliver Sacks, \"A Lullaby\" [\"The din of work is subdued\"]). His last completed poem was \"Archaeology\", about ritual and timelessness, two recurring themes in his later years.\nReputation and influence.\nAuden's stature in modern literature has been contested. Probably the most common critical view from the 1930s onward ranked him as the last and least of the three major twentieth-century poets of the UK or Ireland\u2014behind Yeats and Eliot\u2014while a minority view, more prominent in recent years, ranks him as the highest of the three. Opinions have ranged from those of Hugh MacDiarmid, who called him \"a complete wash-out\"; F. R. Leavis, who wrote that Auden's ironic style was \"self-defensive, self-indulgent or merely irresponsible\"; and Harold Bloom, who wrote \"Close thy Auden, open thy [Wallace] Stevens,\" to the obituarist in \"The Times\", who wrote: \"W.H. Auden, for long the \"enfant terrible\" of English poetry... emerges as its undisputed master.\" Joseph Brodsky wrote that Auden had \"the greatest mind of the twentieth century\".\nCritical estimates were divided from the start. Reviewing Auden's first book, \"Poems\" (1930), Naomi Mitchison wrote \"If this is really only the beginning, we have perhaps a master to look forward to.\" But John Sparrow, recalling Mitchison's comment in 1934, dismissed Auden's early work as \"a monument to the misguided aims that prevail among contemporary poets, and the fact that... he is being hailed as 'a master' shows how criticism is helping poetry on the downward path.\"\nAuden's clipped, satiric, and ironic style in the 1930s was widely imitated by younger poets such as Charles Madge, who wrote in a poem \"there waited for me in the summer morning / Auden fiercely. I read, shuddered, and knew.\" He was widely described as the leader of an \"Auden group\" that comprised his friends Stephen Spender, Cecil Day-Lewis, and Louis MacNeice. The four were mocked by the poet Roy Campbell as if they were a single undifferentiated poet named \"Macspaunday.\" Auden's propagandistic poetic plays, including \"The Dog Beneath the Skin\" and \"The Ascent of F6\", and his political poems such as \"Spain\" gave him the reputation as a political poet writing in a progressive and accessible voice, in contrast to Eliot; but this political stance provoked opposing opinions, such as that of Austin Clarke who called Auden's work \"liberal, democratic, and humane\", and John Drummond, who wrote that Auden misused a \"characteristic and popularizing trick, the generalized image\", to present ostensibly left-wing views that were in fact \"confined to bourgeois experience.\"\nAuden's departure for America in 1939 was debated in Britain (once even in Parliament), with some seeing his emigration as a betrayal. Defenders of Auden such as Geoffrey Grigson, in an introduction to a 1949 anthology of modern poetry, wrote that Auden \"arches over all\". His stature was suggested by book titles such as \"Auden and After\" by Francis Scarfe (1942) and \"The Auden Generation\" by Samuel Hynes (1977).\nIn the US, starting in the late 1930s, the detached, ironic tone of Auden's regular stanzas became influential; John Ashbery recalled that in the 1940s Auden \"was \"the\" modern poet\". Auden's formal influences were so pervasive in American poetry that the ecstatic style of the Beat Generation was partly a reaction against his influence. From the 1940s through the 1960s, many critics lamented that Auden's work had declined from its earlier promise; Randall Jarrell wrote a series of essays making a case against Auden's later work, and Philip Larkin's \"What's Become of Wystan?\" (1960) had a wide impact.\nThe first full-length study of Auden was Richard Hoggart's \"Auden: An Introductory Essay\" (1951), which concluded that \"Auden's work, then, is a civilising force.\" It was followed by Joseph Warren Beach's \"The Making of the Auden Canon\" (1957), a disapproving account of Auden's revisions of his earlier work. The first systematic critical account was Monroe K. Spears' \"The Poetry of W.\u00a0H. Auden: The Disenchanted Island\" (1963), \"written out of the conviction that Auden's poetry can offer the reader entertainment, instruction, intellectual excitement, and a prodigal variety of aesthetic pleasures, all in a generous abundance that is unique in our time.\"\nAuden was one of three candidates recommended by the Nobel Committee to the Swedish Academy for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1963 and 1965 and six recommended for the 1964 prize. By the time of his death in 1973 he had attained the status of a respected elder statesman, and a memorial stone for him was placed in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey in 1974. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" writes that \"by the time of Eliot's death in 1965... a convincing case could be made for the assertion that Auden was indeed Eliot's successor, as Eliot had inherited sole claim to supremacy when Yeats died in 1939.\" With some exceptions, British critics tended to treat his early work as his best, while American critics tended to favour his middle and later work.\nAnother group of critics and poets has maintained that unlike other modern poets, Auden's reputation did not decline after his death, and the influence of his later writing was especially strong on younger American poets including John Ashbery, James Merrill, Anthony Hecht, and Maxine Kumin. Typical later evaluations describe him as \"arguably the [20th] century's greatest poet\" (Peter Parker and Frank Kermode), who \"now clearly seems the greatest poet in English since Tennyson\" (Philip Hensher).\nAuden became a close friend of neurologist Oliver Sacks and after publication of Sacks's first book \"Migraine\", in 1970, his review encouraged Sacks to adapt his writing style to \"be metaphorical, be mythical, be whatever you need.\"\nPublic recognition of Auden's work sharply increased after his \"Funeral Blues\" (\"Stop all the clocks\") was read aloud in the film \"Four Weddings and a Funeral\" (1994); subsequently, a pamphlet edition of ten of his poems, \"Tell Me the Truth About Love\", sold more than 275,000 copies. An excerpt from his poem \"As I walked out one evening\" was recited in the film \"Before Sunrise\" (1995). After the 11 September 2001 attacks, his 1939 poem \"September 1, 1939\" was widely circulated and frequently broadcast. Public readings and broadcast tributes in the UK and US in 2007 marked his centenary year.\nOverall Auden's poetry was noted for its stylistic and technical achievement, its engagement with politics, morals, love, and religion, and its variety in tone, form and content.\nMemorial stones and plaques commemorating Auden include those in Westminster Abbey; at his birthplace at 55 Bootham, York; near his home on Lordswood Road, Birmingham; in the chapel of Christ Church, Oxford; on the site of his apartment at 1 Montague Terrace, Brooklyn Heights; at his apartment in 77 St. Marks Place, New York (damaged and now removed); at the site of his death at Walfischgasse 5 in Vienna; and in the Rainbow Honor Walk in San Francisco. In his house in Kirchstetten, his study is open to the public upon request.\nIn 2023, newly declassified UK government files revealed that Auden was considered as a candidate to be the new Poet Laureate of the United Kingdom in 1967 following the death of John Masefield. He was rejected due to having taken American citizenship.\nPublished works.\nThe following list includes only the books of poems and essays that Auden prepared during his lifetime; for a more complete list, including other works and posthumous editions, see W. H. Auden bibliography. Dates refer to first publication or first performance, not of composition.\nIn the list below, works reprinted in the \"Complete Works of W.\u00a0H. Auden\" are indicated by footnote references.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
