{"id": "32099", "revid": "34452882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32099", "title": "University of Manitoba", "text": "Public university in Winnipeg, Canada\nThe University of Manitoba (U of M, UManitoba, or UM) is a public research university in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Founded in 1877, it is the first university in Western Canada. Both by total student enrolment and campus area, the University of Manitoba is the largest university in the province of Manitoba. Its main campus is located in the Fort Garry neighbourhood of Winnipeg, with other campuses throughout the city: the Bannatyne Campus, the James W. Burns Executive Education Centre, the William Norrie Centre, and the French-language affiliate, Universit\u00e9 de Saint-Boniface in the Saint Boniface ward.\nResearch at the university contributed to the creation of canola oil in the 1970s. Likewise, University of Manitoba alumni include Nobel Prize recipients, Academy Award winners, Order of Merit recipients, and Olympic medalists. As of 2019[ [update]], there have been 99 Rhodes Scholarship recipients from the University of Manitoba, more than that of any other university in western Canada.\nThe University of Manitoba is a member of the U15 group of research-intensive universities in Canada and of Universities Canada, while its global affiliations include the International Association of Universities and the Association of Commonwealth Universities.\nThe Manitoba Bisons compete in U Sports and Canada West Universities Athletic Association (CWUAA).\nHistory.\nFounding.\nThe University of Manitoba, founded by Alexander Morris, was established under the \"University of Manitoba Act\" as a \"Provincial University\" on 28 February 1877, becoming the first institution of higher education to be established in western Canada.\nThe first University of Manitoba Chancellor (1877\u20131904) was Robert Machray, later the Archbishop of Rupert's Land. The first vice-chancellor (1877\u20131889) was Manitoba Attorney-General Joseph Royal, who was also the one to introduce the bill for the \"University of Manitoba Act\".\nFounding colleges.\nOfficially opening on June 20, 1877, the university was formed by the federation of three existing denominational colleges and conferred degrees on students graduating from these colleges: Coll\u00e8ge de Saint-Boniface (Roman Catholic), St John's College (Anglican), and Manitoba College (Presbyterian).\nThe university would add a number of colleges to its corporate and associative body since. In 1882, the Manitoba Medical College, privately founded by physicians and surgeons, became a part of the university. Six years later, in 1888, Wesley College (Methodist) became affiliated with the university as well. The Bacteriological Research Building of the Manitoba Medical College would be designed by architect Charles Henry Wheeler in 1897, while the Science Building, between 1899 and 1900 by architect George Creeford Browne.\nIn 1895, the \"University of Manitoba Act\" was amended to give the denominational colleges the power to confer degrees in divinity. It would be amended again two years later in order to allow the Manitoba government to grant up to $60,000 for the university and a normal school (i.e., a teaching college).\nIn 1900, the university became a teaching institution by an act of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba. Soon after, other colleges also received affiliated status:\nIn 1938, Wesley College and Manitoba College merged to form United College. Three decades later, in 1967, United College became the University of Winnipeg, and Brandon College became Brandon University.\nIn contrast, Coll\u00e8ge universitaire de St. Boniface has retained its affiliation with the University of Manitoba, though operating independently on its own campus in the St. Boniface area of Winnipeg. Moreover, St. John's, St. Paul's, and St. Andrew's College have continued their affiliated relationship with the University of Manitoba into the present day, and are housed on the university's Fort Garry campus.\nEarly development.\nThe university would hold its first exams on 27 May 1878, taken by a total of seven students, all from Manitoba College. Two years later, the University of Manitoba conferred its first degree, the recipient being Reginald William Gunn, a M\u00e9tis student of Manitoba College who graduated with honours in Natural Sciences.\nIn 1885, the university is approved by the federal government for up to of crown land in Manitoba as an endowment.\nIn 1886, the University of Manitoba admitted its first woman student, Jessie Holmes, and in 1889, Holmes also became the university's first female graduate. In 1892, the Manitoba Medical College saw its first female graduate, Hattie Foxton, who passed her exams with first-class standing for Doctor of Medicine and Master of Surgery.\nIn 1897, the \"University of Manitoba Act\" was amended in order to allow the Manitoba government to grant up to $60,000 for the university and a normal school (i.e., a teaching college).\nIn the early part of the 20th century, professional education expanded beyond the traditional fields of theology, law, and medicine. Graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized course work and the completion of a research thesis was introduced.\nAs the university recognized its need to be a teaching university in addition to its degree-granting responsibilities, the science building was built in 1901 on Broadway in downtown Winnipeg, becoming the university's first teaching facility. The university's first dedicated staff was subsequently hired in 1904 to teach in the newly created Faculty of Science. This staff of science professors is regarded as the university's \"original six,\" and included A.H.R. Buller (botany and geology), Frank Allen (physics and mineralogy), M.A. Parker (chemistry), R. R. Cochrane (mathematics), Swale Vincent (physiology), and Gordon Bell (bacteriology).\nIn 1908 the university established its library and Florence Davy Thompson became the first librarian.\nThe Broadway location\u2014as well as the current site of the Canadian Mennonite University near Assiniboine Park\u2014was considered as a possible main campus. However, the university ultimately decided on its current site at Fort Garry in order to be near the Manitoba Agricultural College, which, in 1911, began constructing the campus\u2019 first buildings: Tache Hall, the Administration Building, and the Home Economics Building (now the Human Ecology Building), all completed in 1912.\nBetween 1911 and 1912, the university conferred its first honorary degrees, received by President of the University of Toronto Robert Alexander Falconer and by Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba Daniel Hunter Macmillan. On 1 January 1913, James Alexander Maclean became the first President of the university. Also in 1913, the university officially moved to the site, where it began constructing some of its own buildings, including the Engineering building. That year, the Departments of Architecture, Mechanical Engineering, French, and of German were established as well.\nWorld War I.\nMany of the university's students went off to fight in the First World War, for which the University of Manitoba also served as a training ground. Between 1914 and 1915, the University Council established a Committee on Military Instruction, authorizing the teaching of military science and tactics, and a university corps is also organized. In 1915, the Western Universities Battalion (the 196th) of the Canadian Expeditionary Forces (CEF) was formed. On the first of March that year, the appointment of the Canadian Officers' Training Corps of the university was published.\nIn 1914, the Manitoba Law School was founded by the University of Manitoba and the Law Society of Manitoba as an affiliated college of the university. Officially opening on 3 October 1914, the School would have 123 students (including 5 women) and 21 academic staff in 1920. On 23 April 1915, a Baccalaureate Address was given at the end of the academic session for the first time in the university's history. In 1919, the University of Manitoba would found the first school of architecture in all of western Canada.\nIn 1916, the Departments of Arts (including Mathematics) and Architecture, the Library, and the administrative offices of the university were moved into the former Law Courts Building. Also that year, Englishman Frank E. Nuttall became the first trained librarian for the university.\nIn 1916, an Overseas Correspondence Club was established to write letters to UM students serving in England and France during the War, keeping them up-to-date in on University activities during their absence. At a March Faculty Council meeting in 1917, taking note of the Russian Revolution, the Faculty ordered the sending of a congratulatory telegram to the Provisional Government of Russia. The telegram was subsequently answered by Foreign Minister Pavel Milyukov.\nDuring this time, university enrolment reduced significantly due to military enlistment; students dropped from 925 in 1914\u201315 to 662 in 1916\u201317.\nIn 1918, the university's board of governors arranged for all men with a record of overseas service in the CEF, or who have served for a year or more in Canada, to receive full tuition remission in Arts and half tuition fees in Engineering, Architecture, Pharmacy, and Medicine. Also this year, the Spanish flu epidemic and the subsequent ban on public meetings closed the university for several weeks from October 11 to December 2.\nBy the end of World War I on 11 November 1918, a total of 1160 students and 14 faculty/staff from the University of Manitoba enlisted; 123 were killed or died during the war; and 142 received military honors.\nPost-World War I.\nFollowing the War, the university saw a large increase in enrolment, with 2,013 students enrolling in various degree and special courses in 1919.\nThe University of Manitoba Students\u2019 Union was officially established in 1919, followed by the University of Manitoba Alumni Association in 1921.\nBy 1920, the university would be the largest university in the Canadian Prairies and the fifth largest in Canada, with 1,654 male and 359 female students, as well as 184 academic staff (including 6 women). It had eight faculties: Arts, Science, Law, Medicine, Engineering, Architecture, Pharmacy, and Agriculture.\nFrom 1920 to 1921, the teaching faculty was reorganized, creating a General University Faculty Council and an individual Faculties in Arts &amp; Science, Engineering, and Medicine. In 1921, William Tier was appointed as the first Dean of Arts &amp; Science, and E.P. Fetherstonhaugh as the first Dean of Engineering.\nIn 1924, the university officially merged with the Manitoba Agricultural College through an act of the Manitoba legislature. In the 1930s, the university moved its administrative offices to its Fort Garry campus, where the Arts Building is completed in 1931. Also that year, St. Paul's College became affiliated with the university.\nThe Faculty of Education was established by the university in 1934. The university established an Evening Institute in 1936.\nIn 1937, the university offers a Bachelor of Commerce, to be awarded through the Faculty of Arts and Science, for the first time.\nWorld War II.\nThe Second World War affected the university considerably.\nBetween 1940 and 1941, the Canadian Army took over the Fort Garry residence; all fit 18-year-old male students were required to take 6 hours per week in military training; and students above 21 years old receive two weeks of practical military training in a camp. Moreover, 90% of women students enrolled in a variety of courses to aid in the war, with auto mechanics particularly proving to be a preferred course among the women. During this time, the Dean of Women was Ursulla Macdonnell.\nIn 1943, the first degrees for Bachelor of Science in Pharmacy were conferred, replacing the diploma course for pharmacy. Also that year, the Senate established two new honorary degrees: Doctor of Science (D.Sc.) and Doctor of Letters (D.Litt.). Also, around this time, the School of Social Work was established within the Faculty of Arts and Science.\nSome time from 1943 to 1944, the president of the University of Manitoba Students' Union, Albert Hamilton, was called before the Board of Governors for an anti-war poem\u2014\u201cAtrocities\u201d\u2014that he provided for \"The Manitoban\"\u2019s Literary Supplement, and his graduating year marks would be held up until he joined active service. In March 1945, four members of the French Resistance Movement addressed the student body.\nIn the 1944/45 academic year, the University's new Department of Music began providing arts and science students with elective courses in theory and history at the Broadway location.\nThe University saw an influx of 3,125 War veterans in 1946, increasing registration to 9,514.\nLater 20th century.\nThe nondenominational University College\u2014created by historian W.L. Morton\u2014was completed in 1963. The following year, St. Andrew's College became an associated college of the University of Manitoba. (It would gain special affiliation status 2 decades later.) Also at this time, the University recognized the Canadian Mennonite Bible College (now Canadian Mennonite University), the Catherine Booth Bible College (now Booth University College), and the Prairie Theatre Exchange, as \"approved teaching centres.\"\nIn 1966, the Manitoba Law School would be fully incorporated into the university as the Faculty of Law.\nResponding to population pressure, the policy of university education would be initiated in the 1960s. As result, in 1967, two of the colleges that had originally been part of the University of Manitoba were given university status of their own by the provincial government: United College, which had been formed by the merging of Wesley College and Manitoba College, would become the University of Winnipeg; and Brandon College would become Brandon University.\nIn 1968, the Manitoba Theatre Centre and the University of Manitoba English Department combined to offer theatre courses at the university. In 1970, the Faculty of Arts and Science separated to form the individual Faculties of Arts and of Science.\nRecent history and legacy.\nSt. Boniface College and St. John's College, two of the founding colleges of the university, still remain part of the University of Manitoba. St. Boniface is the university's only French-language college, offering instruction in French, as well as facilities for the training of teachers who expect to teach in the French language. St. John's, which dates back to 1820, offers instruction in Arts and Science and, among other special programs, prepares men and women for the ordained ministry of the Anglican Church. St. Andrew's College today remains a home to a large Ukrainian cultural and religious library.\nIn 1993/94, the University of Manitoba became the first university in Canada to offer a master's degree in interior design.\nIn 1999, the university launched Smartpark, a 100-acre research and technology park at the Fort Garry Campus.\nOn 28 February 2002, Canada Post issued 'University of Manitoba, 1877\u20132002' as part of the Canadian Universities series. The stamp was based on a design by Steven Slipp, based on photographs by Mike Grandmaison and on an illustration by Bonnie Ross. The 48\u00a2 stamps are perforated 13.5 and were printed by Ashton-Potter Canada Limited.\nThe administrative position of \"Vice-President (Indigenous)\" was established at the university in October 2019 to lead the development and implementation of Indigenous-focused initiatives, engagement, research, etc.\n\"The University of Manitoba Act\".\nThe University of Manitoba was established by the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba as a \"Provincial University\" on 28 February 1877 through the University of Manitoba Act, first introduced by Manitoba Attorney-General Joseph Royal.\nThe Act formed the university by the federation of three existing denominational colleges: St. Boniface College (Roman Catholic), St John's College (Anglican), and Manitoba College (Presbyterian).\nThe Act also established the corporation for the university's government, consisting of a Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor with a Council. The Chancellor would be appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council for a 3-year term, and the council would consist of 7 representatives from each of its three affiliated college, 3 from the Convocation, and 1 from each of the two sections of the Board of Education.\nThe governance of the university would be modeled on the provincial \"University of Toronto Act\" (1906), which would establish a bicameral system of university government consisting of a university council (consisting of faculty), who are responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors (consisting of citizens), who exercise exclusive control over financial policy and have formal authority in all other matters. The president of the university, appointed by the board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership.\nIn 1895, the Act was amended to give the denominational colleges the power to confer degrees in divinity. It would be amended again two years later in order to allow the Manitoba government to grant up to $60,000 for the university and a normal school (i.e., a teaching college).\nMajor revisions to the Act came in 1936, with changes including:\nUniversity of Manitoba Fort Garry Campus.\nThe main Fort Garry campus (66 Chancellors Circle, on the Red River in south Winnipeg) comprises over 60 major teaching and research buildings of the university and sits on over of land. Among these buildings, 33 are used for teaching, of which 4 are colleges: St. John's College, St. Paul's College, St. Andrew's College, and University College. The remaining buildings include laboratories, administrative and service offices, a research complex, and residences.\nIn 2013, the University of Manitoba sponsored an urban planning design competition to plan an extension to the Fort Garry Campus. The goal is to improve the general campus experience and guide future growth of parking citation revenue by establishing an urban framework for housing, university buildings and the associated public transportation in the area. The winning design submission was from Janet Rosenberg &amp; Studio Inc. (Toronto) and Cibinel Architects Ltd. (Winnipeg) with Landmark Planning &amp; Design Inc. (Winnipeg) and ARUP Canada Inc. (Toronto).\nOther campuses.\nThe William Norrie Centre on 485 Selkirk Avenue is the University of Manitoba campus for the \"Inner City Social Work Program\" of the Faculty of Social Work. The program is designed for low-income mature students (21 years or older) living in Winnipeg who have inner-city volunteer experience and are in need of academic support. The Faculty of Social Work also has a Bachelor's program\u2014the Northern Social Work Program\u2014in Thompson, Manitoba, as an extension of the Faculty on the Fort Garry campus.\nThe James W. Burns Executive Education Centre houses the Asper School of Business Executive Education program, which provides training in professional development, executive leadership, etc. Located on the second floor of 177 Lombard Avenue\u2014near Portage and Main in downtown Winnipeg\u2014the building was originally opened in 1911 as the new head office for the Great-West Life Assurance Company. In 1985, it was designated a provincial heritage site.\nAgricultural sites.\nThe Glenlea Research Station is an agricultural research station operated by the Department of Animal Science, with financial support from Manitoba Agriculture and the university. Covering approximately , it is located on Highway 75, by Glenlea, Manitoba, approximately south of the Fort Garry campus. The Station was officially opened in June 1966 by then-Premier Duff Roblin.\nLocated at the Glenlea Research Station's National Centre for Livestock and the Environment is the Bruce D. Campbell Farm and Food Discovery Centre. This centre is a hands-on facility that allows visitors to explore the ways in which food is made in Canada. The Centre does so through interactive hands-on displays about each aspect of food production\u2014from farming to the marketing, retailing, and eating of food.\nCovering , the Ian N. Morrison Research Farm is a farm research facility operated by the Department of Plant Science in Carman, Manitoba, located south of Winnipeg. The site also includes the University of ManitobaCarman and Region Facility, a teaching, research and extension centre that serves the community; amenities include a wet lab, seed lab and cleaning equipment, computer facilities, and classrooms for teaching and extension programs.\nRady Faculty of Health Sciences and UM Bannatyne Campus.\nThe University of Manitoba Bannatyne Campus is a complex of ten buildings in central Winnipeg belonging to the university's health sciences branch. Located about 13 kilometers north of the Fort Garry site, this campus is adjoined to the west of Winnipeg's Health Sciences Centre (HSC), between McDermot and William Avenue.\nThe Rady Faculty of Health Sciences was established to consolidate the university's health education community into a more unified body. The Rady Faculty consists of several health sciences departments, including the Max Rady College of Medicine, the Dr. Gerald Niznick College of Dentistry, the College of Rehabilitation Sciences, and the College of Pharmacy, as well as the College of Nursing, although it still remains on the Fort Garry campus.\nAlso at this campus, the Manitoba Medical Alumni Association erected the Medical Corps Memorial, dedicated to the memory of the graduates and students of the University of Manitoba Medical College, who had laid down their lives during the North West Rebellion (1 name); 1900 South African War (1 name); and The Great War [i.e., World War I] (7 names).\nDepartments and facilities.\nThe Brodie Centre is the main building of the Bannatyne campus, which not only connects the various health education facilities but also the Neil John MacLean Health Sciences Library and the Joe Doupe Fitness Centre .\nThe College of Pharmacy, originally located at Fort Garry, moved to the Bannatyne campus on 16 October 2008 with the opening of the Apotex Centre. The Faculty of Pharmacy Apotex Centre is detached from the rest of the Bannatyne complex, located right across from the main entrance of the Brodie Centre. First established at the university in 1914 as the Department of Pharmacy, it was created to take over the work of the affiliated Manitoba College of Pharmacy.\nThe Dental Building is the westernmost building of the entire campus, housing the Dr. Gerald Niznick College of Dentistry. The college encompasses the entirety of dental education offered at the U of M, including the http:// .\nMax Rady College of Medicine.\nThe Max Rady College of Medicine has 27 academic departments found throughout the Bannatyne campus, the Health Sciences Centre, and other Winnipeg health sciences facilities. Each department is involved in teaching, research, service and clinical activities with an academic staff of approximately 1,630 faculty members. The college also consists of several centres, institutes, and research groups, often in partnership with other health sciences organizations. \nResearch.\nThe university claims to maintain a reputation as a top research-intensive post-secondary educational institution, conducting more research annually than any other university in the region; its competitive academic and research programs have also consistently ranked among the top in the Canadian Prairies. Research at the University of Manitoba has accordingly produced various world-renowned contributions, including the creation of canola oil in the 1970s, as well as the discovery of a treatment for and control of Rh hemolytic disease.\nThe University of Manitoba is the network leader of Intelligent Sensing for Innovative Structures (ISIS) Canada, headquartered at the Faculty of Engineering. As a National Network of Centres of Excellence (NCE), ISIS Canada develops better ways to build, repair, and monitor civil structures. The university is also a member of 13 other NCEs.\nThe Centre for Defence and Security Studies at the University of Manitoba has a research, teaching, and outreach program designed to advance knowledge, understanding and debate in Canada on defence and security issues.\nThe first issue of \"Mosaic: A Journal for the Comparative Study of Literature &amp; Ideas\" was published by the University of Manitoba in the fall of 1967.\nSmartpark.\nSmartpark Research and Technology Park (or Smartpark) is a research and technology park by the Fort Garry campus, serving as a link between basic research and industry. With , the location has 7 multi-tenant buildings leased to over 30 research and development-oriented organizations involving university-industry partnerships.\nIt is the primary research and technology park in Manitoba. Launched in 1999, opening its first facility in 2002, Smartpark today has at least 9 buildings comprising of research facilities across the park.\nIncubators at the park are involved in the following broad research areas: information &amp; communications technology, engineering &amp; advanced materials, health &amp; biotechnology, and agricultural &amp; nutritional science. Currently, the park houses 18 tenants employing 1,200 people, many of whom are co-op students and graduates of the university.\nThe mandate of the park is carried out by the Smartpark Development Corporation, a subsidiary corporation of the University of Manitoba with its own Board of Directors.\nAcademics.\nThe university has a total enrolment of approximately 26,000 students in 24 faculties. Most academic units offer graduate studies programs leading to master's or doctoral degrees. The University of Manitoba ranked 14th in \"Maclean's\" 2022 Medical/Doctoral university rankings. The Medical/Doctoral category ranks Canadian universities that are research-intensive.\nThe university's Price Faculty of Engineering is the oldest engineering school in western Canada.\nThere are five colleges under the University of Manitoba banner, each with their own multiple faculties: Universit\u00e9 de Saint-Boniface (University of St. Boniface; where courses are taught completely in French), St. John's College, St. Paul's College, St. Andrew's College, and University College.\nIn 2015, the university dissolved its Faculty of Human Ecology, whose departments were then joined with those of other faculties. The Faculty began in 1910 as merely a diploma in Household Sciences at the Manitoba Agricultural College, eventually becoming the School of Home Economics in 1943. The School gained official faculty status in 1970, and changed its name to Human Ecology in 1981.\nIndigenous community.\nThe University of Manitoba provides various services to urban and rural Indigenous people.\nThe university's Department of Indigenous Studies is the oldest such unit in western Canada and the second oldest in Canada, offering undergraduate courses and a Masters and PhD program. Indigenous Elders are present on campus at Migizii Agamik (Bald Eagle Lounge), the university's Indigenous Centre, to provide social supports. On 2 June 2017, Indigenous knowledge and guidance became a formally-recognized part of the Rady Faculty of Health Sciences with the creation of Ongomiizwin, the largest Indigenous education and health unit in Canada in terms of scope and mandate.\nTutoring services are available within the university's Medicine, Engineering, and Social Work ACCESS Programs. Many of the Indigenous Access programs include summer courses that bring new Indigenous students to campus before the start of the school year for campus orientation sessions. The university also connects with First Nations communities to talk to potential students at a much younger age through Curry Biz Camp, which fosters entrepreneurship among young First Nations and M\u00e9tis students.\nLibraries, Museums, and Archives.\nThe Anthropology Laboratory Museum at the University of Manitoba collects, inventories, and displays artifacts including cartographic materials, prints, drawings, and textual records from the Manitoba Region. The Human History collection includes archaeological and ceremonial objects, and weapons. The Natural Sciences artifacts include biological, zooarchaeological, aquatic, Earth Science, Geological and Paleontological Collections.\nThe University of Manitoba Press was established in 1945.\nThe main art gallery on campus is \"School of Art Gallery.\" Other art galleries include: Arch II, Faculty of Architecture, Dr. Paul H. T. Thorlakson Gallery, Icelandic Collection, Elizabeth Dafoe Library, Gallery of Student Art (GOSA), and University Centre.\nThe University of Manitoba Libraries include:\nScholarships and awards.\nThe university offers numerous scholarships, bursaries and awards. One of these is the Diane Loranger Memorial Scholarship which can given to a second- or third-year full-time student in the geological sciences who has a minimum GPA of 3.5.\nUniversity governance and administration.\nGovernance.\nThe governance of the University of Manitobais defined by \"The University of Manitoba Act\".\nAs per the Act, the university is governed through a bicameral system, consisting of two separate governing bodies: the Senate, the academic body responsible for academic matters (including policy); and a Board of Governors, the governing body who exercises exclusive control over financial policy and have formal authority in all other matters.\nChancellor.\nAs the titular head of the university, the chancellor confers all degrees, is a member of both the Board of Governors and the Senate, and acts as a university ambassador when needed.\nSince its establishment, the University of Manitoba has had fourteen chancellors in total. However, following the first chancellor, between 1904 and 1908, no successor was appointed by the Government.\nBoard of Governors.\nThe UM Board of Governors is the governing body of the university, overseeing the administrative and business affairs of the university. It is composed of 23 members and exercises exclusive control over financial policy and have formal authority in all other matters, as well as having the authority to decide on all matters that are not reserved to Senate.\nThe first Board of Governors was created in 1917 with \"The University Amendment Act\".\nIt is required to make an annual report to Manitoba's Lieutenant Governor in Council and send it to the Minister of Education. The Board also has the power to appoint president, vice-presidents, deans, the librarian, comptroller, and members of academic staff.\nSenate.\nSenate, as per the \"University of Manitoba Act\", is the University of Manitoba's senior academic governing body, and has authority over academic matters. The Senate was established in 1936 to replace the University council in order to provide more equal representation between faculties and the affiliated colleges.\nAdministration.\nPresident.\nThe President of the University of Manitoba is appointed by the university's Board of Governors and is \"ex officio\" Vice-Chancellor. The Office of the President was established as position that provides a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership.\nSince its establishment, the university has had 12 presidents in total, including:\nVice presidents and provosts.\nThe Provost and vice-president (Academic) is the university's senior academic officer, with responsibility for providing academic vision at the university and leadership in all matters relating to students and academic staff. This office also oversees matters of human resource and immigration related to the University of Manitoba. The current Provost and vice-president (Academic) is Dr. Janice Ristock, who was appointed in 2016.\nThe Deputy Provost (Academic Planning and Programs) is responsible for the \"processes by which new academic programs are introduced, current programs are modified or discontinued, and professional academic programs are assessed by accreditation agencies.\"\nThe Vice-Provost (Academic Affairs) is responsible for matters related to academic staff, including hiring, tenure, promotion, discipline, faculty development, and leaves due to research study. The Vice-Provost (Students) looks over matters related to the enhancement of student life and the student experience at the university, as well as student recruitment, retention, and success. This office accordingly has senior leadership responsibility for units within Enrolment Services, the Registrar's Office, Student Engagement and Success, and Student Support.\nOther Vice-Provosts include Health Sciences, Teaching and Learning, and Libraries, who is \"ex officio\" University Librarian.\nFaculty.\nHuman resources.\nThe academic staff are represented by two unions. The professors are represented by the University of Manitoba Faculty Association, who applied to the Manitoba Labor Relations Board for certification as a union on 1 February 1973. (Professors at the Faculty of Dentistry are represented by the University of Manitoba Dental Clinical Staff Association.) Sessional instructors and teaching assistants, on the other hand, are represented by the CUPE Local 3909.\nThe support staff are divided among many unions. The support staff and the campus security are represented by the AESES, though the support staff at the Faculty of the Engineering are represented by CUPE Local 1482. All outside workers are represented by the CAW Local 3007.\nAlumni and student life.\nNotable alumni.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], there have been 96 Rhodes Scholars from the University of Manitoba, more than from any other university in Western Canada.\nThe administrative office that is officially charged with enhancing student life and the student experience at the University of Manitoba is the Vice-Provost (Students), who has senior leadership responsibility for units within Enrolment Services, the Registrar's Office, Student Engagement and Success, and Student Support.\nThe university has approximately 27,000 students\u201424,000 undergraduate and 3,000 graduate. It offers over ninety degrees, including more than sixty at the undergraduate level. Most academic units offer graduate studies programs leading to master's or doctoral degrees.\nThe school theme song, Brown and Gold, was recorded by the University of Manitoba Band at CJRC radio station in 1939, and was written by W. J. MacDonald with lyrics written by Charles McCullough.\nIn 1934, the \"University of Manitoba Quarterly\" was replaced by the \"Alumni Journal\". In 1938, the Arts Student Body began publishing the \"Manitoba Arts Review\", a journal of academic articles written primarily by UM students and faculty. In 1947, a new literature and art magazine called \"Creative Campus\" made its way under the editorship of Alvin Goldman.\nOn 15 March 1923, the university's Extension Department launched its \"University Hour\" radio program, a series of lectures presented by UM faculty members over an 11-week period. The program was broadcast by the Manitoba Government Telephone System to the Canadian prairie provinces and 8 adjoining American states. In January 1968, the university's TV program \"A View of Our Own\" premiered on \"CBC,\" and was aimed at students in the 15\u201323 age bracket.\nStudent groups and representation.\nThe students at the university are members of the University of Manitoba Students' Union (UMSU). UMSU represents students at the Board of Governors and Senate, as well as providing programs and support to students. The University of Manitoba Graduate Students' Association (UMGSA) also represents over 3,000 graduate students at the University of Manitoba. \nThere are several sororities and fraternities on campus.\nStudents can participate in the University of Manitoba Orchestra.\n\"The Manitoban\".\n\"The Manitoban\" is the official student newspaper at the University of Manitoba. Published for the first time on November 5, 1914, the \"Toban\", as it is called for short, is one of the oldest and largest (by circulation and budget) student newspapers in Canada. The tabloid-sized paper is published monthly during the summer and every Wednesday during the regular Fall-Winter university session. \"The Manitoban\" is non-profit and is completely owned and operated by students. During the fall and winter 10,000 copies of \"The\" \"Manitoban\" are printed on a weekly basis, and distributed extensively on both campuses of the University of Manitoba and throughout Winnipeg. Notable past contributors include Marshall McLuhan, Marcel Dzama, Andrew Coyne, Nahlah Ayed, Graham Spry and Izzy Asper. \nAthletics and recreation.\nThe university is represented in U Sports by the Manitoba Bisons.\nThe university offers recreational programs year-round. Athletic facilities on campus include the Frank Kennedy Centre, Max Bell Centre, the Investor's Group Athletic Centre, and Princess Auto Stadium, which opened in 2013 to replace University Stadium. The first three facilities contain indoor tracks, a swimming pool, work-out facilities, and an international ice hockey rink, as well as basketball, volleyball, squash, and racquetball courts. In addition, the Frank Kennedy Centre also hosts dance, combat and gymnastics rooms, and indoor tennis courts.\nThe university held its first track meet in the early fall of 1914 with the University of North Dakota on the Winnipeg Exhibition Grounds. With University of Manitoba being victorious, the meet would be thought of as a success and the universities decide to make it an annual event. In 1979, UM student Jan Madden equals the world record in the 300-yard track-and-field event.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32100", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32100", "title": "Urban exploration", "text": "Exploration of usually hidden or abandoned buildings and structures\nUrban exploration (often shortened as urbex and sometimes known as roof and tunnel hacking) is the exploration of manmade structures, usually abandoned ruins or hidden components of the manmade environment. Photography and historical interest/documentation are heavily featured in the hobby, sometimes involving trespassing onto private property. Urban exploration is also called draining (a specific form of urban exploration where storm drains or sewers are explored), urban spelunking, urban rock climbing, urban caving, building hacking, or mousing.\nThe activity presents risks including physical danger, the possibility of arrest and punishment if done illegally and/or without permission and various more. Some activities associated with urban exploration may violate local or regional laws, certain broadly interpreted anti-terrorism laws, or can be considered trespassing or invasion of privacy. Encountering squatters, who are unauthorized occupants in abandoned or unmonitored properties, can lead to unpredictable and potentially dangerous situations.\nHistory.\nSuicide Club.\nUrban exploration in its organized form has been traced to the Suicide Club, a San Francisco\u2013based group founded in 1977. The group engaged in activities such as exploring abandoned or restricted urban environments, street theater, and immersive role-playing events. Although active for only five years, the Suicide Club is regarded as one of the earliest organized groups to pursue exploration of the urban landscape as a recreational and social activity.\nExploration sites.\nAbandonments.\nVentures into abandoned structures are perhaps the most common example of urban exploration. Many sites are entered first by locals and may have graffiti or other kinds of vandalism, while others are better preserved. Although targets of exploration vary from one country to another, high-profile abandonments include amusement parks, grain elevators, factories, power plants, fallout shelters, hospitals, asylums, prisons, schools, outmoded and abandoned skyscrapers, poor houses, and sanatoriums.\nIn Japan, abandoned infrastructure is known as (literally \"ruins\"), and the term is synonymous with the practice of urban exploration. are particularly common in Japan because of its rapid industrialization (e.g., Hashima Island), damage during World War II, the 1980s real estate bubble, and natural disasters such as the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami.\nIn Bosnia and Herzegovina, a large underground facility abandoned since 1992 is \u017deljava Air Base, situated under the mountain, near the city of Biha\u0107. It was the largest underground airport and military air base in the SFR Yugoslavia, and one of the largest in Europe. The complex contains tunnels in total length of 3.5\u00a0km (2.2\u00a0mi), and other large facilities. Nowadays, it is popular for urban exploration, although it is risky due to the possibility of anti-personnel landmines being located in unexplored areas, remnants from 1990s Bosnian War.\nMany explorers find the decay of uninhabited space profoundly beautiful, and some are also proficient freelance photographers who document what they see, such as those who document the infrastructure of the former USSR.\nAbandoned sites are also popular among historians, preservationists, architects, archaeologists, industrial archaeologists, ghost hunters and notably, photographers.\nActive buildings.\nAnother aspect of urban exploration is the practice of exploring active or \"in use\" buildings, which includes gaining access to secured or \"member-only\" areas, mechanical rooms, roofs, elevator rooms, abandoned floors, and other normally unseen parts of working buildings. The term \"infiltration\" is often associated with exploring active structures. People entering restricted areas may be committing trespass, and civil prosecution may result. One notable instance of the urban exploration of active buildings occurred in 2007, when the French urban exploration group les UX carried out a clandestine operation to repair and restore the Panth\u00e9on's clock, which had stood inoperable for several decades. The group were able to conduct the repair work in secret, having infiltrated the building and set up a workshop inside a cavity under the Panth\u00e9on's dome.\nCatacombs.\nCatacombs such as those found in Paris, Rome, Odessa, and Naples have been investigated by urban explorers. Some consider the Mines of Paris, comprising many of the tunnels that are not open to public tours, including the catacombs, the \"Holy Grail\" due to their extensive nature and history. Explorers of these spaces are known as cataphiles.\nSewers and storm drains.\nEntry into storm drains, or \"draining\", is another common form of urban exploration. Groups devoted to the task have arisen, such as the Cave Clan and Darkside in Australia. Draining has a specialized set of guidelines, the foremost of which is \"When it rains, no drains!\", because the dangers of becoming entrapped, washed away, or killed increase dramatically during heavy rainfall.\nA small subset of explorers enter sanitary sewers. Sometimes they are the only connection to caves or other subterranean features. Sewers are among the most dangerous locations to explore owing to the risk of poisoning by buildups of toxic gas (commonly methane, hydrogen sulfide, or carbon dioxide). Sewers can contain viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and parasitic worms. Protective equipment is recommended for people who enter sewers.\nTransit tunnels.\nExploring active and abandoned subway and railway tunnels, bores, and stations is often considered trespassing and can result in civil prosecution due to security concerns. As a result, this type of exploration is rarely publicized. An exception to this is the abandoned subway of Rochester, New York, the only American city with an abandoned subway system that was once operational. The Cincinnati subway is also abandoned but was never completed. London has a number of stations on the London Underground network that have been closed over the years, with Aldwych tube station a popular location for explorers.\nUtility tunnels.\nUniversities, and other large institutions, such as hospitals, often distribute hazardous superheated steam for heating or cooling buildings from a central heating plant. These pipes are generally run through utility tunnels, which are often intended to be accessible solely for the purposes of maintenance. Nevertheless, many of these steam tunnels, especially those on college campuses, have a tradition of exploration by students. This practice was once called \"vadding\" at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, but students there now call it roof and tunnel hacking.\nSome steam tunnels have dirt floors, poor lighting and temperatures above . Others have concrete floors, bright light, and more moderate temperatures. Most steam tunnels have large intake fans to bring in the fresh air and push the hot air out the back, and these may start without warning. Most active steam tunnels do not contain airborne asbestos, but proper breathing protection may be required for other respiratory hazards. Experienced explorers are very cautious inside active utility tunnels since pipes can spew boiling hot water or steam from leaky valves or pressure relief blow-offs. Often there are puddles of muddy water on the floor, making slips and falls a special concern near hot pipes.\nSteam tunnels have generally been secured more heavily in recent years due to their frequent use for carrying communications network backbone cables, increased safety and liability concerns, and perceived risk of use in terrorist activities.\nPopularity.\nThe rise in urban exploration's popularity can be attributed to increased media attention. Recent television shows such as \"Urban Explorers\" on the Discovery Channel, \"MTV's Fear\", and the \"Ghost Hunting\" exploits of The Atlantic Paranormal Society have packaged the hobby for a popular audience. The fictional film \"After...\" (2006), a hallucinatory thriller set in Moscow's underground subways, features urban explorers caught up in extreme situations. Talks and exhibits on urban exploration have appeared at the fifth and sixth Hackers on Planet Earth Conference, complementing numerous newspaper articles and interviews.\nAnother source of popular information is \"Cities of the Underworld\", a documentary series that ran for three seasons on the History Channel starting in 2007. This series roamed around the world, showing little-known underground structures in remote locales and right under the feet of densely packed city-dwellers. Websites for professional and hobby explorers have been developed to share tips and locations.\nWith the rise in the hobby's popularity, there has been increasing discussion of whether the extra attention has been beneficial.\nLegality.\nThe activity's growing popularity has resulted in increased attention not just from explorers but also from vandals and law enforcement. The illicit aspects of urban exploring, which may include trespassing and breaking and entering, have had critical attention in mainstream newspapers. Sometimes, security or police of buildings can let explorers off with a warning, but can differ depending if explorers have caused destruction or fires.\nIn Australia, lawyers for the Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales shut down the Sydney Cave Clan's website after they raised concerns that the portal could \"risk human safety and threaten the security of its infrastructure\". Another website belonging to the Bangor Explorers Guild was criticized by the Maine State Police for encouraging behavior that \"could get someone hurt or killed\". Toronto Police, who have called for an \"end\" to rooftop photography in 2016, citing similar concerns about the possibility of death or injury. The Toronto Transit Commission has used the Internet to crimp subway tunnel explorations, going as far as to send investigators to various explorers' homes.\nJeff Chapman, who authored \"Infiltration\", writes that genuine urban explorers \"never vandalize, steal or damage anything\". The thrill comes from \"discovery and a few nice pictures\". Some explorers also request permission for entry in advance.\nHazards.\nStorm drains are not designed with human access as their primary use and can be subject to flash flooding and poor air quality.\nMany abandoned structures have hazards such as unstable structures, unsafe floors, broken glass, stray voltage, entrapment hazards, or unknown chemicals and other harmful substances (most notably asbestos). Other risks include freely roaming guard dogs and hostile squatters. Some abandoned locations may be heavily guarded by motion detectors and active security patrols, while others are more easily accessible and carry less risk of discovery.\nRooftopping.\nRooftopping and skywalking are the ascents of rooftops, cranes, antennas, smokestacks, etc., usually illegally, to get an adrenaline rush and take selfie photos or videos. Rooftopping differs from skywalking as the latter is mostly about taking panoramic photographs of the scene below, and safety is more important than the thrill. Rooftopping has been especially popular in Russia. Buildering has a similar goal as rooftopping and skywalking (to reach the roof), but involves climbing the building from the outside rather than infiltrating from the inside.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32101", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32101", "title": "Umbriel", "text": "Moon of Uranus\nUmbriel () is the third-largest moon of Uranus. It was discovered on October 24, 1851, by William Lassell at the same time as neighboring moon Ariel. It was named after a character in Alexander Pope's 1712 poem \"The Rape of the Lock\". Umbriel consists mainly of ice with a substantial fraction of rock, and may be differentiated into a rocky core and an icy mantle. The surface is the darkest among Uranian moons and appears to have been shaped primarily by impacts, However, the presence of canyons suggests early internal processes. The moon may have undergone an early endogenically driven resurfacing event that obliterated its older surface.\nCovered by numerous impact craters reaching in diameter, Umbriel is the second-most heavily cratered satellite of Uranus after Oberon. The most prominent surface feature is a ring of bright material on the floor of Wunda crater. This moon, like all regular moons of Uranus, probably formed from an accretion disk that surrounded the planet just after its formation. Umbriel has been studied up close only once, by the spacecraft \"Voyager 2\" in January 1986. It took several images of Umbriel, which allowed mapping of about 40% of the moon's surface.\nDiscovery and name.\nUmbriel, along with another Uranian satellite, Ariel, was discovered by William Lassell on October 24, 1851. Although William Herschel, the discoverer of Titania and Oberon, claimed at the end of the 18th century that he had observed four additional moons of Uranus, his observations were not confirmed and those four objects are now thought to be spurious.\nAll of Uranus's moons are named after characters created by William Shakespeare or Alexander Pope. The names of all four satellites of Uranus then known were suggested by John Herschel (son of William) in 1852 at the request of Lassell, though it is uncertain if Herschel devised the names, or if Lassell did so and then sought Herschel's permission. Umbriel is the \"dusky melancholy sprite\" in Alexander Pope's \"The Rape of the Lock\", and the name suggests the Latin , meaning 'shadow'. The moon is also designated \"Uranus\u00a0II\".\nPlanetary moons other than Earth's were never given symbols in the astronomical literature. Denis Moskowitz, a software engineer who designed most of the dwarf planet symbols, proposed a U (the initial of Umbriel) combined with the low globe of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande's Uranus symbol as the symbol of Umbriel (). This symbol is not widely used.\nOrbit.\nUmbriel orbits Uranus at the distance of about , being the third farthest from the planet among its five major moons. Umbriel's orbit has a small eccentricity and is inclined very little relative to the equator of Uranus. Its orbital period is around 4.1\u00a0Earth days, coincident with its rotational period, making it a synchronous or tidally locked satellite, with one face always pointing toward its parent planet. Umbriel's orbit lies completely inside the Uranian magnetosphere. This is important, because the trailing hemispheres of airless satellites orbiting inside a magnetosphere (like Umbriel) are struck by magnetospheric plasma, which co-rotates with the planet. This bombardment may lead to the darkening of the trailing hemispheres, which is observed for all Uranian moons except Oberon (see below). Umbriel also serves as a sink of the magnetospheric charged particles, which creates a pronounced dip in energetic particle count near the moon's orbit as observed by \"Voyager 2\" in 1986.\nBecause Uranus orbits the Sun almost on its side, and its moons orbit in the planet's equatorial plane, Umbriel and the other moons are subject to an extreme seasonal cycle. Both northern and southern poles spend 42 years in complete darkness, and another 42 years in continuous sunlight, with the Sun rising close to the zenith over one of the poles at each solstice. The \"Voyager 2\" flyby coincided with the southern hemisphere's 1986 summer solstice, when nearly the entire northern hemisphere was unilluminated. Once every 42 years, when Uranus has an equinox and its equatorial plane intersects the Earth, mutual occultations of Uranus's moons become possible. In 2007\u20132008, several such events were observed including two occultations of Titania by Umbriel on August 15 and December 8, 2007, as well as of Ariel by Umbriel on August 19, 2007.\nCurrently, Umbriel is not involved in any orbital resonance with other Uranian satellites. Early in its history however, it may have been in a 1:3 resonance with Miranda. This would have increased Miranda's orbital eccentricity, contributing to the internal heating and geological activity of that moon, while Umbriel's orbit would have been less affected. Due to Uranus's lower oblateness and smaller size relative to its satellites, its moons can escape more easily from a mean motion resonance than those of Jupiter or Saturn. After Miranda escaped from this resonance (through a mechanism that probably resulted in its anomalously high orbital inclination), its eccentricity would have been damped, turning off the heat source.\nComposition and internal structure.\nUmbriel is the third-largest and third-most massive of the Uranian moons. Umbriel is the 13th-largest moon in the Solar System, and it is also the 13th-most massive. The moon's density is 1.54\u00a0g/cm3, which indicates that it mainly consists of water ice, with a dense non-ice component constituting around 40% of its mass. The latter could be made of rock and carbonaceous material including heavy organic compounds known as tholins. The presence of water ice is supported by infrared spectroscopic observations, which have revealed crystalline water ice on the surface of the moon. Water ice absorption bands are stronger on Umbriel's leading hemisphere than on the trailing hemisphere. The cause of this asymmetry is not known, but it may be related to the bombardment by charged particles from the magnetosphere of Uranus, which is stronger on the trailing hemisphere (due to the plasma's co-rotation). The energetic particles tend to sputter water ice, decompose methane trapped in ice as clathrate hydrate and darken other organics, leaving a dark, carbon-rich residue behind.\nExcept for water, the only other compound identified on the surface of Umbriel by the infrared spectroscopy is carbon dioxide, which is concentrated mainly on the trailing hemisphere. The origin of the carbon dioxide is not completely clear. It might be produced locally from carbonates or organic materials under the influence of the energetic charged particles coming from the magnetosphere of Uranus or the solar ultraviolet radiation. This hypothesis would explain the asymmetry in its distribution, as the trailing hemisphere is subject to a more intense magnetospheric influence than the leading hemisphere. Another possible source is the outgassing of the primordial CO2 trapped by water ice in Umbriel's interior. The escape of CO2 from the interior may be a result of past geological activity on this moon.\nUmbriel may be differentiated into a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle. If this is the case, the radius of the core (317\u00a0km) is about 54% of the radius of the moon, and its mass is around 40% of the moon's mass\u2014the parameters are dictated by the moon's composition. The pressure in the center of Umbriel is about 0.24\u00a0GPa (2.4\u00a0kbar). The current state of the icy mantle is unclear, although the existence of a subsurface ocean is considered unlikely.\nSurface features.\nUmbriel's surface is the darkest of the Uranian moons, and reflects less than half as much light as Ariel, a sister satellite of similar size. Umbriel has a very low Bond albedo of only about 10% as compared to 23% for Ariel. The reflectivity of the moon's surface decreases from 26% at a phase angle of 0\u00b0 (geometric albedo) to 19% at an angle of about 1\u00b0. This phenomenon is called opposition surge. The surface of Umbriel is slightly blue in color, while fresh bright impact deposits (in Wunda crater, for instance) are even bluer. There may be an asymmetry between the leading and trailing hemispheres; the former appears to be redder than the latter. The reddening of the surfaces probably results from space weathering from bombardment by charged particles and micrometeorites over the age of the Solar System. However, the color asymmetry of Umbriel is likely caused by accretion of a reddish material coming from outer parts of the Uranian system, possibly, from irregular satellites, which would occur predominately on the leading hemisphere. The surface of Umbriel is relatively homogeneous\u2014it does not demonstrate strong variation in either albedo or color.\nScientists have so far recognized only one class of geological feature on Umbriel\u2014craters. The surface of Umbriel has far more and larger craters than do Ariel and Titania. It shows the least geological activity. In fact, among the Uranian moons only Oberon has more impact craters than Umbriel. The observed crater diameters range from a few kilometers at the low end to 210\u00a0kilometers for the largest known crater, Wokolo. All recognized craters on Umbriel have central peaks, but no crater has rays.\nNear Umbriel's equator lies the most prominent surface feature: Wunda crater, which has a diameter of about 131\u00a0km. Wunda has a large ring of bright material on its floor, which may be an impact deposit or a deposit of pure carbon dioxide ice, which formed when the radiolytically formed carbon dioxide migrated from all over the surface of Umbriel and then got trapped in relatively cold Wunda. Nearby, seen along the terminator, are the craters Vuver and Skynd, which lack bright rims but possess bright central peaks. Study of limb profiles of Umbriel revealed a possible very large impact feature having the diameter of about 400\u00a0km and depth of approximately 5\u00a0km.\nMuch like other moons of Uranus, the surface of Umbriel is cut by a system of canyons trending northeast\u2013southwest. They are not officially recognized due to the poor imaging resolution and generally bland appearance of this moon, which hinders geological maping.\nUmbriel's heavily cratered surface has probably been stable since the Late Heavy Bombardment. The only signs of the ancient internal activity are canyons and dark polygons\u2014dark patches with complex shapes measuring from tens to hundreds of kilometers across. The polygons were identified from precise photometry of \"Voyager 2\"'s images and are distributed more or less uniformly on the surface of Umbriel, trending northeast\u2013southwest. Some polygons correspond to depressions of a few kilometers deep and may have been created during an early episode of tectonic activity. Currently there is no explanation for why Umbriel is so dark and uniform in appearance. Its surface may be covered by a relatively thin layer of dark material (so called \"umbral material\") excavated by an impact or expelled in an explosive volcanic eruption. Alternatively, Umbriel's crust may be entirely composed of the dark material, which prevented formation of bright features like crater rays. However, the presence of the bright feature within Wunda seems to contradict this hypothesis.\nOrigin and evolution.\nUmbriel is thought to have formed from an accretion disc or subnebula; a disc of gas and dust that either existed around Uranus for some time after its formation or was created by the giant impact that most likely gave Uranus its large obliquity. The precise composition of the subnebula is not known, but the higher density of Uranian moons compared to the moons of Saturn indicates that it may have been relatively water-poor. Significant amounts of nitrogen and carbon may have been present in the form of carbon monoxide (CO) and molecular nitrogen (N2) instead of ammonia and methane. The moons that formed in such a subnebula would contain less water ice (with CO and N2 trapped as clathrate) and more rock, explaining the higher density.\nUmbriel's accretion probably lasted for several thousand years. The impacts that accompanied accretion caused heating of the moon's outer layer. The maximum temperature of around 180\u00a0K was reached at the depth of about 3\u00a0km. After the end of formation, the subsurface layer cooled, while the interior of Umbriel heated due to decay of radioactive elements in its rocks. The cooling near-surface layer contracted, while the interior expanded. This caused strong extensional stresses in the moon's crust, which may have led to cracking. This process probably lasted for about 200\u00a0million years, implying that any endogenous activity ceased billions of years ago.\nThe initial accretional heating together with continued decay of radioactive elements may have led to melting of the ice if an antifreeze like ammonia (in the form of ammonia hydrate) or some salt was present. The melting may have led to the separation of ice from rocks and formation of a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle. A layer of liquid water (ocean) rich in dissolved ammonia may have formed at the core\u2013mantle boundary. The eutectic temperature of this mixture is 176\u00a0K. The ocean is likely to have frozen long ago. Among Uranian moons Umbriel was least subjected to endogenic resurfacing processes, although it may, like other Uranian moons, have experienced a very early resurfacing event.\nExploration.\nThe only close-up images of Umbriel have been from the \"Voyager 2\" probe, which photographed the moon during its flyby of Uranus in January 1986. Since the closest distance between \"Voyager 2\" and Umbriel was , the best images of this moon have a spatial resolution of about 5.2\u00a0km. The images cover about 40% of the surface, but only 20% was photographed with enough quality for geological mapping. At the time of the flyby the southern hemisphere of Umbriel (like those of the other moons) was pointed towards the Sun, so the northern (dark) hemisphere could not be studied.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32102", "revid": "29495429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32102", "title": "U.S. Supreme Court", "text": ""}
{"id": "32103", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32103", "title": "United States Regional Cuisine", "text": ""}
{"id": "32104", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32104", "title": "Unabomber (disambiguation)", "text": "The Unabomber (Ted Kaczynski, 1942\u20132023) was an American domestic terrorist.\nUnabomber may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32105", "revid": "1284434429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32105", "title": "Ursidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "32106", "revid": "2273576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32106", "title": "Ursus arctos", "text": ""}
{"id": "32108", "revid": "29278485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32108", "title": "USS Hornet", "text": "Eight ships of the United States Navy have been named USS \"Hornet\", after the stinging insect:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32109", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32109", "title": "Unicycling", "text": ""}
{"id": "32110", "revid": "49605264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32110", "title": "Urd (Oh My Goddess!)", "text": " is a fictional character in the popular \"Oh My Goddess!\" manga and anime, voiced by Toma Yumi (\u51ac\u99ac\u7531\u7f8e). In the series, her character is only loosely based on the deity Ur\u00f0r from Norse mythology. Visually, her character design shows influences from shoujo and Art Nouveau.\nCreation and conception.\nUrd was one of a series of characters created by K\u014dsuke Fujishima, and is depicted as the older sister of Belldandy. Belldandy, Keiichi Morisato, Skuld (Urd and Belldandy's younger sister) and Urd make up the four major characters in \"Oh My Goddess!\". Urd first appeared in the manga in chapter 14, \"Sexy sister\", but she has also been depicted in a novel (\"Ah! My Goddess: First End\"), three anime series (\"Oh My Goddess!\" (OVA), \"Ah! My Goddess\" and \"The Adventures of Mini-Goddess\") and in \"\".\nNorse origins.\nAs with her fictional sisters, Belldandy and Skuld, Urd has her origins in Norse mythology. Urd is one of the three Norns and represents the past, (the Norse Verdandi representing the present, with Skuld representing the future). Nevertheless, other than her name, Urd (like her \"Oh My Goddess!\" sisters) has little in common with her Norse namesake.\nUnlike the problems with transliteration that were encountered with Belldandy, \"Urd\" presented no significant difficulties for translators. While Toren Smith determined that \"Urtht\" would be the more accurate translation of the Old Norse, when translating the manga series into English he acknowledged that \"Urd\" was an accepted alternate translation, and thus was comfortable using the spelling.\nBiography.\nUrd is Belldandy's older sister and is the second Goddess to appear to Keiichi. Urd ranks as Goddess second class, management category limited license, similar to her youngest sister Skuld. She is Yggdrasil's System Administrator and Manager.\nAlthough her powers exceed those of her sisters, she was supposedly relegated to \"second class\" ranking due to her tendency to lie according to her younger sister, Belldandy. Later, the real reason that Urd dropped the first class license examination was revealed to be because she was asked why she wanted to be a first class goddess. When she did not answer and the licensing goddess said \"I think it better if you don't,\" meaning don't become a first class goddess. Many years later, Urd once again took the first-class licensing exam this time examined by Peorth and Belldandy. At one point, Peorth commented that Urd's control and mastery of her own powers, exceeded her own. At the end of this story arc the licensing goddess approved her first-class exam to which Urd surprisingly declined. She explained to Peorth that a first class goddess' prime directive is to protect and bless all things. However, Urd wishes to selectively protect what is most dear to her (this is followed by a page with Urd drawn enveloping her sisters with her black and white wings). She also concluded that there can be use in a Goddess that can lie, which is forbidden to first class goddesses.\nUrd has extensive knowledge of potion lore. She checks her cabinet of potions each day and can tell if even a minute amount is missing. Urd recharges her energy by drinking sake and travels via television screens. She bears the emblem of the past. If allowed to wield her full first class power unsealed, Urd could possibly be the most powerful of the Goddesses on Earth. Her power is so great that she unknowingly burned Peorth (a first class Goddess) by merely touching her shoulder to which Peorth stated \"It's no wonder the Almighty was cautious about her powers.\"\nUrd fancies herself a Goddess of Love, although the mishaps of using her magical potions and her general lack of restraint tends to complicate, rather than stimulate, Keiichi and Belldandy's love life. She came to Earth to spur Keiichi onward with love potions and deceitful though well-meaning advice, but as punishment for deserting her post and for using her powers on Earth without authorization, The Almighty banished her from Heaven until further notice. That notice of return came after the Terrible Master Urd episode c. chapter 47, but by then she wanted to stay on Earth and everyone helped muck up things so she couldn't go back right away. She and Skuld have since done emergency duty on Yggdrasil in heaven at least twice since then, as of ch 162.\nAs she demonstrates later in the manga, she can exercise immense control over her powers despite her second-class status. She was able to draw her personal sigil using first-class lightning magic on her first attempt, a task that First Class Goddess Peorth needed numerous attempts to successfully complete.\nUrd shares a common father with her younger sisters (Belldandy, Skuld), but has a different mother, the Demon Lord Hild. Their father has yet to be introduce to the series, but it is implied that he is someone of high status. Because of her heritage, Urd is a hybrid of Goddess and Demon, reflected in the half-white, half-black appearance of her Angel, World of Elegance. Urd is the first and only hybrid introduced in the series, and possibly the only hybrid in the Ah! My Goddess universe. Perhaps due to her Demonic heritage, Austrian Polka (in the English manga) or Enka (in the Japanese manga and TV series) instantly puts Urd to sleep and she is unable to awaken until the music ceases. Similarly, the demon Marller dances to rock music, and the two often use these weaknesses against each other.\nKeiichi's friends and his sister Megumi are aware of Urd's existence and her relationship with Belldandy and residency at Keiichi's home; however, for the most part they are not aware of her \"goddess\" status.\nFor the longest time, she was unable to summon her angel since she was so scared when she first saw it and ordered it never to come out. This was caused by her self-doubt at being a hybrid Goddess/Demon since she equated having pure white wings as the sign of being a true Goddess. She has since gotten over whatever self-doubt that was holding her back and can now once again call her angel at will, much to Skuld's chagrin (she had originally thought that Urd had no angel and wanted to top her eldest sister by being first).\nPersonality.\nUnlike her younger sister Belldandy, Urd is very impulsive and headstrong. Belldandy describes Urd as being very passionate about everything she does. Urd is a great believer in the idea that the 'End justifies the Means', although, as Belldandy puts it: \"...she gets so wrapped up in the means that she forgets what the end was.\" She once stole Sleipnir to get a cure for a sick Belldandy, but spent so much time in the effort to master riding Sleipnir that it took eight days for her to get to the place where the cure was. Another god had fetched the cure six days earlier. Despite such, she usually means well and will do anything to protect her loved ones. Because of her being the oldest, she believes it's also her duty to look after Belldandy and Skuld.\nUrd's impulsiveness often makes her act first without fully considering the consequences. She is also a constant meddler, seemingly unable to leave well enough alone. She is also quite short tempered for a goddess, and is rather easy to irritate and anger. Urd is also notable for her tendency to lie, something a goddess supposedly can't do (or, more accurately, it is something a goddess \"shouldn't\" do, being against the rules). Although she's not a pathological liar, she's more than willing to distort the truth if needed to accomplish an objective. She is also very open about (and rather proud of) her sexuality, evidenced by her provocative dress, jibes at the younger Skuld and her slightly comical distress when turned into a child as a result of energy drainage. Her first appearance to Keiichi Morisato was through a semi-pornographic video.\nUrd has an interesting love-hate relationship with her youngest sister, Skuld. Both seem to antagonize one another at times, with Urd usually teasing Skuld about her age, bust size, and apparent lack of talent when it comes to magic. However both do care for each other and will come to the other's aid when necessary. Urd and Skuld are commonly seen playing different games at the table in front of the television for rights to watching their favorite shows, although the two of them have stated that simply watching television isn't as fun as competing for the television, they have been joined at times by Belldandy, Keiichi's mother and Peorth. When Keiichi asked Belldandy \"Are they best friends or what?\" Belldandy replied with a smile and \"They're best friends. I almost envy their ability to feel so strongly for each other.\"\nFor a goddess, Urd seems to have an amazing tendency to have her plans backfire, usually a result of her impulsive tendency to use raw power to solve a situation. Given her power levels this tends to cause explosions. Quite often, something will happen to louse up whatever scheme she's currently cooked up. Examples including: drinking one of her own love potions, trying to help Belldandy bake a cake and blowing up the kitchen, trying to help Keiichi build a motorbike and blowing up the garage, trying to dispel a number of computer \"bugs\" and blowing up the house, and so on.\nOne of Urd's most defining traits is her mixed Goddess-Demon ancestry. Because of this unique heritage, Urd is occasionally uncertain of her status within her world, as her Goddess and Demon personalities are always in conflict inside her. It was this inner conflict that allowed the Lord of Terror to eventually overcome Urd's will at one point. Deep in her heart, she truly wishes to be recognized as a Goddess and, in her earlier years, often looked up to Belldandy as a role model. This has led Urd to quietly deny her demonic heritage, much to the consternation of her mother, Hild.\nYumi Touma has said that it is only in the last of the OAV episodes that Urd can be seen \"as an older sister, one that you can depend on.\"\nWorld of Elegance's appearances.\nEpisodes in which World of Elegance has appeared.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32113", "revid": "45313785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32113", "title": "Conservative Party (UK)", "text": "The Conservative and Unionist Party, commonly the Conservative Party and colloquially the Tories, is one of the two main political parties in the United Kingdom, along with the Labour Party. It sits on the centre-right to right-wing of the left\u2013right political spectrum. Following its defeat by Labour at the 2024 general election it is currently the second-largest party by the number of votes cast and number of seats in the House of Commons; as such it has the formal parliamentary role of His Majesty's Most Loyal Opposition. It encompasses various ideological factions including one-nation conservatives, Thatcherites and traditionalist conservatives. There have been 20 Conservative prime ministers. \nThe Conservative Party was founded in 1834 from the Tory Party and was one of two dominant political parties in the 19th century, along with the Liberal Party. Under Benjamin Disraeli it played a preeminent role in politics at the height of the British Empire. In 1912 the Liberal Unionist Party merged with the party to form the Conservative and Unionist Party. Its rivalry with the Labour Party has shaped modern British politics for the last century. David Cameron sought to modernise the party after his election as leader in 2005, and the party governed from 2010 to 2024 under five prime ministers, latterly Rishi Sunak.\nThe party has generally adopted liberal economic policies favouring free markets since the 1980s, although historically it advocated protectionism. The party is British unionist, opposing a united Ireland as well as English, Northern Irish, Scottish and Welsh independence, and has been critical of devolution. Historically the party supported the continuance and maintenance of the British Empire. The party has taken various approaches towards the European Union (EU), with Eurosceptic and, to a decreasing extent, pro-European factions within it. Historically the party took a socially conservative approach. In defence policy it supports an independent nuclear weapons programme and commitment to NATO membership.\nFor much of modern British political history the United Kingdom exhibited a wide urban\u2013rural political divide; the party's voting and financial support base has historically consisted primarily of homeowners, business-owners, farmers, real-estate-developers and middle-class voters, especially in rural and suburban areas of England. Since the EU membership referendum in 2016 the Conservatives have targeted working-class voters from traditional Labour strongholds. The party's domination of British politics throughout the 20th century made it one of the most electorally successful political parties in history. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nSome writers trace the party's origins to the Tory Party, which it soon replaced. Other historians point to a faction, rooted in the 18th-century Whig Party, that coalesced around William Pitt the Younger in the 1780s. They were known as \"Independent Whigs\", \"Friends of Mr Pitt\" or \"Pittites\", and never used terms such as \"Tory\" or \"Conservative\". From about 1812 the name \"Tory\" was commonly used for a new party that, according to the historian Robert Blake, \"are the ancestors of Conservatism\". Blake adds that Pitt's successors after 1812 \"were not in any sense standard-bearers of 'true Toryism'\".\n\"Tory\" was an insult that entered English politics during the Exclusion Bill crisis of 1678\u20131681, which derived from the Middle Irish word (modern Irish: ) meaning \"outlaw\" or \"robber\", which in turn derived from the Irish word , meaning \"pursuit\", since outlaws were \"pursued men\".\nThe term \"Conservative\" was suggested as a title for the party in an article by J. Wilson Croker published in the \"Quarterly Review\" in 1830. The name immediately caught on and was formally adopted under the aegis of Robert Peel around 1834. Peel is acknowledged as the founder of the Conservative Party, which he created with the announcement of the Tamworth Manifesto. The term \"Conservative Party\" rather than Tory was the dominant usage by 1845.\n1867\u20131914: Conservatives and Unionists.\nThe widening of the electoral franchise in the 19th century forced the Conservative Party to popularise its approach under Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby, and Benjamin Disraeli, who carried through their own expansion of the franchise with the Reform Act 1867. The party was initially opposed to further expansion of the electorate but eventually allowed passage of William Ewart Gladstone's Representation of the People Act 1884. In 1886 the party formed an alliance with Spencer Cavendish's and Joseph Chamberlain's new Liberal Unionist Party and, under the statesmen Robert Gascoyne-Cecil and Arthur Balfour, held power for all but three of the following twenty years before suffering a heavy defeat in 1906, when it split over the issue of free trade.\nYoung Winston Churchill denounced Chamberlain's attack on free trade, and helped to organise the opposition inside the Unionist/Conservative Party. Nevertheless, Balfour, as party leader, introduced protectionist legislation. Churchill crossed the floor and formally joined the Liberal Party (he rejoined the Conservatives in 1925). In December, Balfour lost control of his party, as the defections multiplied. He was replaced by Liberal Prime Minister Henry Campbell-Bannerman who called an election in January 1906, which produced a massive Liberal victory. Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith enacted a great deal of reform legislation, but the Unionists worked hard at grassroots organizing. Two general elections were held in 1910, in January and in December. The two main parties were now almost dead equal in seats, but the Liberals kept control with a coalition with the Irish Parliamentary Party.\nIn 1912 the Liberal Unionists merged with the Conservative Party. In Ireland the Irish Unionist Alliance had been formed in 1891 which merged Unionists who were opposed to Irish Home Rule into one political movement. Its MPs took the Conservative whip at Westminster, essentially forming the Irish wing of the party until 1922. In Britain the Conservative Party was known as the Unionist Party because of its opposition to home rule. Under Bonar Law's leadership in 1911\u20131914, the party morale improved, the \"radical right\" wing was contained, and the party machinery strengthened. It made some progress toward developing constructive social policies.\nFirst World War.\nWhile the Liberals were mostly against the First World War until the invasion of Belgium, Conservative leaders were strongly in favour of aiding France and stopping Germany. The Liberal party was in full control of the government until its mismanagement of the war effort under the Shell Crisis badly hurt its reputation. An all-party coalition government was formed in May 1915. In late 1916 the Liberal David Lloyd George became prime minister, but the Liberals soon split and the Conservatives dominated the government, especially after their landslide in the 1918 election. The Liberal party never recovered, but the Labour Party gained strength after 1920.\nNigel Keohane finds that the Conservatives were bitterly divided before 1914 but the war pulled the party together, allowing it to emphasise patriotism as it found new leadership and worked out its positions on the Irish question, socialism, electoral reform, and the issue of intervention in the economy. The fresh emphasis on anti-socialism was its response to the growing strength of the Labour Party. When electoral reform was an issue, it worked to protect their base in rural England. It aggressively sought female voters in the 1920s, often relying on patriotic themes.\n1920\u20131945.\nIn 1922 Bonar Law and Stanley Baldwin led the breakup of the coalition, and the Conservatives governed until 1923, when a minority Labour government led by Ramsay MacDonald came to power. The Conservatives regained power in 1924 but were defeated in 1929 as a minority Labour government took office. In 1931, following the collapse of the Labour minority government, it entered another coalition, which was dominated by the Conservatives with some support from factions of both the Liberal Party and the Labour Party (National Labour and National Liberals). In May 1940, during the Second World War, a more balanced coalition was formed\u2014the National Government\u2014which, under the leadership of Sir Winston Churchill, saw the United Kingdom through the Second World War. However, the party lost the 1945 general election in a landslide to the resurgent Labour Party.\nThe concept of the \"property-owning democracy\" was coined by Noel Skelton in 1923 and became a core principle of the party.\n1945\u20131975: Post-war consensus.\nPopular dissatisfaction.\nWhile serving in Opposition during the late 1940s, the Conservative Party exploited and incited growing public anger at food rationing, scarcity, controls, austerity and government bureaucracy. It used the dissatisfaction with the socialist and egalitarian policies of the Labour Party to rally middle-class supporters and build a political comeback that won them the 1951 general election.\nModernising the party.\nIn 1947 the party published its Industrial Charter which marked its acceptance of the \"post-war consensus\" on the mixed economy and labour rights. David Maxwell Fyfe chaired a committee into Conservative Party organisation that resulted in the Maxwell Fyfe Report (1948\u201349). The report required the party to do more fundraising, by forbidding constituency associations from demanding large donations from candidates, with the intention of broadening the diversity of MPs. In practice it may have had the effect of lending more power to constituency parties and making candidates more uniform. Winston Churchill, the party leader, brought in a party chairman to modernise the party: Frederick Marquis, 1st Earl of Woolton, rebuilt the local organisations with an emphasis on membership, money, and a unified national propaganda appeal on critical issues.\nWith a narrow victory at the 1951 general election, despite losing the popular vote, Churchill was back in power. Apart from rationing, which was ended in 1954, most of the welfare state enacted by Labour was accepted by the Conservatives and became part of the \"post-war consensus\" that was satirised as Butskellism and that lasted until the 1970s. The Conservatives were conciliatory towards trade unions, but they did privatise the steel and road haulage industries in 1953. During the Conservatives' thirteen-year tenure in office, pensions went up by 49% in real terms, sickness and unemployment benefits by 76% in real terms, and supplementary benefits by 46% in real terms. However, family allowances fell by 15% in real terms. \"Thirteen Wasted Years\" was a popular slogan attacking the Conservative record, primarily from Labour. In addition, there were attacks by the right wing of the Conservative Party itself for its tolerance of socialist policies and reluctance to curb the legal powers of labour unions.\nThe Conservatives were re-elected in 1955 and in 1959 with larger majorities. The Conservative prime ministers Churchill, Anthony Eden, Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home promoted relatively liberal trade regulations and less state involvement throughout the 1950s and early 1960s. The Suez Crisis of 1956 was a humiliating defeat for Eden, but his successor, Macmillan, minimised the damage and focused attention on domestic issues and prosperity. Following controversy over the selections of Macmillan and Douglas-Home via a process of consultation known as the 'Magic Circle', a formal election process was created and the first leadership election was held in 1965, won by Edward Heath.\n1965\u20131975: Edward Heath.\nHeath's 1970\u201374 government was known for taking the UK into the European Economic Community (EEC), although the right-wing of the party objected to his failure to control the trade unions at a time when a declining British industry saw many strikes, as well as the 1973\u201375 recession. Since accession to the EEC, which developed into the European Union, British membership has been a source of heated debate within the party.\nHeath had come to power in June 1970 and the last possible date for the next general election was not until mid-1975. However, a general election was held in February 1974 in a bid to win public support during a national emergency caused by the miners' strike. Heath's attempt to win a second term at this \"snap\" election failed, as a deadlock result left no party with an overall majority. Heath resigned within days, after failing to gain Liberal Party support to form a coalition government. Labour won the October 1974 election with an overall majority of three seats.\n1975\u20131990: Margaret Thatcher.\nLoss of power weakened Heath's control over the party and Margaret Thatcher deposed him at the 1975 leadership election. Thatcher led her party to victory at the 1979 general election with a manifesto which concentrated on the party's philosophy.\nAs prime minister, Thatcher focused on rejecting the mild liberalism of the post-war consensus that tolerated or encouraged nationalisation, strong labour unions, heavy regulation, and high taxes. She did not challenge the National Health Service, and supported the Cold War policies of the consensus, but otherwise tried to dismantle and delegitimise it. She built a right-wing political ideology that became known as Thatcherism, based on social and economic ideas from British and American intellectuals such as Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman. Thatcher believed that too much socially democratic-oriented government policy was leading to a long-term decline in the British economy. As a result, her government pursued a programme of economic liberalism, adopting a free-market approach to public services based on the sale of publicly owned industries and utilities, as well as a reduction in trade union power.\nOne of Thatcher's largest and most successful policies assisted council house tenants in public housing to purchase their homes at favourable rates. The \"Right to Buy\" had emerged in the late 1940s but was too great a challenge to the post-war consensus to win Conservative endorsement. Thatcher favoured the idea because it would lead to a \"property-owning democracy\", an important idea that had emerged in the 1920s. Some local Conservative-run councils enacted profitable local sales schemes during the late 1960s. By the 1970s many working-class people could afford to buy homes, and eagerly adopted Thatcher's invitation to purchase their homes at a sizeable discount. The new owners were more likely to vote Conservative, as Thatcher had hoped.\nThatcher led the Conservatives to two further electoral victories in 1983 and in 1987. She was deeply unpopular in certain sections of society due to high unemployment and her response to the miners' strike. Unemployment had doubled between 1979 and 1982, largely due to Thatcher's monetarist battle against inflation. At the time of the 1979 general election inflation had been at 9% or under for the previous year, then increased to over 20% in the first two years of the Thatcher ministry, but it had fallen again to 5.8% by the start of 1983.\nThe period of unpopularity of the Conservatives in the early 1980s coincided with a crisis in the Labour Party, which then formed the main opposition. Victory in the Falklands War in June 1982, along with the recovering British economy, saw the Conservatives returning quickly to the top of the opinion polls and winning the 1983 general election with a landslide majority, due to a split opposition vote. By the time of the general election in June 1987, the economy was stronger, with lower inflation and falling unemployment and Thatcher secured her third successive electoral victory.\nThe introduction of the Community Charge (known by its opponents as the \"poll tax\") in 1989 is often cited as contributing to her political downfall. Internal party tensions led to a leadership challenge by the Conservative MP Michael Heseltine and she resigned on 28 November 1990.\n1990\u20131997: John Major.\nJohn Major won the party leadership election on 27 November 1990, and his appointment led to an almost immediate boost in Conservative Party fortunes. The election was held on 9 April 1992 and the Conservatives won a fourth successive electoral victory, contrary to predictions from opinion polls. The Conservatives became the first party to attract 14 million votes in a general election.\nOn 16 September 1992 the Government suspended Britain's membership of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), after the pound fell lower than its minimum level in the ERM, a day thereafter referred to as Black Wednesday. Soon after, approximately one million householders faced repossession of their homes during a recession that saw a sharp rise in unemployment, taking it close to 3 million people. The party subsequently lost much of its reputation for good financial stewardship. The end of the recession was declared in April 1993. From 1994 to 1997 Major privatised British Rail.\nThe party was plagued by internal division and infighting, mainly over the UK's role in the European Union. The party's Eurosceptic wing, represented by MPs such as John Redwood, opposed further EU integration, whilst the party's pro-European wing, represented by those such as Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke, was broadly supportive. The issue of the creation of a single European currency also inflamed tensions. Major survived a leadership challenge in 1995 by Redwood, but Redwood received 89 votes, further undermining Major's influence.\nThe Conservative government was increasingly accused in the media of \"sleaze\". Their support reached its lowest ebb in late 1994. Over the next two years the Conservatives gained some credit for the strong economic recovery and fall in unemployment. But an effective opposition campaign by the Labour Party culminated in a landslide defeat for the Conservatives in 1997, their worst defeat since the 1906 general election. The 1997 election left the Conservative Party as an England-only party, with all Scottish and Welsh seats having been lost, and not a single new seat having been gained anywhere.\n1997\u20132010: Political wilderness.\nMajor resigned as party leader and was succeeded by William Hague. The 2001 general election resulted in a net gain of one seat for the Conservative Party and returned a mostly unscathed Labour Party back to government. This all occurred months after the fuel protests of September 2000 had seen the Conservatives briefly take a narrow lead over Labour in the opinion polls.\nIn 2001 Iain Duncan Smith was elected leader of the party. Although Duncan Smith was a strong Eurosceptic, during his tenure, Europe ceased to be an issue of division in the party as it united behind calls for a referendum on the proposed European Union Constitution. However, before he could lead the party into a general election, Duncan Smith lost the vote on a motion of no confidence by MPs. This was despite the Conservative support equalling that of Labour in the months leading up to his departure from the leadership.\nMichael Howard then stood for the leadership unopposed on 6 November 2003. Under Howard's leadership at the 2005 general election, the Conservative Party increased their total vote share and\u2014more significantly\u2014their number of parliamentary seats, reducing Labour's majority. The day following the election, Howard resigned.\nDavid Cameron won the 2005 leadership election. He then announced his intention to reform and realign the Conservatives. For most of 2006 and the first half of 2007, polls showed leads over Labour for the Conservatives. Polls became more volatile in summer 2007 with the accession of Gordon Brown as prime minister. The Conservatives gained control of the London mayoralty for the first time in 2008 after Boris Johnson defeated the Labour incumbent, Ken Livingstone.\n2010\u20132025: Austerity, Brexit, and the pandemic.\nIn May 2010, following the 2010 general election, the Conservative Party came to government, first under a coalition with the Liberal Democrats and later as a series of majority and minority governments. During this period there were five Conservative Prime Ministers: Cameron, Theresa May, Johnson, Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak. The initial period of this time, primarily during Cameron's premiership, was marked by the ongoing effects of the 2008 financial crisis and the implementation of austerity measures in response. From 2015 the predominant political event was the Brexit referendum and the process to implement the decision to leave the trade bloc.\nThe Conservatives' time in office was marked by several controversies. The presence of Islamophobia in the Conservative Party, including allegations against its policies, fringes, and structure, was often in the public eye. These include allegations against senior politicians such as Johnson, Michael Gove, May and Zac Goldsmith.\nDuring the period of the Cameron and Johnson governments, a number of Conservative MPs were accused or convicted of sexual misconduct, with cases including the consumption of pornography in parliament, rape, groping and sexual harassment. In 2017 a list of 36 sitting Conservative MPs accused of inappropriate sexual behaviour was leaked. The list is believed to have been compiled by party staff. Following accusations of multiple cases of rape against an unnamed Conservative MP in 2023 and allegations of a cover-up, Baroness Warsi, who has served as the party's co-chairman under Cameron, stated that the Conservative Party has had a problem handling complaints of sexual misconducts against members appropriately.\n2010\u20132016: David Cameron.\nThe 2010 election resulted in a hung parliament with the Conservatives having the most seats but short of an overall majority. Following the resignation of Gordon Brown, Cameron was named prime minister, and the Conservatives entered government in a coalition with the Liberal Democrats\u2014the first postwar coalition government.\nCameron's premiership was marked by the effects of the 2008 financial crisis; these involved a large deficit in government finances that his government sought to reduce through controversial austerity measures. In September 2014 the Unionist side, championed by Labour as well as by the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats, won in the Scottish Independence referendum by 55% No to 45% Yes on the question \"Should Scotland be an independent country?\"\nAt the 2015 general election the Conservatives formed a majority government under Cameron. After speculation of a referendum on the UK's EU membership throughout his premiership, a vote was announced for June 2016 in which Cameron campaigned to remain in the EU. On 24 June 2016 Cameron announced his intention to resign as prime minister after he failed to convince the British public to stay in the European Union.\n2016\u20132019: Theresa May.\nOn 11 July 2016 Theresa May became the leader of the Conservative Party. May promised social reform and a more centrist political outlook for the Conservative Party and its government. May's early cabinet appointments were interpreted as an effort to reunite the party in the wake of the UK's vote to leave the European Union.\nShe began the process of withdrawing the UK from the European Union in March 2017. In April 2017 the Cabinet agreed to hold a general election on 8 June. In a shock result, the election resulted in a hung parliament, with the Conservative Party needing a confidence and supply arrangement with the Democratic Unionist Party to support a minority government.\nMay's premiership was dominated by Brexit as she carried out negotiations with the European Union, adhering to the Chequers Plan, which resulted in her draft Brexit withdrawal agreement. May survived two votes of no confidence in December 2018 and January 2019, but after versions of her draft withdrawal agreement were rejected by Parliament three times, May announced her resignation on 24 May 2019.\nSubsequent to the EU referendum vote, and through the premierships of May, Johnson and their successors, the party shifted right on the political spectrum.\n2019\u20132022: Boris Johnson.\nIn July 2019 Boris Johnson became the leader of the party. He became prime minister the next day. Johnson had made withdrawal from the EU by 31 October \"with no ifs, buts or maybes\" a key pledge during his campaign for the party leadership.\nJohnson lost his working majority in the House of Commons on 3 September 2019. Later that same day, 21 Conservative MPs had the Conservative whip withdrawn after voting with the Opposition to grant the Commons control over its order paper. Johnson would later halt the Withdrawal Agreement Bill, calling for a general election.\nThe 2019 general election resulted in the Conservatives winning a majority, the party's largest since 1987. It won several constituencies, particularly in formerly traditional Labour seats. On 20 December 2019, MPs passed an agreement for withdrawing from the EU; the United Kingdom formally left on 31 January 2020.\nJohnson presided over the UK's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. From late 2021 onwards, Johnson received huge public backlash for the Partygate scandal, in which staff and senior members of government were pictured holding gatherings during lockdown contrary to Government guidance. The Metropolitan Police eventually fined Johnson for breaking lockdown rules in April 2022. In July 2022 Johnson admitted to having appointed Chris Pincher as deputy chief whip while being aware of allegations of sexual assault against him. This, along with Partygate and increasing criticisms on Johnson's handling of the cost-of-living crisis, provoked a government crisis following a loss in confidence and nearly 60 resignations from government officials, eventually leading to Johnson announcing his resignation on 7 July.\n2022: Liz Truss.\nJohnson's successor as leader was confirmed as Liz Truss on 5 September, following a leadership election. In a strategy labelled Trussonomics she introduced policies in response to the cost-of-living crisis, including price caps on energy bills and government help to pay them. Truss's mini-budget on 23 September faced severe criticism and markets reacted poorly; the pound fell to a record low of 1.03 against the US dollar, and UK government gilt yields rose to 4.3 per cent, prompting the Bank of England to trigger an emergency bond-buying programme. After condemnation from the public, the Labour Party and her own party, Truss reversed some aspects of the mini-budget, including the abolition of the top rate of income tax. Following a government crisis Truss announced her resignation as prime minister on 20 October after 44 days in office, the shortest premiership in British history. Truss also oversaw the worst polling the Conservatives had ever received, with Labour polling as high as 36 per cent above the Conservatives amidst the crisis.\n2022\u20132025: Rishi Sunak and Kemi Badenoch.\nOn 24 October 2022 Rishi Sunak was declared leader, the first British Asian leader of the Conservatives and the first British Asian prime minister. On 22 May 2024 Sunak announced a general election to be held on 4 July 2024.\nDuring the 2024 general election, public opinion in favour of a change in government was reflected by poor polling from the Conservative Party, with Reform UK making strong polling gains. The Conservative manifesto focused on the economy, taxes, welfare, expanding free childcare, education, healthcare, environment, energy, transport and crime. It pledged to lower taxes, increase education and NHS spending, deliver 92,000 more nurses and 28,000 more doctors, introduce a new model of National Service, and to treble Britain's offshore wind capacity and support solar energy. The final result was the lowest seat total at a general election in the history of the Conservative Party, with well below the previous record low of 156 seats won at the 1906 general election. Kemi Badenoch became party leader following Sunak's defeat and resignation.\nPolicies.\nEconomic policy.\nThe Conservative Party believes that a free market and individual achievement are the primary factors behind economic prosperity. A leading economic theory advocated by Conservatives is supply-side economics, which holds that reduced income tax rates increase growth and enterprise (although a reduction in the budget deficit has sometimes taken priority over cutting taxes). The party focuses on the social market economy, promoting a free market for competition with social balance to create fairness. This has included education reform, vocational skills reform, expanding free childcare, curbs on the banking sector, enterprise zones to revive regions in Britain, and grand and extensive infrastructure projects, such as high-speed rail.\nOne concrete economic policy of recent years has been opposition to the European single currency, the euro. With the growing Euroscepticism within his party, John Major negotiated a British opt-out in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty, which enabled the UK to stay within the European Union without adopting the single currency. All subsequent Conservative leaders have positioned the party firmly against the adoption of the euro.\nThe 50% top rate of income tax was reduced to 45% by the Conservative\u2013Liberal Democrat coalition. Alongside a reduction in tax and commitments to keep taxation low, the Conservative Party has significantly reduced government spending, through the austerity programme which commenced in 2010, subsequent to the 2008 financial crisis. In 2019 and during the election campaign that year, Boris Johnson signalled an end to austerity with increased public expenditure, in areas including healthcare, education, transport, welfare, and the police.\nJobs and welfare policy.\nOne of the Conservatives' key policy goals in 2010 was to reduce the number of people unemployed, and increase the number of people in the workforce, by strengthening apprenticeships, skills and job training. Between 2010 and 2014, all claimants of Incapacity Benefit were moved onto a new benefit scheme, Employment and Support Allowance, which was then subsumed into the Universal Credit system alongside other welfare benefits in 2018. The Universal Credit system came under immense scrutiny following its introduction. Shortly after her appointment to the Department for Work and Pensions, the then Secretary of State Amber Rudd acknowledged there were real problems with the Universal Credit system, especially the wait times for initial payments and the housing payments aspect of the combined benefits. Rudd pledged specifically to review and address the uneven impact of Universal Credit implementation on economically disadvantaged women, which had been the subject of numerous reports by the Radio 4 \"You and Yours\" programme and others.\nUntil 1999 Conservatives opposed the creation of a national minimum wage, as they believed it would cost jobs, and businesses would be reluctant to start business in the UK from fear of high labour costs. However the party have since pledged support and in the July 2015 budget, Chancellor George Osborne announced a National Living Wage of \u00a39/hour. The National Minimum Wage in 2024 was \u00a311.44 for those over 21. The party support, and have implemented, the restoration of the link between pensions and earnings, and seek to raise retirement age from 65 to 67 by 2028.\nTransport and infrastructure policy.\nThe Conservatives have invested in public transport and infrastructure, aimed to promoting economic growth. This has included rail (including high-speed rail), electric vehicles, bus networks, and active transport.\nIn 2020 new funding for active travel infrastructure was announced by the Conservatives. The party's stated aim was for England to be a \"great walking and cycling nation\" and for half of all journeys in towns and cities being walked or cycled by 2030. The plan was accompanied by \u00a32 billion in additional funding over the following five years for cycling and walking. The plan also introduced new inspectorate, known as Active Travel England.\nIn 2021 the Conservatives announced a white paper that would transform the operation of the railways. The rail network will be partly renationalised, with infrastructure and operations brought together under the state-owned public body Great British Railways. On 18 November 2021, the government announced the biggest ever public investment in Britain's rail network costing \u00a396\u00a0billion and promising quicker and more frequent rail connections in the North and Midlands: the Integrated Rail Plan includes substantially improved connections north\u2013south as well as east\u2013west and includes three new high speed lines.\nEnergy and climate change policy.\nDavid Cameron brought several 'green' issues to the forefront of his 2010 campaign. These included proposals designed to impose a tax on workplace car parking spaces, a halt to airport growth, a tax on cars with exceptionally poor petrol mileage, and restrictions on car advertising. Many of these policies were implemented in the Coalition\u2014including the 'Green Deal'. A law was passed in 2019 that UK greenhouse gas emissions will be net zero by 2050. The UK was the first major economy to embrace a legal obligation to achieve net zero carbon emissions.\nIn 2019 the Conservatives became the first national government in the world to officially declare a climate emergency (second in the UK after the SNP). In November 2020 the Conservatives announced a 10-point plan for a 'green industrial revolution', with green enterprises, an end to the sale of petrol and diesel cars, quadruple the amount of offshore wind power capacity within a decade, fund a variety of emissions-cutting proposals, and spurn a proposed green post-COVID-19 recovery. In 2021, the Conservatives announced plans to cut carbon emissions by 78% by 2035.\nSocial policy.\nSocially conservative policies such as tax incentives for married couples may have played a role in the party's electoral decline in the 1990s and early 2000s, and so the party has attempted to seek a new direction. As part of their coalition with the Liberal Democrats, the Conservative government did support the introduction of equal marriage rights for LGBT+ individuals in 2010, though 139 Conservative MPs, a majority, voted against the 2013 same-sex marriage act. Thus the extent to which this policy represented a more liberal Conservative party has been challenged.\nSince 1997 debate has occurred within the party between 'modernisers' such as Alan Duncan, who believe that the Conservatives should modify their public stances on social issues, and 'traditionalists' such as Liam Fox and Owen Paterson, who believe that the party should remain faithful to its traditional conservative platform. In the previous parliament, modernising forces were represented by MPs such as Neil O'Brien, who has argued that the party needs to renew its policies and image, and is said to be inspired by Macron's centrist politics. Ruth Davidson is also seen as a reforming figure. Many of the original 'traditionalists' remain influential, though Duncan Smith's influence in terms of Commons contributions has waned.\nThe party has strongly criticised what it describes as Labour's \"state multiculturalism\". Shadow Home Secretary Dominic Grieve said in 2008 that state multiculturalism policies had created a \"terrible\" legacy of \"cultural despair\" and dislocation, which has encouraged support for \"extremists\" on both sides of the debate. David Cameron responded to Grieve's comments by agreeing that policies of \"state multiculturalism\" that treat social groups as distinct, for example policies that \"treat British Muslims as Muslims, rather than as British citizens\", are wrong. However, he expressed support for the premise of multiculturalism on the whole.\nOfficial statistics showed that EU and non-EU mass immigration, together with asylum seeker applications, all increased substantially during Cameron's term in office. However, this was not solely as a result of intentional government policy \u2013 during this period, there were significant refugee flows into the UK and an increased level of asylum applications due to conflict and persecution globally. In 2019 former Conservative Home Secretary Priti Patel announced that the government would enact stricter immigration reforms, crack down on illegal immigration, and scrap freedom of movement with the European Union following the completion of Brexit. In the four years following this announcement, net migration increased annually, in large part due to the number of health care workers, and their dependents, that were invited into the country because of recruitment problems caused by Brexit and the pandemic. The number of asylum seekers dropped as a proportion of total net migrants, whereas the number of people coming to the UK to study increased during that time period.\nFamily policy.\nAs prime minister, David Cameron wanted to 'support family life in Britain' and put families at the centre of domestic social policymaking. He stated in 2014 that there was 'no better place to start' in the Conservative mission of 'building society from the bottom up' than the family, which was responsible for individual welfare and well-being long before the welfare state came into play. He also argued that 'family and politics are inextricably linked'. Both Cameron and Theresa May aimed at helping families achieve a work-home balance and have previously proposed to offer all parents 12 months parental leave, to be shared by parents as they choose. This policy is now in place, offering 50 weeks total parental leave, of which 37 weeks are paid leave, which can be shared between both parents.\nOther policies have included doubling the free hours of childcare for working parents of three and four-year-olds from 15 hours to 30 hours a week during term-time, although parents can reduce the number of hours per week to 22 and spread across 52 weeks of the year. The government also introduced a policy to fund 15 hours a week of free education and childcare for 2-year-olds in England if parents are receiving certain state benefits or the child has a SEN statement or diagnosis, worth \u00a32,500 a year per child.\nHealth and drug policy.\nIn 1945 the Conservatives declared support for universal healthcare. They introduced the Health and Social Care Act 2012, constituting the biggest reformation that the NHS has ever undertaken.\nThe Conservative Party supports drug prohibition. Legalisation of cannabis for some medical uses is favoured by some Conservative politicians. The party has rejected both decriminalising drugs for personal use and the creation of safe consumption sites. In 2024 the Conservative government passed a law to phase out smoking by banning the sale of tobacco to anyone born in or after 2009.\nForeign policy.\nFor much of the 20th century, the Conservative Party took a broadly Atlanticist stance in relations with the United States, Members of EU and NATO, favouring close ties with the United States and similarly aligned nations such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Japan. The Conservatives have generally favoured a diverse range of international alliances, ranging from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to the Commonwealth of Nations. The Conservatives have proposed a Pan-African Free Trade Area, which it says could help entrepreneurial dynamism of African people. The Conservatives pledged to increase aid spending to 0.7% of national income by 2013. They met this pledge in 2014, when spending on aid reached 0.72% of GDP and the commitment was enshrined in UK law in 2015.\nClose Anglo-American Relationship have been an element of Conservative foreign policy since the Second World War. Though the Anglo\u2013American relationship in foreign affairs has often been termed a 'Special Relationship', a term coined by Winston Churchill, this has often been observed most clearly where leaders in each country are of a similar political stripe. David Cameron had sought to distance himself from former US President Bush and his neoconservative foreign policy. Despite traditional links between the UK Conservatives and US Republicans, London Mayor Boris Johnson, a Conservative, endorsed Barack Obama in the 2008 election. However, after becoming prime minister, Johnson developed a close relationship with Republican President Donald Trump. This has been described as a reestablishing of the \"Special Relationship\" with the United States following Britain's withdraw from the European Union, as well as returning to the links between the Conservatives and Republican Party. Beyond relations with the United States, the Commonwealth and the EU, the Conservative Party has generally supported a pro free-trade foreign policy within the mainstream of international affairs.\nAlthough stances have changed with successive leadership, the modern Conservative Party generally supports cooperation and maintaining friendly relations with Israel. Historic Conservative statesmen such as Arthur Balfour and Winston Churchill supported the idea of national home for the Jewish people. Under Margaret Thatcher Conservative support for Israel was seen to crystallise. Support for Israel has increased under the leaderships of Theresa May and Boris Johnson, with prominent Conservative figures within the May and Johnson ministries strongly endorsing Israel. In 2016, Theresa May publicly rebutted statements made by US Secretary of State John Kerry over the composition of the Israeli government. In 2018 the party pledged to proscribe all wings of the Lebanese-based militant group Hezbollah and this was adopted as a UK-wide policy in 2019. In 2019, the Conservative government under Boris Johnson announced plans to stop the influence of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement on local politics which included prohibiting local councils from boycotting Israeli products.\nDefence policy.\nAfter the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the Conservative Party supported the coalition military action in Afghanistan. The Conservative Party believed that success in Afghanistan would be defined in terms of the Afghans achieving the capability to maintain their own internal and external security. They have repeatedly criticised the former Labour Government for failing to equip British Forces adequately in the earlier days on the campaign\u2014especially highlighting the shortage of helicopters for British Forces resulting from Gordon Brown's \u00a31.4bn cut to the helicopter budget in 2004.\nThe Conservative Party believes that in the 21st century defence and security are interlinked. It has pledged to break away from holding a traditional Strategic Defence Review and committed to carrying out a more comprehensive Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR). As well as an SDSR, the Conservative Party pledged in 2010 to undertake a fundamental and far-reaching review of the procurement process and how defence equipment is provided in Britain, and to increase Britain's share of the global defence market as Government policy.\nThe Conservative Party upholds the view that NATO remains and should remain the most important security alliance for the United Kingdom. It has advocated for the creation of a fairer funding mechanism for NATO's expeditionary operations and called for all NATO countries to meet their required defence spending 2% of GDP. Some Conservatives believe that there is scope for expanding NATO's Article V to include new threats such as cybersecurity.\nThe Conservative Party aims to build enhanced bilateral defence relations with key European partners and believes that it is in Britain's national interest to cooperate fully with all its European neighbours. It has pledged to ensure that any EU military capability must supplement and not supplant British national defence and NATO, and that it is not in the British interest to hand over security to any supranational body.\nThe Conservatives see it as a priority to encourage all members of the European Union to do more in terms of a commitment to European security at home and abroad. Regarding the defence role of the European Union, the Conservatives pledged to re-examine some of Britain's EU Defence commitments to determine their practicality and utility; specifically, to reassess UK participation provisions like Permanent Structured Cooperation, the European Defence Agency and EU Battlegroups to determine if there is any value in Britain's participation.\nThe Conservatives support the UK's possession of nuclear weapons through the Trident nuclear programme.\nEuropean Union policy.\nNo subject has proved more divisive in the Conservative Party in recent history than the role of the United Kingdom within the European Union. Though the principal architect of the UK's entry into the European Communities (which became the European Union) was Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath, most contemporary Conservative opinion is opposed to closer economic and particularly political union with the EU. This is a noticeable shift in British politics, as in the 1960s and 1970s the Conservatives were more pro-Europe than the Labour Party: for example, in the 1971 House of Commons vote on whether the UK should join the European Economic Community, only 39 of the then 330 Conservative MPs were opposed.\nThe Conservative Party has members with varying opinions of the EU, with pro-European Conservatives joining the affiliate Conservative Group for Europe, while some Eurosceptics left the party to join the United Kingdom Independence Party. Whilst the vast majority of Conservatives in recent decades have been Eurosceptics, views among this group regarding the UK's relationship with the EU have been polarised between moderate, soft Eurosceptics who support continued British membership but oppose further harmonisation of regulations affecting business and accept participation in a multi-speed Europe, and a more radical, economically libertarian faction who oppose policy initiatives from Brussels, support the rolling back of integration measures from the Maastricht Treaty onwards, and have become increasingly supportive of a complete withdrawal.\nDomestic policy.\nConstitutional policy.\nTraditionally the Conservative Party has supported the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom and its traditional Westminster system of politics. The party opposed many of Tony Blair's reforms, such as the removal of the hereditary peers, the incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights into British law, and the 2009 creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, a function formerly carried out by the House of Lords.\nThere was also a split on whether to introduce a British Bill of Rights that would replace the Human Rights Act 1998; David Cameron expressed support, but party grandee Ken Clarke described it as \"xenophobic and legal nonsense\".\nIn 2019 the Conservatives' manifesto committed to a broad constitutional review in a line which read \"after Brexit we also need to look at the broader aspects of our constitution: the relationship between the government, parliament and the courts\".\nJustice, crime and security policy.\nIn 2010 the Conservatives campaigned to cut the perceived bureaucracy of the modern police force and pledged greater legal protection to people convicted of defending themselves against intruders.\nThe party has also campaigned for the creation of a UK Bill of Rights to replace the Human Rights Act 1998, but this was vetoed by their coalition partners the Liberal Democrats. The Conservatives' 2017 manifesto pledged to create a national infrastructure police force, subsuming the existing British Transport Police; Civil Nuclear Constabulary; and Ministry of Defence Police \"to improve the protection of critical infrastructure such as nuclear sites, railways and the strategic road network\".\nEducation and research.\nIn education, the Conservatives pledged to review the National Curriculum, introduce the English Baccalaureate, and reform GCSE, A-level, other national qualifications, apprenticeships and training. The restoration of discipline was also highlighted, as they want it to be easier for pupils to be searched for contraband items, the granting of anonymity to teachers accused by pupils, and the banning of expelled pupils being returned to schools via appeal panels.\nIn higher education, the Conservatives have increased tuition fees to \u00a39,250 per year, however have ensured that this will not be paid by anyone until they are earning over \u00a325,000. The Scottish Conservatives also support the re-introduction of tuition fees in Scotland. In 2016 the Conservative government extended student loan access in England to postgraduate students to help improve access to education.\nWithin the EU, the UK was one of the largest recipients of research funding in the European Union, receiving \u00a37 billion between 2007 and 2015, which is invested in universities and research-intensive businesses. Following the vote to leave the EU, Prime Minister Theresa May guaranteed that the Conservative government would protect funding for existing research and development projects in the UK. In 2017, the Conservatives introduced the T Level qualification aimed at improving the teaching and administration of technical education.\nOrganisation.\nParty structure.\nThe Conservative Party comprises the voluntary party, parliamentary party (sometimes called the political party) and the professional party.\nMembers of the public join the party by becoming part of a local constituency Conservative Association.\nFinancial ties to Russian oligarchs.\nThe Conservative Party has received funding from Russian oligarchs, beginning in the early 2000s, for which it has been criticised. Scrutiny became more prominent after alleged interference in the 2016 Brexit referendum by the Kremlin to support the Vote Leave campaign, and increased after the \"Intelligence and Security Committee Russia\" report into Russian interference in British politics was published in July 2020. Concerns over Conservative Party funds have become increasingly controversial due to Vladimir Putin's human rights abuses and the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nOne of the first was Lubov Chernukhin, wife of former deputy finance minister and investment company VEB.RF founder Vladmir Chernukhin, who had donated north of \u00a32.2 million as of the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Donations to British political parties is only legal for citizens; the individuals who donated to the party had dual UK-Russian citizenship, and the donations were legal and properly declared. However, an investigation conducted by \"The New York Times\" shortly after the invasion of Ukraine determined that a \u00a3399,810 donation made by British-Israeli businessman Ehud Sheleg in 2018 was in fact given directly to him by his father-in-law, Russian oligarch Sergei Kopytov. Kopytov, a former minister in Russian-occupied Crimea, has strong ties to Vladimir Putin's government. Barclays Bank reported that in January 2021, they \"[traced] a clear line back from this donation to its ultimate source\", and reported it accordingly to the National Crime Agency.\nAn investigation by the Good Law Project found that in spite of Johnson's claims that donations from those with links to the Russian government was to stop, since the start of the war, the Conservatives have accepted at least \u00a3243,000 from Russia and Kremlin-associated donors. In February 2022, the Labour Party used Electoral Commission information to calculate that donors who had made money from Russia or Russians had given \u00a31.93m to either the Conservative party or constituency associations since Boris Johnson's premiership began. Then-party leader Liz Truss said that the donations would not be returned, stating that they had been \"properly declared\".\nInternational affiliation.\nThe Conservative Party is a member of a number of international organisations, most notably the International Democracy Union which unites right-wing parties including the United States Republican Party, the Liberal Party of Australia, the Conservative Party of Canada and the South Korean People Power Party.\nAt a European level, the Conservatives were members of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party (ECR Party), which unites conservative parties in opposition to a federal European Union, through which the Conservatives have ties to the Ulster Unionist Party and the governing parties of Israel and Turkey, Likud and the Justice and Development Party respectively. In the European Parliament, the Conservative Party's MEPs sat in the European Conservatives and Reformists Group (ECR Group), which is affiliated to the ACRE. Party leader David Cameron pushed the foundation of the ECR, which was launched in 2009, along with the Czech Civic Democratic Party and the Polish Law and Justice, before which the Conservative Party's MEPs sat in the European Democrats, which had become a subgroup of the European People's Party in the 1990s. Since the 2014 European election, the ECR Group has been the third-largest group, with the largest members being the Conservatives (nineteen MEPs), Law and Justice (eighteen MEPs), the Liberal Conservative Reformers (five MEPs), and the Danish People's Party and New Flemish Alliance (four MEPs each). In June 2009 the Conservatives required a further four partners apart from the Polish and Czech supports to qualify for official fraction status in the parliament; the rules state that a European parliamentary caucus requires at least 25 MEPs from at least seven of the 27 EU member states. In forming the caucus, the party broke with two decades of co-operation by the UK's Conservative Party with the mainstream European Christian Democrats and conservatives in the European parliament, the European People's Party (EPP). It did so on the grounds that it is dominated by European federalists and supporters of the Lisbon treaty, which the Conservatives were generally highly critical of.\nLogo.\nWhen Sir Christopher Lawson was appointed as a marketing director at Conservative Central Office in 1981, he developed a logo design based on the Olympic flame in the colours of the Union Jack, which was intended to represent leadership, striving to win, dedication, and a sense of community. The emblem was adopted for the 1983 general election. In 1989, the party's director of communications, Brendan Bruce, found through market research that recognition of the symbol was low and that people found it old fashioned and uninspiring. Using a design company headed by Michael Peters, an image of a hand carrying a torch was developed, which referenced the Statue of Liberty.\nIn 2006, there was a rebranding exercise to emphasise the Conservatives' commitment to environmentalism; a project costing \u00a340,000 resulted in a sketched silhouette of an oak tree, a national symbol, which was said to represent \"strength, endurance, renewal and growth\". A change from green to the traditional Conservative blue colour appeared in 2007, followed by a version with the Union Jack superimposed in 2010. An alternative version featuring the colours of the Rainbow flag was unveiled for an LGBT event at the 2009 conference in Manchester.\nAssociated groups.\nIdeological groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInterest groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThink tanks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlliances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParty branches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParty factions.\nThe Conservative Party has a variety of internal factions or ideologies, including one-nation conservatism, Christian democracy, social conservatism, Thatcherism, traditional conservatism, neoconservatism, Euroscepticism, and, since 2016, right-wing populism.\nOne-nation Conservatives.\nOne-nation conservatism was the party's dominant ideology in the 20th century until the rise of Thatcherism in the 1970s. It has included in its ranks Conservative Prime Ministers such as Stanley Baldwin, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath. One-nation Conservatives in the contemporary party include former First Secretary of State Damian Green, the current chair of the One Nation Conservatives caucus.\nThe name itself comes from a famous phrase of Disraeli. Ideologically, one-nation conservatism identifies itself with a broad paternalistic conservative stance. One-nation Conservatives are often associated with the Tory Reform Group and the Bow Group. Adherents believe in social cohesion and support social institutions that maintain harmony between different interest groups, classes, and\u2014more recently\u2014different races or religions. These institutions have typically included the welfare state, the BBC, and local government.\nOne-nation Conservatives often invoke Edmund Burke and his emphasis on civil society (\"little platoons\") as the foundations of society, as well as his opposition to radical politics of all types. The Red Tory theory of Phillip Blond is a strand of the one-nation school of thought; prominent Red Tories include former Cabinet Ministers Iain Duncan Smith and Eric Pickles and Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State Jesse Norman. There is a difference of opinion among supporters regarding the European Union. Some support it perhaps stemming from an extension of the cohesion principle to the international level, though others are strongly against the EU (such as Peter Tapsell).\nFree-market Conservatives.\nThe \"free-market wing\" of economic liberals achieved dominance after the election of Margaret Thatcher as party leader in 1975. Their goal was to reduce the role of the government in the economy and to this end, they supported cuts in direct taxation, the privatisation of nationalised industries and a reduction in the size and scope of the welfare state. Supporters of the \"free-market wing\" have been labelled as \"Thatcherites\". The group has disparate views of social policy: Thatcher herself was socially conservative and a practising Anglican but the free-market wing in the Conservative Party harbour a range of social opinions from the civil libertarian views of Michael Portillo, Daniel Hannan, and David Davis to the traditional conservatism of former party leaders William Hague and Iain Duncan Smith. The Thatcherite wing is also associated with the concept of a \"classless society\".\nWhilst a number of party members are pro-European, some free-marketeers are Eurosceptic, perceiving most EU regulations as interference in the free market and/or a threat to British sovereignty. EU centralisation also conflicts with the localist ideals that have grown in prominence within the party in recent years. Rare Thatcherite Europhiles included Leon Brittan. Many take inspiration from Thatcher's Bruges speech in 1988, in which she declared that \"we have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain only to see them reimposed at a European level\". A number of free-market Conservatives have signed the Better Off Out pledge to leave the EU. Thatcherites and economic liberals in the party tend to support Atlanticism, something exhibited between Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan.\nThatcher herself claimed philosophical inspiration from the works of Burke and Friedrich Hayek for her defence of liberal economics. Groups associated with this tradition include the No Turning Back Group and Conservative Way Forward, whilst Enoch Powell and Keith Joseph are usually cited as early influences in the movement. Some free-market supporters and Christian Democrats within the party tend to advocate the Social Market Economy, which supports free markets alongside social and environmental responsibility, as well a welfare state. Joseph was the first to introduce the model idea into British politics, writing the publication: \"Why Britain needs a Social Market Economy\".\nTraditionalist Conservatives.\nThis socially conservative right-wing grouping is currently associated with the Cornerstone Group (or Faith, Flag and Family), and is the oldest tradition within the Conservative Party, closely associated with High Toryism. The name stems from its support for three social institutions: the Church of England, the unitary British state and the family. To this end, it emphasises the country's Anglican heritage, oppose any transfer of power away from the United Kingdom\u2014either downwards to the nations and regions or upwards to the European Union\u2014and seek to place greater emphasis on traditional family structures to repair what it sees as a broken society in the UK. It is a strong advocate of marriage and believes the Conservative Party should back the institution with tax breaks and have opposed the alleged assaults on both traditional family structures and fatherhood.\nProminent MPs from this wing of the party include Andrew Rosindell, Edward Leigh and Jacob Rees-Mogg\u2014the latter two being prominent Roman Catholics, notable in a faction marked out by its support for the established Church of England.\nRelationships between the factions.\nSometimes two groupings have united to oppose the third. Both Thatcherite and traditionalist Conservatives rebelled over Europe (and in particular Maastricht) during John Major's premiership; and traditionalist and One Nation MPs united to inflict Margaret Thatcher's only major defeat in Parliament, over Sunday trading.\nNot all Conservative MPs can be easily placed within one of the above groupings. For example, John Major was the ostensibly \"Thatcherite\" candidate during the 1990 leadership election, but he consistently promoted One-Nation Conservatives to the higher reaches of his cabinet during his time as prime minister. These included Kenneth Clarke as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Michael Heseltine as deputy prime minister.\nElection results and campaigns.\nNational campaigning within the Conservative Party is fundamentally managed by the CCHQ campaigning team, which is part of its central office\nHowever, it also delegates local responsibility to Conservative associations in the area, usually to a team of Conservative activists and volunteers in that area, but campaigns are still deployed from and thus managed by CCHQ\nNational campaigning sometimes occurs in-house by volunteers and staff at CCHQ in Westminster.\nThe \"Voter Communications Department\" is line-managed by the Conservative Director of Communications who upholds overall responsibility, though she has many staff supporting her, and the whole of CCHQ at election time, her department being one of the most predominant at this time, including project managers, executive assistants, politicians, and volunteers. The Conservative Party also has regional call centres and VoteSource do-it-from-home accounts.\nUK general election results.\nThis chart shows the electoral performance of the Conservative Party in each general election since 1835.\nFor all election results, including: devolved elections, London elections, Police and Crime Commissioner elections, combined authority elections and European Parliament elections see: Electoral history of the Conservative Party (UK)\nFor results of the Tories, the party's predecessor, see here.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32115", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32115", "title": "Ursus maritimus", "text": ""}
{"id": "32117", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32117", "title": "Upper Peninsula of Michigan", "text": "Northern major peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan\nThe Upper Peninsula of Michigan\u2014also known as Upper Michigan or colloquially the U.P. or Yoop\u2014is the northern and more elevated of the two major landmasses that make up the U.S. state of Michigan; it is separated from the Lower Peninsula by the Straits of Mackinac. It is bounded primarily by Lake Superior to the north, separated from the Canadian province of Ontario at the east end by the St. Marys River, and flanked by Lake Huron and Lake Michigan along much of its south. Although the peninsula as a geographic feature extends into the state of Wisconsin, the state boundary follows the Montreal and Menominee rivers and a line connecting them.\nFirst inhabited by Algonquian-speaking native American tribes, the area was explored by French colonists, then occupied by British forces, before being ceded to the newly established United States in the late 18th century. After being assigned to various territorial jurisdictions, it was granted to the newly formed state of Michigan as part of the settlement of a dispute with Ohio over the city of Toledo. The region's exploitable timber resources and the discovery of iron and copper deposits in the 19th century brought immigrants, especially Finnish, French Canadian, Swedish, Norwegian, Cornish, and Italian; the peninsula includes the only counties in the United States where a plurality of residents claim Finnish ancestry. The area's economy declined in the 20th century when all of the readily available minerals had been removed, and it became largely dependent on logging and tourism.\nThe Upper Peninsula contains 29% of the land area of Michigan and has 3% of its total population; at the height of the mining and timber era in the early 20th century it had as much as 11% of the state's population. Residents are nicknamed \"Yoopers\" (derived from \"UP-ers\") and have a strong regional identity, enhanced by the perception that the rest of the state neglects them. Proposals have been made to establish the Upper Peninsula as a separate state but have failed to gain traction. Its largest cities are Marquette, Sault Ste. Marie, Escanaba, Menominee, Houghton, and Iron Mountain. Because of the surrounding waters and northern latitude, it receives more snow than most of the eastern U.S. The heavily forested land, soil types, short growing season, and logistical factors (e.g. long distance to market, lack of infrastructure) make the Upper Peninsula poorly suited for agriculture. The region is home to a variety of wildlife, including moose, wolves, coyotes, deer, foxes, bears, mountain lions, bobcats, eagles, hawks, and owls.\nHistory.\nThe first known inhabitants of the Upper Peninsula were tribes speaking Algonquian languages, specifically the Algonquian branches of Ojibwe and Menominee. They arrived roughly around 800 C.E. and subsisted chiefly from fishing. Early tribes included the Menominee, Odawa, Ojibwe, Nocquet, and Potawatomi. \n\u00c9tienne Br\u00fbl\u00e9, an explorer and Catholic missionary working on behalf of the colony of New France under the tutelage of fellow explorer Samuel de Champlain, was the first known European to visit the peninsula. Accompanied by Wendat tribesmen, he is recorded to have sailed the St. Marys River around the year 1620 in search of a route to the Far East. French colonists subsequently laid claim to the land in the 17th century, with other European explorers and missionaries (including Jacques Marquette) mapping the area and engaging with Indians throughout the century and into the 1700s. The government of New France set about establishing missions and fur trading posts such as Sault Ste. Marie and St. Ignace, Sault Ste. Marie (est. 1668) being the oldest European settlement in Michigan and the site of Native American settlements for centuries, including the contemporary Sault Tribe of Chippewa Indians. By 1680, the major Ojibwe communities on the peninsula were in the Sault, L\u2019Anse, and on Grand Island.\nFollowing the end of the French and Indian War (part of the Seven Years' War) in 1763, the territory was ceded to Great Britain. American Indian tribes who formerly allied with the French were dissatisfied with the British occupation, which brought new territorial policies. Whereas the French cultivated alliances among the Indians, the British postwar approach was to treat the tribes as conquered peoples. In 1763, tribes united in Pontiac's Rebellion to try to drive the British from the area. American Indians captured Fort Michilimackinac, at present-day Mackinaw City, then the principal fort of the British in the Michilimackinac region, as well as others and killed hundreds of British. In 1764, they began negotiations with the British, resulting in temporary peace and changes in objectionable British policies.\nAlthough the Upper Peninsula nominally became United States territory with the 1783 Treaty of Paris, the British did not give up control until 1797 under terms of the Jay Treaty. As an American territory, the Upper Peninsula was still dominated by the fur trade. John Jacob Astor founded the American Fur Company on Mackinac Island in 1808; however, the industry began to decline in the 1830s as beaver and other game were overhunted.\nWhen the Michigan Territory was first established in 1805, it included only the Lower Peninsula and the eastern portion of the Upper Peninsula. In 1819, the territory was expanded to include the remainder of the Upper Peninsula, all of what later became Wisconsin, and part of Minnesota (previously included in the Indiana and Illinois Territories). When Michigan applied for statehood in the 1830s, the proposal corresponded to the original territorial boundaries. However, there was an armed conflict known as the Toledo War with the state of Ohio over the location of their mutual border. Meanwhile, the people of Michigan approved a constitution in May 1835 and elected state officials in late autumn 1835. Although the state government was not yet recognized by the United States Congress, the territorial government effectively ceased to exist. President Andrew Jackson's government offered the remainder of the Upper Peninsula to Michigan if it would cede the Toledo Strip to Ohio. A constitutional convention of the state legislature refused, but a second convention, hastily convened by Governor Stevens Thomson Mason, consisting primarily of his supporters, agreed in December 1836 to the deal. In January 1837, the U.S. Congress admitted Michigan as a state of the Union.\nAt the time, Michigan was considered the losing party in the compromise. The land in the Upper Peninsula was described in a federal report as a \"sterile region on the shores of Lake Superior destined by soil and climate to remain forever a wilderness.\" This belief changed when rich mineral deposits (primarily copper and iron) were discovered in the 1840s. The Upper Peninsula's mines produced more mineral wealth than the California Gold Rush, especially after shipping was improved by the opening of the Soo Locks in 1855 and docks in Marquette in 1859. The Upper Peninsula supplied 90% of America's copper by the 1860s. It was the nation's largest supplier of iron ore by the 1890s, and production continued to a peak in the 1920s but sharply declined shortly afterward. The last copper mine closed in 1995, although the majority of mines had closed decades before. Some iron mining continues near Marquette. The Eagle Mine, a nickel-copper mine, opened in 2014.\nThousands of Americans and immigrants moved to the area during the mining boom, prompting the federal government to create Fort Wilkins near Copper Harbor to maintain order. The first wave were the Cornish from Great Britain, with centuries of mining experience; followed by Irish, Germans, and French Canadians. During the 1890s, Finnish immigrants began settling there in large numbers, forming the population plurality in the northwestern portion of the peninsula. In the early 20th century, 75% of the population was foreign-born.\nFrom 1861 to 1865, 90,000 Michigan men fought in the American Civil War, including 1,209 from the Upper Peninsula. Houghton County contributed 460 soldiers, while Marquette County sent 265.\nGeography.\nIncluding extensive parts of the Great Lakes, the Upper Peninsula contains about of total area. Of that, about is its land area, about 29% of the state. It is bounded on the north by Lake Superior, on the east by St. Marys River, on the south by the Niagara Escarpment, Lake Michigan and Lake Huron, and on the west by Wisconsin and (counting the water border on Lake Superior) by Minnesota. It has about of continuous shoreline with the Great Lakes. There are about 4,300\u00a0inland lakes, the largest of which is Lake Gogebic, and of streams. Its lowest elevation is along the shoreline of Lake Huron and Lake Michigan, averaging above sea level. Its highest elevation is Mount Arvon, at .\nMichigan's Upper Peninsula is bounded on land by Wisconsin to the southwest and west; and in territorial waters by Minnesota to the west, Ontario to the west, north and east, and the Door Peninsula of Wisconsin extends into Lake Michigan east of the western Upper Peninsula.\nFive Michigan Upper Peninsula counties include nearby major islands: Mackinac Island, Round Island and Bois Blanc Island in Lake Huron are in Mackinac County; Sugar Island and Neebish Island in the St. Marys River, and Drummond Island in Lake Huron are in Chippewa County; Grand Island is in Alger County; Summer Island is Delta County; and Isle Royale is part of Keweenaw County.The peninsula is divided between the flat, swampy areas in the east, part of the Great Lakes Plain, and the steeper, more rugged western half, called the Superior Upland, part of the Canadian Shield. The rock in the western portion is the result of volcanic eruptions and is estimated to be at least 3.5 billion years old (much older than the eastern portion) and contains the region's ore resources. Banded-iron formations were deposited 2\u00a0billion years ago; this is the Marquette Range Supergroup. A considerable amount of bedrock is visible. Mount Arvon is within the Huron Mountains, located in Marquette and Baraga counties. The Porcupine Mountains are located in the extreme northwest of the peninsula. All of the higher areas are the remnants of ancient peaks, worn down over millions of years by erosion and glaciers.\nThe Keweenaw Peninsula is the northernmost part of the peninsula (not counting Isle Royale, which is politically part of the UP). It projects into Lake Superior and was the site of the first copper boom in the United States, part of a larger region of the peninsula called the Copper Country. Copper Island is its northernmost section. About one-third of the peninsula is government-owned recreational forest land today, including the Ottawa National Forest and Hiawatha National Forest. Although heavily logged in the 19th century, the majority of the land was forested with mature trees by the 1970s.\nThere was a boundary dispute over the border with Wisconsin. The northwesternmost portion of the border follows a line from Lac Vieux Desert to the headwaters of the Montreal River. An 1847 survey established the east branch of the Montreal River as the border. However, the 1908 revision of the Constitution of Michigan specified that the west branch of the Montreal River was the proper border, which would have placed an additional 360 square miles of land on the Michigan side of the border. A 1926 Supreme Court decision awarded this tract of land to Wisconsin.\nWildlife.\nThe Upper Peninsula contains a large variety of wildlife. Some of the mammals found in the UP include shrews, moles, mice, white-tailed deer, moose, black bears, cougar, gray and red foxes, wolves, river otters, martens, fishers, muskrats, bobcats, coyotes, snowshoe hares, cotton-tail rabbits, porcupines, chipmunks, squirrels, raccoons, opossum and bats. There is a large variety of birds, including hawks, osprey, owls, gulls, hummingbirds, chickadees, robins (the state bird), woodpeckers, warblers, and bald eagles. In terms of reptiles and amphibians, the UP has common garter snakes, red bellied snakes, pine snakes, northern water snakes, brown snakes, eastern garter snakes, eastern fox snakes, eastern ribbon back snakes, green snakes, northern ringneck snakes, eastern milk snakes (Mackinac and Marquette counties) and eastern hognose snakes (Menominee County only), plus snapping turtles, wood turtles, and painted turtles (the state reptile), green frogs, bullfrogs, northern leopard frogs, and salamanders. Lakes and rivers contain many fish such as walleye, muskie, northern pike, trout, salmon, bullhead catfish, and bass. Invasive species like the alewife and sea lamprey can be found in the Great Lakes. The UP also contains many shellfish, such as clams, aquatic snails, and crayfish. The American Bird Conservancy and the National Audubon Society have designated several locations as internationally Important Bird Areas.\nAfter being nearly extirpated from the conterminous United States, gray wolves survived in the remote northeastern corner of Minnesota and Ontario. The repopulation of wolves in this region has occurred naturally as they have expanded their territory after they were protected under the federal Endangered Species Act in 1978. Michigan Department of Natural Resources's principal goals set in 2008 included maintaining a viable wolf population, facilitating wolf-related benefits, minimizing wolf-related conflicts and conducting \"science-based and socially acceptable management of wolves\". Michigan removed wolves from the state's list of threatened and endangered species in 2009 having reached the recovery goal of 200 for five consecutive years in 2004. In 2012, FWS issued a rule that classified and delisted a sub-species called the Western Great Lakes wolves under the federal Endangered Species Act. Michigan had a legal wolf hunt in 2013. Wolves were returned to the list of federally threatened species in December 2014 as a result of a court ruling. The Department of Natural Resources found that an equilibrium has been achieved between the available habitat and the number of this predators the region can support. The department supports delisting as wolves have met and exceeded the biological recovery goals that would necessitate protection.\nThere is significant discussion and studies over the presence of eastern cougars in the UP. Historically, the last of the species, or subspecies, was extirpated near Newberry in 1906, although there have been sightings of the creatures over the years since. These reports increased in number over the first decade of the 21st century. The Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DNRE) formed a four-person team to investigate sightings in the state. The biologists with the DNRE currently do not believe that there is a breeding population anywhere in the state, rather that the sighted animals are visitors to the state. As late as January 2007, the DNRE's official position was that no cougars lived in Michigan. Several residents in the state disagree with both current and previous positions on the part of the DNRE. Researchers at Central Michigan University and the Michigan Wildlife Conservancy in 2006 published the findings of a study using DNA analysis of fecal samples taken in the Upper and Lower peninsulas that showed the presence of cougars at the time. These results were disputed in a second journal article in 2007 by other researchers from Eastern Michigan University and the U.S. Forest Service. A citizen's group, the Michigan Citizens for Cougar Recognition (MCCR), independently tracked sightings and in 2009 listed Delta County as the location with the greatest number of reports in the state. The DNRE verified five sets of tracks and two trail camera photos in Delta, Chippewa, Marquette, and Menominee counties since 2008. DNRE officials acknowledge that there are cougars in the UP, but not elsewhere in the state. Critics of the DNRE's position on the species, including the founder of the MCCR, say that the department is attempting to \"avoid paying for a cougar management program\". In March 2025 the DNR released a statement that two cougar cubs were verified to be living in an undisclosed area of Ontonagon County, the first time cougar cubs have been verified the Western Great Lakes in over 100 years. The presence of the cubs, estimated via photographic evidence to be around seven weeks old, is in contrast to previous sightings which are thought to be transient adult animals and not representative of resident or breeding populations.\nThere also many invasive species that are primarily brought in the ballast water of foreign ships, usually from the ocean bordering northeastern Asia. This water is dumped directly into the Great Lakes, depositing a variety of fresh and salt water fish and invertebrates, most notably the zebra mussel, \"Dreissena polymorpha\". There are also many plant species that have been transported to the Great Lakes, including purple loosestrife, \"Lythrum salicaria\" and \"Phragmites australis\", both of which are considered to be a threat to native hydrophyte wetland plants. The emerald ash borer was first reported in the UP at Brimley State Park and is considered to be a serious ecological threat to the habitat and economy.\nClimate.\nThe Upper Peninsula has a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system). The Great Lakes have a great effect on the larger part of the peninsula. Winters tend to be long, cold, and snowy for most of the peninsula, and because of its northern latitude, the daylight hours are short\u2014around 8 hours between sunrise and sunset in the winter. Lake Superior has the greatest effect on the area, especially the northern and western parts. Lake-effect snow causes many areas to get in excess of of snow per year\u2014especially in the Keweenaw Peninsula and Gogebic County, and to a lesser extent Baraga, Marquette and Alger counties, making the western UP a prominent part of the midwestern snowbelt.\nRecords of of snow or more have been set in many communities in this area. The Keweenaw Peninsula averages more snowfall than any other location east of the Mississippi River. Because of the howling storms across Lake Superior, which cause dramatic amounts of precipitation, it has been said that the lake-effect snow makes the Keweenaw Peninsula the snowiest place east of the Rockies. Herman averages of snow every year. Lake-effect snow can cause blinding whiteouts in just minutes, and some storms can last for days. Hancock is found frequently on lists of the snowiest cities in America.\nThe banana belt along the Wisconsin border has a more continental climate since most of its weather does not arrive from the lakes. Summers tend to be warmer and winter nights much colder. Coastal communities have temperatures tempered by the Great Lakes. In summer, it might be cooler at lakeside than it is inland, and the opposite effect is seen in winter. The area of the Upper Peninsula north of Green Bay through Menominee and Escanaba (and extending west to Iron River) does not have the extreme weather and precipitation found to the north. The coldest temperature officially recorded in the Upper Peninsula was in Humboldt in January 1915.\nTime zones.\nLike the entire Lower Peninsula, most of the Upper Peninsula is within the Eastern Time Zone. However, the four counties bordering Wisconsin are in the Central Time Zone. In 1967, when the Uniform Time Act came into effect, the Upper Peninsula went under year-round Central Standard Time, with no daylight saving time. In 1973, the majority of the peninsula switched to Eastern Standard Time; only the four western border counties of Gogebic, Iron, Dickinson, and Menominee continue to observe Central Standard Time. Daylight saving time is observed peninsula-wide.\nDemographics.\nThe Upper Peninsula remains a predominantly rural region. As of the 2020 census the region had a population of 301,608, just more than 3% of Michigan's total population and a decline of 3.2% from 2010.\nAccording to the 2010 census, 103,211 people live in the 12 towns of at least 4,000 people, covering . A total of 116,548 people live in the 18 towns and villages of at least 2,000 people, which cover \u2014less than 1% of the peninsula's land area.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFederal censuses indicate that the population of the Upper Peninsula grew throughout the 19th century as European settlers moved into the region, then boomed around the turn of the century, and experienced gradual decline overall during most of the 20th century. The decline was uneven, however: the population in the largest cities \u2013 Marquette, Sault Ste Marie, and Escanaba \u2013 grew somewhat, while smaller cities and non-urban areas have generally declined in population. The six westernmost counties experienced the largest decrease, from a 1920 population of 153,674 to a 2020 population of 79,392. Many ghost towns exist in the region.\nA \" indicates an increase in population from the previous census, and a \" indicates a decrease in population from the previous census.\nEducation.\nThe Upper Peninsula of Michigan has three state universities (Lake Superior State University in Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan Technological University in Houghton, and Northern Michigan University in Marquette) and five community colleges (Bay Mills Community College in Brimley, Bay de Noc Community College in Escanaba and Iron Mountain, Gogebic Community College in Ironwood, and Keweenaw Bay Ojibwa Community College in Baraga).\nCulture.\nEarly settlers included multiple waves of people from Nordic countries, and people of Finnish ancestry make up 16% of the peninsula's population. The Finnish sauna and the concept of \"sisu\" have been adopted widely by residents of the Upper Peninsula. The television program \"Finland Calling\" was for a long period the only Finnish-language television broadcast in the United States; it aired on Marquette station WLUC-TV from March 25, 1962, until March 29, 2015. Finlandia University, America's only college with Finnish roots, was located in Hancock, but has shut down as of spring 2023. Street signs in Hancock appear in English and Finnish to celebrate this heritage.\nOther sizable ethnic communities in the Upper Peninsula include French-Canadian, German, Cornish, Italian, and Ojibwe ancestry.\nPeople from the Upper Peninsula speak a dialect influenced by Scandinavian and French-Canadian speech. A popular bumper sticker, a parody of the \"Say YES to Michigan\" slogan promoted by state tourism officials, shows an outline of the Upper Peninsula and the slogan, \"Say ya to da UP, eh!\" The dialect and culture are captured in many songs by Da Yoopers, a comedy music and skit troupe from Ishpeming.\nThe Keweenaw Peninsula is home to several ski areas. Mont Ripley, just outside Houghton, is popular among students of Michigan Technological University (the university actually owns the ski hill). Further up the peninsula in the small town of Lac La Belle is Mt. Bohemia. A skiing purist's resort, Bohemia is a self-proclaimed \"experts only\" mountain, and it does not groom its heavily gladed slopes. Other ski areas are Pine Mountain located in Iron Mountain, Norway Mountain in the town of the same name, and the Porcupine Mountains Ski Area located in Ontonagon.\nHoughton is where professional ice hockey was first started in 1904.\nRegional identity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen the Mackinac Bridge first opened, many feared the U.P. would cease to maintain its singular identity and start to blend in culturally with the lower peninsula. But it has, in fact, been the opposite. If anything, the Yooper identity has strengthened since that time. There's even more of a sense of identity of place, culture and way of life.\nAs of 2018, the western Upper Peninsula is home to about 173,887 people, while the eastern Upper Peninsula is home to about 133,499 people, a total of 307,386\u2014only about 3% of the state's population\u2014living in almost one-third of the state's land area. Upper Peninsula residents are known as Yoopers (from \"UP-ers\"), and many consider themselves Yoopers before they consider themselves Michiganders. (People living in the Lower Peninsula are commonly called \"trolls\" by Upper Peninsula residents, as they live \"Under the Bridge\".) This regionalism is not only a result of the physical separation of the two peninsulas, but also the history of the state.\nResidents of the western Upper Peninsula take on some of the cultural identities of both Wisconsin and Michigan. In terms of sports fandom, residents may support Detroit professional teams or those of Wisconsin, particularly the Green Bay Packers. This is a result of both proximity and the broadcast and print media of the area. The four counties that border Wisconsin are also in the Central Time Zone, unlike the rest of Michigan, which is on Eastern time. In some cases, commercial cartographers draw incorrect maps that inadvertently annex the Upper Peninsula into Wisconsin. Other maps of Michigan or the United States sometimes omit the Upper Peninsula, as does The Mitten, how residents of the Lower Peninsula use a hand to depict where in the state they are from.\nCuisine.\nThe Upper Peninsula has a distinctive local cuisine. The pasty (pronounced \"pass-tee\"), a kind of meat turnover originally brought to the region by Cornish miners, is popular among locals and tourists alike. Pasty varieties include chicken, venison, pork, hamburger, and pizza, all of which many restaurants serve.\nMany restaurants serve potato sausage and \"cudighi\", a spicy Italian meat.\nFinnish immigrants contributed \"nisu\", a cardamom-flavored sweet bread; \"limppu\", an Eastern Finnish rye bread; \"pannukakku\", a variant on the pancake with a custard flavor; \"viili\" (sometimes spelled \"fellia\"), a stretchy, fermented Finnish milk; and \"korppu\", hard slices of toasted cinnamon bread, traditionally dipped in coffee. Some Finnish foods such as \"juusto\" (squeaky cheese, essentially a cheese curd, like Leip\u00e4juusto) and \"saunamakkara\" (a ring-bologna sausage) have become so ubiquitous in Upper Peninsula cuisine that they are now commonly found in most grocery stores and supermarkets.\nMaple syrup is a highly prized local delicacy. Fresh Great Lakes fish, such as the lake trout, whitefish, and (in the spring) smelt are widely eaten. There is minimal concern about contamination of fish from Lake Superior waters. Smoked fish is also popular. Thimbleberry jam and chokecherry jelly are a treat.\nEconomy.\nIndustries.\nThe Upper Peninsula is rich in mineral deposits, including iron, copper, nickel, and silver. Small amounts of gold have also been discovered and mined. In the 19th century, mining dominated the economy, and the UP became home to many isolated company towns. For many years, mines in the Keweenaw Peninsula were the world's largest producers of copper. The mines began declining as early as 1913, with most closing temporarily during the Great Depression. Mines reopened during World War II, but almost all quickly closed after the war ended. The last copper mine in the Copper Country was the White Pine mine, which closed in 1995. Marquette County sits along the Marquette Iron Range, which sent out a significant portion of the iron ore mined in the United States for many years. As of 2020[ [update]], Marquette County is home to one remaining iron ore mine and one nickel and copper mine.\nFrom approximately 1870 to 1915, about 32 quarries mined Jacobsville Sandstone in the Upper Peninsula, particularly near Marquette and the community of Jacobsville. The sandstone was used in many buildings, both locally and around the United States.\nSince logging of white pine began in the 1880s, timber has been an important industry. Stands of hemlock and hardwood in the western reaches of the forest experienced larger scale selection-cutting beginning in the mid-20th century. Because of the highly seasonal climate and the short growing season, agriculture is limited in the Upper Peninsula, though potatoes, strawberries and a few other small fruits are grown.\nTourism has become the main industry in recent decades. In 2005, ShermanTravel, LLC listed the Upper Peninsula as #10 in its assessment of all travel destinations worldwide. The peninsula has extensive coastline on the Great Lakes, large tracts of state and national forests, cedar swamps, more than 150 waterfalls, and low population densities. Because of the skiing, camping, boating, fishing, snowmobiling, hunting, and hiking opportunities, many Lower Peninsula and Wisconsin families spend their vacations in the UP, and tourists visit from Detroit, Chicago, Grand Rapids, Milwaukee, and other metropolitan areas. The opening of the Mackinac Bridge in 1957 (see below) has made the Upper Peninsula easily accessible to tourists from the Lower Peninsula and southeast of Michigan, and has helped make the UP a year-round tourist destination.\nDuring the Cold War, the U.P. was home to two U.S. Air Force bases, Kincheloe south of Sault Ste. Marie, and K.I. Sawyer, south of Marquette. Both were bases of the Strategic Air Command (SAC), with B-52H bombers; Kincheloe closed in 1977, and Sawyer in 1995.\nIn 2004, microbreweries began opening across the Upper Peninsula; 14 opened by 2014, and 23 by 2019. In 2019, their annual economic impact totaled $346 million. As of 2018[ [update]], three of Michigan's fifty largest breweries were in the Upper Peninsula: Keweenaw Brewing Company, Blackrocks Brewery, and the Ore Dock Brewing Company.\nMedia.\nThere are five daily newspapers published in the Upper Peninsula, \"The Mining Journal\" in Marquette, \"The Daily Mining Gazette\" in Houghton, \"The Daily News\" in Iron Mountain, the \"Daily Press\" in Escanaba, and \"The Evening News\" in Sault Ste. Marine. All but \"The Evening News\" are owned by Ogden Newspapers, with the former being owned by Gannett. \"The Mining Journal\", is the only daily newspaper that publishes a Sunday edition, which is distributed, with the exception of Chippewa and eastern Mackinac counties, across the entire UP (the other six days are distributed in its local area only). Additional, there are monlthly and student publications serving the region.\nThe Upper Peninsula is home to eight television stations, 15 AM broadcasting stations, and 90 FM broadcasting stations. Most of the UP lies within the Marquette media market. The eastern three counties of the peninsula are in the Cadillac-Traverse City market, while Gogebic County in the western UP is served by stations in the Duluth market, and Menominee County in the southern UP is served by stations from the Green Bay region. The peninsula's oldest television station is WLUC-TV in Negaunee Township, while the UP's longest continually operated radio station is WCCY in Houghton. Most of the region's radio signals originate from the population centers of Sault Ste. Marie, Escanaba, Marquette, or Houghton. Due to the vast and sparsely populated geography of the UP, many of the FM stations operate at maximum effective radiated power.\nGovernment.\nThere are 15 counties in the Upper Peninsula. All counties in the UP are part of Michigan's 1st congressional district. Jack Bergman, a Republican, has been the U.S. representative for this district since January 2017.\nIn Michigan's 2010 gubernatorial election Republican Rick Snyder carried every UP county but one, Gogebic, on his way to victory over his Democratic opponent, Virg Bernero.\nState prisons are located in Baraga, Marquette, Munising, Newberry, and Kincheloe.\nPolitics.\nDuring most of the \"System of 1896\", the Upper Peninsula was overwhelmingly Republican even by the standards of Michigan during this era. Some of its counties would often vote for the Republican candidate by among the widest margins in the nation. However, the region's politics began shifting in 1924, when the Upper Peninsula was the strongest region in Michigan for the insurgent candidacy of Progressive Robert M. La Follette. After the Great Depression and as the New Deal era progressed, the Upper Peninsula became more Democratic than the state as a whole, voting that way when the state did not in 1940, 1948, 1976, and 1988. However, the region would move back to Republicans in the 21st century, voting for the GOP candidate every time except in 2008.\nProposed statehood.\nDue to the geographic separation and perceived cultural and political differences from the Lower Peninsula, at various times there have been proposals for the Upper Peninsula to secede from Michigan as a 51st state named \"Superior\", sometimes including portions of northern Wisconsin and/or the northern Lower Peninsula. Several prominent legislators, including the region's long-serving state representative Dominic Jacobetti, attempted unsuccessfully to gain passage of such a bill in the 1970s. It would be the least populous state in the union, and as stronger connections to the rest of Michigan have developed since completion of the Mackinac Bridge in the 1950s, the proposal has remained largely dormant since the 1970s.\nCasinos.\nAmerican Indian casinos contribute to the tourist attractions and are popular in the UP. Originally the casinos were simple, one-room affairs. Some of the casinos are now quite elaborate and are being developed as part of resort and conference facilities, including features such as golf courses, pool and spa, dining, and rooms to accommodate guests.\nTransportation.\nThe Upper Peninsula is separated from the Lower by the Straits of Mackinac, five miles (8\u00a0km) across at the narrowest, and is connected to it by the Mackinac Bridge at St. Ignace, one of the longest suspension bridges in the world. Until the bridge was completed in 1957, travel between the two peninsulas was difficult and slow (and sometimes even impossible during winter). In 1881, the Mackinac Transportation Company was established by three railroads, the Michigan Central Railroad, the Grand Rapids and Indiana Railroad, and the Detroit, Mackinac and Marquette Railroad, to operate a railroad car ferry across the Straits. Beginning in 1923, the State of Michigan operated automobile ferries between the two peninsulas. At the busiest times of year the wait was several hours long, much longer at holidays. In winter, travel was possible over the ice only after the straits had solidly frozen.\nHighways.\nThere are one Interstate Highway, five US Highways and 24 other state highways in the Upper Peninsula. Interstate\u00a075 is the only freeway in the region and runs from the Mackinac Bridge at St. Ignace to the International Bridge at Sault Ste. Marie. Two highways run the east\u2013west length of the peninsula, US Highway\u00a02 along the south and M-28 to the north. US\u00a041 runs north\u2013south through the central and western UP, connecting Menominee, Escanaba, Marquette and Houghton before terminating near the tip of the Keweenaw at Copper Harbor. M-185 encircles Mackinac Island as the only state highway in the country without motor vehicles.\nThe United States Forest Service and Federal Highway Administration have designated certain roads within the several National Forests in the UP as Federal Forest Highways. State-maintained highways closest to the Upper Peninsula's Great Lakes shorelines are marked by the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) with signs indicating that they are part of the Great Lakes Circle Tour, a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. MDOT has also designated five UP highways as Pure Michigan Byways for their historic, recreational or scenic qualities. They are: US 2 in Iron County (Iron County Heritage Trail) and in Schoolcraft and Mackinac counties (Top of the Lake Scenic Byway), US 41 from Houghton to Copper Harbor (Copper County Trail, also a National Scenic Byway), M-35 (UP Hidden Coast Recreational Heritage Trail), M-123 (Tahquamenon Scenic Heritage Route) and M-134 (M-134 North Huron Byway)\nAirports.\nThere are 43 airports in the Upper Peninsula. Of these, six airports have commercial passenger service: Gogebic-Iron County Airport north of Ironwood, Houghton County Memorial Airport southwest of Calumet, Ford Airport west of Iron Mountain, Sawyer International Airport south of Marquette, Delta County Airport in Escanaba, and Chippewa County International Airport south of Sault Ste. Marie. There are 19 other public use airports with a hard surface runway. These are used for general aviation and charter. Notably, Mackinac Island, Beaver Island, and Drummond Island are all accessible by airports. There are five public access airports with turf runways and thirteen airports for the private use of their owners. There is only one control tower in the Upper Peninsula, at Sawyer.\nFerries and bridges.\nThe Eastern Upper Peninsula Transportation Authority operates car ferries in its area. These include ferries for Sugar Island, Neebish Island, and Drummond Island. Two ferry companies run passenger ferries from St. Ignace to Mackinac Island.\nThe three major bridges in the Upper Peninsula are:\nBus systems.\nDespite its rural character, there are public buses in several counties of the Upper Peninsula. These include MarqTran serving Marquette, as well as intercity services provided by Indian Trails.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32119", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32119", "title": "Ultra-violet radiation", "text": ""}
{"id": "32120", "revid": "1274018299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32120", "title": "Universal (metaphysics)", "text": "Characteristic or qualities that particular things have in common\nIn metaphysics, a universal is what particular things have in common, namely characteristics or qualities. In other words, universals are repeatable or recurrent entities that can be instantiated or exemplified by many particular things. For example, suppose there are two chairs in a room, each of which is green. These two chairs share the quality of \"chairness\", as well as \"greenness\" or the quality of being green; in other words, they share two \"universals\". There are three major kinds of qualities or characteristics: types or kinds (e.g. mammal), properties (e.g. short, strong), and relations (e.g. father of, next to). These are all different types of universals.\nParadigmatically, universals are \"abstract\" (e.g. humanity), whereas particulars are \"concrete\" (e.g. the personhood of Socrates). However, universals are not necessarily abstract and particulars are not necessarily concrete. For example, one might hold that numbers are particular yet abstract objects. Likewise, some philosophers, such as D. M. Armstrong, consider universals to be concrete.\nMost do not consider classes to be universals, although some prominent philosophers do, such as John Bigelow.\nProblem of universals.\nThe problem of universals is an ancient problem in metaphysics on the existence of universals. The problem arises from attempts to account for the phenomenon of similarity or attribute agreement among things. For example, grass and Granny Smith apples are similar or agree in attribute, namely in having the attribute of greenness. The issue is how to account for this sort of agreement in attribute among things.\nThere are many philosophical positions regarding universals. Taking \"beauty\" as an example, four positions are:\nTaking a broader view, the main positions are generally considered classifiable as: extreme realism, nominalism (sometimes simply named \"anti-realism\" with regard to universals), moderate realism, and idealism. Extreme Realists posit the existence of independent, abstract universals to account for attribute agreement. Nominalists deny that universals exist, claiming that they are not necessary to explain attribute agreement. Conceptualists posit that universals exist only in the mind, or when conceptualized, denying the independent existence of universals, but accepting they have a \"fundamentum in re\". \nComplications which arise include the implications of language use and the complexity of relating language to ontology.\nParticular.\nA universal may have instances, known as its \"particulars\". For example, the type \"dog\" (or \"doghood\") is a universal, as are the property \"red\" (or \"redness\") and the relation \"betweenness\" (or \"being between\"). Any particular dog, red thing, or object that is between other things is not a universal, however, but is an \"instance\" of a universal. That is, a universal type (\"doghood\"), property (\"redness\"), or relation (\"betweenness\") \"inheres\" in a particular object (a specific dog, red thing, or object between other things).\nPlatonic realism.\nPlatonic realism holds universals to be the referents of general terms, such as the \"abstract\", nonphysical, non-mental entities to which words such as \"sameness\", \"circularity\", and \"beauty\" refer. Particulars are the referents of proper names, such as \"Phaedo,\" or of definite descriptions that identify single objects, such as the phrase, \"that person over there\". Other metaphysical theories may use the terminology of universals to describe physical entities.\nPlato's examples of what we might today call universals included mathematical and geometrical ideas such as a circle and natural numbers as universals. Plato's views on universals did, however, vary across several different discussions. In some cases, Plato spoke as if the perfect circle functioned as the form or blueprint for all copies and for the word definition of \"circle\". In other discussions, Plato describes particulars as \"participating\" in the associated universal.\nContemporary realists agree with the thesis that universals are multiply-exemplifiable entities. Examples include by D. M. Armstrong, Nicholas Wolterstorff, Reinhardt Grossmann, Michael Loux.\nNominalism.\nNominalists hold that universals are not real mind-independent entities but either merely concepts (sometimes called \"conceptualism\") or merely names. Nominalists typically argue that properties are abstract particulars (like tropes) rather than universals. JP Moreland distinguishes between \"extreme\" and \"moderate\" nominalism. Examples of nominalists include Buddhist logicians and apoha theorists, the medieval philosophers Roscelin of Compi\u00e8gne and William of Ockham and contemporary philosophers W. V. O. Quine, Wilfrid Sellars, D. C. Williams, and Keith Campbell.\nNess-ity-hood principle.\nThe ness-ity-hood principle is used mainly by English-speaking philosophers to generate convenient, concise names for universals or properties. According to the Ness-Ity-Hood Principle, a name for any universal may be formed by taking the name of the predicate and adding the suffix \"ness\", \"ity\", or \"hood\". For example, the universal that is distinctive of left-handers may be formed by taking the predicate \"left-handed\" and adding \"ness\", which yields the name \"left-handedness\". The principle is most helpful in cases where there is not an established or standard name of the universal in ordinary English usage: What is the name of the universal distinctive of chairs? \"Chair\" in English is used not only as a subject (as in \"The chair is broken\"), but also as a predicate (as in \"That is a chair\"). So to generate a name for the universal distinctive of chairs, take the predicate \"chair\" and add \"ness\", which yields \"chairness\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32121", "revid": "16071891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32121", "title": "University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology", "text": "Former university in Manchester, England, United Kingdom\nThe University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST) was a university based in the centre of the city of Manchester in England. It specialised in technical and scientific subjects and was a major centre for research. On 1 October 2004, it amalgamated with the Victoria University of Manchester (commonly called the University of Manchester) to produce a new entity called the University of Manchester.\nUMIST gained its royal charter in 1956 and became a fully autonomous university in 1994. Previously its degrees were awarded by the Victoria University of Manchester. The UMIST motto was \"Scientia et Labore\" (By Knowledge and Work).\nManchester Mechanics' Institute (1824\u20131882).\nThe foundation of UMIST can be traced to 1824 during the Industrial Revolution when a group of Manchester businessmen and industrialists met in a public house, the Bridgewater Arms, to establish the \"Mechanics' Institute in Manchester\", where artisans could learn basic science, particularly mechanics and chemistry. Hundreds of such institutions were founded in towns and cities throughout the country and while many of the fine Victorian buildings built to house them remain, Manchester's alone survived as an independent institution serving some of its original educational aims throughout the 20th century.\nThe meeting, convened by George William Wood on 7 April 1824,\nwas attended by prominent members of the science and engineering community, including:\nA committee was elected to realise the planned institution, including Wood, Fairbairn, Heywood, Roberts and John Davies and the institute opened in 1825 with Heywood as chairman.\nHowever, the institute's intentions were paternal and no democratic control by its students was intended. In 1829, radical Rowland Detrosier led a breakaway group to form the New Mechanics' Institution in Poole Street, a move that had a serious effect on the recruitment and finances of the original institute. Subscriptions and memberships in 1830 and 1831 were an all-time low and only the gradual opening of the board up to election by the members rectified the situation. Detrosier's break away ultimately rejoined the institute.\nBy 1840, the institute was established with 1,000 subscribers and a library of some 5,500 books. However, the increased popularity had been somewhat at the cost of science education as more and more lectures on non-scientific subjects were occupying its programmes.\nThe institute occupied a building on Cooper Street (near the present St Peter's Square) and later moved to its present site on David Street (later renamed Princess Street). This still stands and is a Grade II* listed building.\nThe Tech (1883\u20131917).\nIn 1883 secretary of the institution John Henry Reynolds reorganised the institution as a technical school using the schemes and examinations of the City and Guilds of London Institute. A new building was begun in 1895 and opened by the Prime Minister Arthur Balfour in October 1902. On the site previously had been cheap crowded inner-city housing occupied by Irish immigrants.\nThis is the western end of the Sackville Street Building, until 2005 known as the UMIST Main Building, pictured above, a Grade II listed building by Spalding and Cross with Renaissance motifs of Burmantofts terracotta. By this time the institution was called the Manchester Municipal School of Technology or fondly known as the Tech. As a project of the Manchester City Council it includes in the decoration many portrayals of the city's coat of arms.\nAs befits its roots in the early chemical industry of the region \"The Tech\" had pioneered chemical engineering as an academic subject in Britain, indeed the lectures by George E. Davis in 1888 were highly influential in defining the discipline. Similarly in the 1920s it pioneered academic training in management, with the formation of a Department of Industrial Administration funded by an endowment from asbestos magnate Sir Samuel Turner.\nIn 1905, the Tech become the Faculty of Technology of the Victoria University of Manchester, allowing the award of BSc and MSc degrees. The principal of the School of Technology was now also dean of the faculty and an \"ex officio\" member of the university's senate.\nAfter the merger with Victoria University of Manchester the UMIST Main Building was renamed as the Sackville St. Building.\nEstablishment as a university (1918\u20131994).\nIn 1918, the institution changed name again to \"Manchester Municipal College of Technology\". By 1949 over 8500 students were enrolled, however most still studying non-degree courses.\nThe appointment of B. V. Bowden (later Lord Bowden) in 1953 marked the beginning of a phase of expansion.\nOn 29 July 1955 the institute received its own Royal Charter incorporating it as a university college under the name Manchester College of Science and Technology, and became separately funded by the University Grants Committee. The process of independence from the city was completed on 1 August 1956 when the Manchester Corporation transferred the assets of the \"Manchester Municipal College of Technology\" to the new college, with the principal of the municipal college becoming the first principal of the university college on the same day.\nBy 1966 all non-degree courses were moved to the Manchester School of Design which is now part of Manchester Metropolitan University, and in 1966 the name finally changed to the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology on the initiative of Acting Principal Frank Morton. UMIST and the Victoria University of Manchester retained close ties for the second half of the 20th century, with UMIST students being awarded, or having the choice of, a University of Manchester degree until full autonomy.\nIn 1994 UMIST finally achieved the status of an independent university with its own degree-awarding powers with the principal, Harold Hankins, becoming the principal and vice-chancellor.\nUntil this time UMIST was the Faculty of Technology of the Victoria University of Manchester, an interesting situation because the University of Manchester also had its own science and engineering courses. Although academically part of the university, UMIST was financially and administratively independent.\nCongregation ceremonies were held at the University of Manchester on Oxford Road, but in 1991 the first congregation ceremony was held in the Great Hall at UMIST itself in the Sackville Street Building.\nUMIST students were entitled to use the facilities of the Victoria University, including the John Rylands University Library at the Oxford Road site and sports facilities and social clubs organised by the students' unions. In fact, first year UMIST undergraduates were often placed into Manchester University halls of residence and vice versa.\nStudent life.\nIn the late 20th century, student life at UMIST centred on the Barnes Wallis Building, which was the home of the Students' Union (later known as the Students' Association), the main refectory and Harry's Bar. The main redbrick building contained a student self-service caf\u00e9, known as the Readers' Digest.\nA prominent feature of the student calendar from the 1960s onwards was the Bogle Stroll. This was a sponsored walk for charity which was held annually during Rag Week. Each year, hundreds of students followed the circular route which started and finished at the UMIST campus. The tradition continues at the University of Manchester.\nSports facilities included a gymnasium in the main building, the large assembly hall, the MUTECH playing fields and the Sugden Sports Centre (jointly owned by UMIST and the Metropolitan University and opened in 1998). The director of sport administered the facilities, recreation classes and inter-departmental competitions. The athletic union was responsible for administering the grant-aided clubs and inter-varsity teams.\nAchievements and evolution.\nDuring the last quarter of the 20th century UMIST established a reputation as a major research-based university, performing well in the government's Research Assessment Exercise in 2001, and was well placed in various league tables. UMIST has won four Queen's Prizes for Higher and Further Education, two Prince of Wales' Awards for Innovation and two Queen's Award for Export Achievement.\nUMIST was instrumental in the founding of what is now the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester. Famous alumni include Nobel Laureate in nuclear physics Sir John Cockcroft, aeroplane pioneer Sir Arthur Whitten Brown, and designer of the Lancaster bomber Roy Chadwick, while famous academics include mathematicians Louis Joel Mordell, Hanna Neumann, Lewis Fry Richardson and Robin Bullough, and the physicist Henry Lipson.\nOther notable alumni include Margaret Beckett, a politician who in 2006 became Foreign Secretary.\nThe later 20th century saw UMIST diminishing its formal connections with Manchester University. In 1994 most of the remaining institutional ties with the Victoria University of Manchester were severed, as new legislation allowed UMIST to become a fully autonomous university with powers to award its own degrees.\nThe end of UMIST, 2004.\nUMIST, together with the Victoria University of Manchester ceased to exist on 1 October 2004, when they were combined in a new single University of Manchester. Terry Leahy, CEO of Tesco and alumnus was the last Chancellor of UMIST, and the Vice-Chancellor was a chemical engineer, John Garside.\nThe merged university undertook a massive expansion and a \u00a3350\u00a0million capital investment programme in new buildings. Some, such as the Alan Turing Building, house merged departments such as the School of Mathematics. The estates plan, published in 2007, indicates an intention to sell a number of former UMIST teaching buildings, including the Moffat Building, the Maths and Social Sciences Tower, the Morton Building and the Fairbairn Building, as well as formerly UMIST-owned halls of residence including Hardy Farm, Chandos Hall, Wright-Robinson Hall and Weston Hall. The original UMIST Main Building is not included in this list. Covenants restrict it to educational use. No plans have been announced for the sale of any former Victoria University of Manchester buildings. Unions and some ex-UMIST staff and students have reacted angrily to the potential sales.\nIn the estates strategy for 2010\u20132020 for the University of Manchester it is stated that essentially all of the former UMIST campus, described as the \"area north of the Mancunian Way\", is to be disposed of. Only the Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, which was built in 2006, is exempted, whilst the fate of the former UMIST Main Building is left vague. The Faraday Building will be replaced by student accommodation and it is envisaged that the Engineering Schools will eventually be relocated to new buildings on the site of the present halls of residence in the Grosvenor Place area. This plan will, therefore, encompass the destruction of almost all of UMIST's physical legacy.\nIn March 2007, the press claimed that the merger had created a debt of \u00a330\u00a0million, about 5% of the university's annual turnover, and that the university was aiming to tackle this debt by implementing 400 voluntary redundancies. The University and College Union accused the university of mismanagement and called for a halt to recruitment. Critics use these statistics to support the claim that it was not a merger of equals, that it was effectively a takeover of UMIST by Manchester University and that this was not in UMIST's best interests.\nAlumni groups.\nUntil the late 1980s, UMIST's official alumni organisation was called the Manchester Technology Association, a name which was a relic of UMIST's past incarnation as 'The Tech'. The organisation's name was then updated to become the UMIST Association. It published a glossy magazine for UMIST graduates called \"Mainstream\".\nIn 2004, at the time of the university merger, the UMIST Association also merged with its equivalent organisation at the Victoria University of Manchester. This step was taken after minimal consultation with its membership. From that point on, there was no official association specifically for past UMIST students or staff. However, the growth of social networking websites has allowed the development of a number of unofficial UMIST alumni groups in cyberspace, particularly on Facebook. The UMIST alumni group on LinkedIn has over 6,500 members and has a sub-group for each of UMIST's academic departments.\nUMIST Campus.\nUMIST moved to its present location just south of Manchester city centre at the end of the 19th century. The Main Building (now called the Sackville Street Building) was purpose-built between 1895 and 1902 by Spalding and Cross. Starting in 1927, plans were drawn up by the architects Bradshaw Gass &amp; Hope for an extension which would approximately double the size of the original building. However, construction was delayed by the war and other factors, so that the extension was not fully completed until 1957. The latter firm were also responsible for internal alterations which enlarged and upgraded the library so that it extended over more floors and some of the academic departments were relocated (1986-1987). Upon completion it was given the name of Joule Library.\nIn the 1960s the institution expanded rapidly to the south, growing from a single large building to an entire campus. Around a dozen modern buildings were constructed on the other side of the railway viaduct from the Main Building. The new edifices were designed by leading Manchester architects and were all built out of concrete. They included the George Begg Building (Mechanical Engineering), the Maths and Social Sciences Tower, the Faraday Building, the Renold Building, and the Barnes Wallis Building, the last two of which faced each other across a bowling green, which later became a landscaped garden.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32122", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32122", "title": "US Senate", "text": ""}
{"id": "32124", "revid": "50255754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32124", "title": "United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification", "text": "International treaty on environmental protection\nThe United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa (UNCCD) is a Convention to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought through national action programs that incorporate long-term strategies supported by international cooperation and partnership arrangements.\nThe Convention, the only convention stemming from a direct recommendation of the Rio Conference's Agenda 21, was adopted in Paris, France, on 17 June 1994 and entered into force in December 1996. It is the only internationally legally binding framework set up to address the problem of desertification. The Convention is based on the principles of participation, partnership and decentralization\u2014the backbone of good governance and sustainable development. It has 197 parties, making it near universal in reach.\nTo help publicise the Convention, 2006 was declared \"International Year of Deserts and Desertification\" but debates have ensued regarding how effective the International Year was in practice.\nStates Parties.\nThe UNCCD has been ratified by the European Union and 196 states: all 193 UN member states, the Cook Islands, Niue, and the State of Palestine.\nOn 28 March 2013, Canada became the first country to withdraw from the convention. However, three years later, Canada reversed its withdrawal by re-acceding to the convention on 21 December 2016, which resulted in Canada becoming party to the convention again on 21 March 2017.\nThe Holy See (Vatican City) is the only state that is not a party to the convention that is eligible to accede to it.\nSecretariat.\nThe permanent Secretariat of the UNCCD was established during the first Conference of the parties (COP 1) held in Rome in 1997. It has been located in Bonn, Germany, since January 1999, and moved from its first Bonn address in Haus Carstanjen to the new UN Campus in July 2006.\nThe functions of the secretariat are to make arrangements for sessions of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and its subsidiary bodies established under the Convention, and to provide them with services as required. One key task of the secretariat is to compile and transmit reports submitted to it.\nThe secretariat also provides assistance to affected developing country parties, particularly those in Africa. This is important when compiling information and reports required under the Convention. UNCCD activities are coordinated with the secretariats of other relevant international bodies and conventions, like those of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).\nConference of the Parties.\nThe Conference of the Parties (COP) oversees the implementation of the Convention. It is established by the Convention as the supreme decision-making body, and it comprises all ratifying governments. The first five sessions of the COP were held annually from 1997 to 2001.\nStarting 2001 sessions are held on a biennial basis interchanging with the sessions of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC), whose first session was held in 2002.\nCommittee on Science and Technology.\nThe UN Convention to Combat Desertification has established a Committee on Science and Technology (CST). The CST was established under Article 24 of the Convention as a subsidiary body of the COP, and its mandate and terms of reference were defined and adopted during the first session of the Conference of the Parties in 1997. It is composed of government representatives competent in the fields of expertise relevant to combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought. The committee identifies priorities for research, and recommends ways of strengthening cooperation among researchers. It is multi-disciplinary and open to the participation of all Parties. It meets in conjunction with the ordinary sessions of the COP.\nThe CST collects, analyses and reviews relevant data. It also promotes cooperation in the field of combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought through appropriate sub-regional, regional and national institutions, and in particular by its activities in research and development, which contribute to increased knowledge of the processes leading to desertification and drought as well as their impact.\nThe Bureau of the CST is composed of the Chairperson and the four Vice-Chairpersons. The chairman is elected by the Conference of the Parties at each of its sessions with due regard to ensure geographical distribution and adequate representation of affected Country Parties, particularly those in Africa, who shall not serve for more than two consecutive terms. The Bureau of the CST is responsible for the follow-up of the work of the Committee between sessions of the COP and may benefit from the assistance of ad hoc panels established by the COP.\nThe CST also contributes to distinguishing causal factors, both natural and human, with a view to combating desertification and achieving improved productivity as well as the sustainable use and management of resources.\nUnder the authority of the CST, a Group of Experts was established by the COP with a specific work programme, to assist in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the CST. This Group of Experts, working under the authority of the CST, provides advice on the areas of drought and desertification.\nGroup of Experts.\nThe Group of Experts (GoE) plays an important institutional role, providing the CST with information on the current knowledge, the extent and the impact, the possible scenarios and the policy implications on various themes assigned in its work programme. The results of the work performed by the GoE are widely recognized and include dissemination of its results on ongoing activities (benchmarks and indicators, traditional knowledge, early warning systems).\nThe Group of Experts develops and makes available to all interested people information on appropriate mechanisms for scientific and technological cooperation and articulates research projects, which promote awareness about desertification and drought between countries and stakeholders at the international, regional and national level.\nThe Group of Experts seeks to build on and use existing work and evidence to produce pertinent synthesis and outputs for the use of the Parties to the Convention and for the broader dissemination to the scientific community. The programme of work and its mandate is pluri-annual in nature, for a maximum of four years.\nNational, regional and sub-regional programmes.\nNational Action Programmes (NAP) are one of the key instruments in the implementation of the Convention. They are strengthened by Action Programmes on Sub-regional (SRAP) and Regional (RAP) level. National Action Programmes are developed in the framework of a participative approach involving the local communities and they spell out the practical steps and measures to be taken to combat desertification in specific ecosystems.\nReferences.\nFull text available from https://\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32126", "revid": "30571117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32126", "title": "Uniramia", "text": "Group of arthropods\nUniramia (\"uni\" \u2013 one, \"ramus\" \u2013 branch, i.e. single-branches) is formerly recognised group within Arthropoda, now recognised as non-monophyletic, united by their strictly uniramous (single branched) appendages.\nUniramia was one of three subphyla in the Arthropoda classification suggested by Sidnie Manton. This classification divided arthropods into a three-phyla polyphyletic group, with phylum Uniramia including the Hexapoda (insects), Myriapoda (centipedes and millipedes) and the Onychophora (velvetworms). The discovery of fossil lobopods, determined to be intermediate between onychophorans and arthropods led to the splintering of the Lobopoda and Onychophora into separate groups.\nThe name Uniramia was temporarily rejected as a polyphyletic group, but was later redefined to only include Myriapoda and Hexapoda. This subphylum Uniramia was considered to be characterized by their uniramous (single-branching) appendages, one pair of antennae and two pairs of mouthparts (single pairs of mandibles and maxillae). Their body forms and ecologies are diverse. While most unirames are terrestrial, \"some are aquatic for part or all of their life cycles.\" Atelocerata is described as replacing Uniramia in early twentieth-century texts (Heymons, 1901), where it was the preferred name for the category uniting the Hexapoda (insects) + Myriapoda; but depending on the source, the term Atelocerata may have replaced Mandibulata, be an infraphylum beneath Mandibulata, or may no longer be a valid category after closer, cladistics-based genetic study.\nThe Crustacea were generally considered the closest relatives of the Uniramia, and sometimes these were united as Mandibulata. However, the competing hypothesis \u2014 that Crustacea and Hexapoda form a monophyletic group, the Pancrustacea, to which the Myriapoda are the closest relatives \u2014 has support from molecular and fossil evidence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32127", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32127", "title": "University of Chicago", "text": "Private university in Chicago, Illinois, US\nThe University of Chicago (UChicago, Chicago, UChi, or U of C) is a private research university in the Hyde Park community area of Chicago, Illinois, United States.\nThe university is composed of an undergraduate college and four graduate research divisions: the Arts &amp; Humanities Division, the Biological Sciences Division, the Physical Sciences Division, and the Social Sciences Division, all of which include various organized departments and institutes. In addition, the university operates seven professional schools in the fields of business, social work, theology, public policy, law, medicine, and molecular engineering, and a school of continuing studies. The university maintains satellite campuses and centers in London, Hong Kong, Paris, Beijing, Delhi, Luxor, and downtown Chicago.\nUniversity of Chicago scholars have played a role in the development of many academic disciplines, including economics, law, literary criticism, mathematics, physics, religion, sociology, and political science, establishing the Chicago schools of thought in various fields. Chicago's Metallurgical Laboratory produced the world's first human-made, self-sustaining nuclear reaction in Chicago Pile-1 beneath the viewing stands of the university's Stagg Field. Advances in chemistry led to the \"radiocarbon revolution\" in the carbon-14 dating of ancient life and objects. The university research efforts include administration of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and the Argonne National Laboratory, as well as the Marine Biological Laboratory. The university is also home to the University of Chicago Press, the largest university press in North America.\nAs of 2025, the university's students, faculty, and staff have included 101 Nobel laureates. The university's faculty members and alumni also include 10 Fields Medalists, 4 Turing Award winners, 58 MacArthur Fellows, 30 Marshall Scholars, 55 Rhodes Scholars, 27 Pulitzer Prize winners, 20 National Humanities Medalists, and 8 Olympic medalists.\nHistory.\nOld University of Chicago.\nThe first University of Chicago was founded by a small group of Baptist educators and incorporated in 1857 after a land endowment from Senator Stephen A. Douglas and a fundraising campaign directed by the first president of the institution, John C. Burroughs. It closed in 1886 after decades of financial struggle, exacerbated by the Great Chicago Fire and the Panic of 1873,18 when the university's property was foreclosed on by its creditors. In 1890, its trustees elected to change the university's name to the \"Old University of Chicago\" so that the new university could go by the name of the city; a year later, the new university voted to recognize the alumni of the old as alumni of the new.59\nEarly years.\nIn 1890, the American Baptist Education Society (ABES) incorporated a new University of Chicago as a coeducational institution, using $400,000 donated to the ABES to supplement a $600,000 donation from Standard Oil co-founder John D. Rockefeller and land donated by Marshall Field. The Hyde Park campus\u2019 construction was financed by donations from wealthy Chicagoans such as Silas B. Cobb, donor of the campus's first building, Cobb Lecture Hall; Charles L. Hutchinson, trustee, treasurer and donor of Hutchinson Commons; and Martin A. Ryerson, president of the board of trustees and donor of the Ryerson Physical Laboratory.\nWilliam Rainey Harper became the university's president on July 1, 1891, and classes first began on October 1, 1892. Harper offered large salaries to attract senior faculty,78 and in two years had a faculty of 120, including eight former university or college presidents. The undergraduate program was divided into two parts, with the first two years making up the Academic College, focusing on preparation for higher learning, and the last two years comprising the University College, with more advanced courses. The university operated on a quarter system, with 36 courses required to graduate. Harper brought the Baptist seminary, which had historical ties to the Old University of Chicago, to the university. This became the Divinity School in 1891, the first graduate professional school at the University of Chicago. Harper was a supporter of intercollegiate athletics, recruiting Amos Alonzo Stagg in 1892 to coach the football team and defending athletics from faculty opposition.89 In 1894, the university adopted maroon as its official color after initially selecting goldenrod. The Maroons became the university's nickname during the same year. During this period, the university founded the university extension, which offered evening courses for adults and correspondence courses, and the University of Chicago Press.74\nRockefeller continued to provide significant contributions to the university after its founding. Harper's efforts to finance faculty research projects, expand the campus, and support university initiatives caused significant deficits covered by Rockefeller donations, with annual deficits between 1894 and 1903 averaging $215,000. In 1898, the board of trustees made a commitment to use new gifts to eliminate the deficit rather than to further expand programs, but structural deficits remained until after Harper's presidency.\n1906\u20131929.\nAfter Harper's death in 1906, the board of trustees named Harry Pratt Judson, head of the Department of Political Science, acting president; in 1907, the appointment was made permanent. Judson initiated a policy of financial austerity, which renewed Rockefeller's confidence in the university and resulted in a series of large gifts to the endowment between 1906 and 1910, including a final gift of $10 million in 1910 that balanced the university's budget.113 In 1911, the university adopted a Latin motto of \"Crescat scientia; vita excolatur\", which translates to \"Let knowledge grow from more and more; and so be human life enriched.\" In 1912, Judson successfully encouraged the board to create a faculty pension fund.150\nDuring World War I, Judson, as well as faculty members such as Albion Small and Paul Shorey, published works supporting the war. On the other hand, student reaction was mixed, with most not participating in newly formed voluntary military training programs such as the ROTC. In 1918, the Student Army Training Corps program was announced by the War Department, which requisitioned the campus to be run by army officers for military training, but the November armistice soon ended the program. After the war, the Oriental Institute, now the Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures, was founded by Egyptologist James Henry Breasted to support and interpret archeological work in what was then called the Near East.\nIn 1923, senior scholar Ernest D. Burton succeeded Judson as president. Burton launched the first major fundraising campaign of the university to improve the research environment of the faculty as well as invest in residential halls for undergraduates, finding initial success despite faculty opposition to the perceived prioritization of undergraduate over graduate interests. Burton's sudden death in 1925 led to his replacement by physicist Max Mason, who ended the citywide fundraising drive early in favor of a quieter outreach among local businessmen. During Burton's term, and later Mason's, the Chicago Schools of thought began to emerge in the social sciences, with new organizations being established such as the Social Science Research Council in 1923.\n1929\u20131950.\nIn 1929, the 30-year-old dean of Yale Law School, Robert Maynard Hutchins, became president. In 1930, Hutchins organized the graduate departments under four independent divisions and united the undergraduate colleges into one college.222 In 1931, alongside dean of the college Chauncey Boucher, Hutchins implemented a new two-year general education curriculum called the \"New Plan\", which formed the basis for the university's core curriculum. Later in the 1930s, Hutchins became unsatisfied with departmental influence on the undergraduate curriculum and pushed for further expansion to the general education curriculum. In 1942, Hutchins transferred jurisdiction of the BA degree from the graduate divisions to the college, thus removing divisional leverage to shape the curriculum. The same year, the college reformed the BA degree with four years of prescribed general education.\nBudget shortfalls caused by the Great Depression led to significant austerity measures and staffing cuts, though Hutchins protected the salaries of those who remained. In 1933, Hutchins proposed a plan to alleviate the financial situation by merging the university with Northwestern University, though it was ultimately abandoned. Financial woes contributed to the decision to end the university's football program in 1939.214 With substantial budget gaps remaining and support from the Rockefeller Foundation having dried up, a second major fundraising campaign was launched between 1939 and 1941 to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the university's founding with mixed results. Large deficits persisted after World War II, leaving future presidents to balance the budget.316\nDuring the war, the university recruited a number of refugee scientists from Europe, including Enrico Fermi, Rudolf Carnap, and James Franck. The university's Metallurgical Laboratory contributed to the Manhattan Project, with Enrico Fermi engineering the first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction under the stands of Stagg Field, the university's football stadium, in 1942. In 1945, Hutchins announced the formation of the Institute for Nuclear Studies and the Institute for the Study of Metals in order to continue work done during the war. These were later renamed the Enrico Fermi Institute and the James Franck Institute, respectively.286 The university came under public scrutiny before and after the war for alleged communist influence, with university leadership called to testify before the Illinois General Assembly on the loyalty of its student body and faculty in 1935 and 1949.\n1951\u20131977.\nIn 1951, vice president of development Lawrence Kimpton succeeded Hutchins as chancellor, a position created in 1945 replacing the president as head of the university.310 The deficits left from Hutchins necessitated severe annual cuts in the operating budget, which was brought into balance by 1954. A fundraising campaign was launched the same year, which allowed for modest recovery, but the financial situation worsened after a decline in undergraduate enrollments. In 1957, to attract more students, Kimpton reduced the general education curriculum from four years to two years. Furthermore, the graduate divisional faculty with slowly merged with the previously independent college faculty via joint appointments. To address safety concerns driven by increasing crime and poverty in the Hyde Park neighborhood, the university became a major sponsor of a controversial urban renewal project for Hyde Park. Between 1954 and 1960, the university worked with the South East Chicago Commission and Mayor Richard J. Daley to clear approximately 925 acres of land, disproportionately affecting Black, low-income residents.\nIn 1961, Caltech professor George Beadle was elected chancellor, resuming the title of president later that year. Beadle's tenure saw large investments in faculty and campus expansion to rebuild the university after Kimpton's austerity, funded in large part by a $25 million grant provided by the Ford Foundation and an accompanying fundraising campaign. In 1964, the undergraduate college was reorganized into five collegiate divisions, four paralleling the four graduate divisions and one interdisciplinary New Collegiate Division.366\nIn 1967, provost Edward Levi became president. His tenure saw a number of sit-ins at the administrative building: in 1962, over the university's segregationist off-campus rental policies; in 1966 and 1967, over the university providing the class rank of students who sought deferments to draft boards; and in 1969, over the sociology's department decision not to rehire the openly Marxist assistant professor Marlene Dixon. In 1967, a university committee issued the Kalven Report, maintaining the university's duty to uphold academic freedom and remain non-partisan. The report has since been cited in university debates over divesting from South Africa and Sudan, as well as in the Chicago Principles on free speech,500 which a number of other universities have since adopted. By the 1970s, facing the end of the Ford Foundation's support, a reduction in enrollment due to insufficient student housing, flagging federal funding, and broader economic stagflation, the university faced more fiscal austerity. In 1975, provost John Wilson was appointed president, balancing the budget once more through cuts.\n1978\u2013present.\nIn 1978, history scholar and provost of Yale, Hanna Holborn Gray, became president of the university. She was the first woman in the United States to be appointed to a full-term presidency of a major research university.393 Still facing budgetary issues, Gray modernized the university's financial systems, increased the size and tuition of the undergraduate college, and paired campus expansion and renovation with administrative austerity. While budgetary equilibrium was reached through the mid-1980s, acute deficits soon re-emerged, exacerbated by the 1990-1992 recession. Gray also oversaw the implementation of a unified 21 course core curriculum across all collegiate divisions in 1985 and invested in student life through new food services, school festivals, and the reintroduction of varsity athletics.\nIn 1992, economist Hugo F. Sonnenschein became president, facing projected deficits of $23 million for the 1995-96 budget and poor endowment growth.407 The raising of $676 million in a fundraising campaign for the university's centennial throughout the early 1990s helped alleviate these problems.418 In 1996, Sonnenschein proposed the expansion of the undergraduate college by 1,000 students to raise tuition revenue, and in 1997, backed a plan to reduce the number of required course in the core curriculum from 21 to 15\u201318 (depending on how a student met the language requirement). After intense debate, with the university becoming the focal point of a national debate on education, both reforms were approved. In 2000, Cornell University provost Don Michael Randel became the twelfth president of the university. His tenure was marked by increased support for the arts on campus, stronger outreach to local civic and business leaders, investments in major campus facilities, and the launch of a new $2 billion capital campaign.421\nIn 2006, mathematician Robert J. Zimmer was appointed president, receiving board approval to take on large amounts of debt at low interest rates after the 2008 recession in order to finance a number of major projects. These included new buildings and pavilions, such as Mansueto Library in 2011, a reading room and book storage facility; the Logan Center for the Arts in 2012;471 the Keller Center in 2019, home of the Harris School of Public Policy;471 and Woodlawn Residential Commons in 2020, which houses 1,298 students. Between 2008 and 2022, the university partnered with the city and outside businesses to launch three interventions along 53rd Street in an attempt to improve the neighborhood's economic condition. As part of an effort to invest in its professional schools, the university formed the Becker Friedman Institute in 2011, acquired the Marine Biological Laboratory in 2013,491 repurposed the Crerar Library as the headquarters of the Department of Computer Science in 2018,472 and established the Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering in 2019. The university also expanded its presence abroad, opening campuses in Hong Kong in 2018, in London in 2022,507 and in Paris in 2024, alongside centers in Beijing in 2010 and in Delhi in 2014. Despite a $5.4 billion fundraising campaign started in 2014,468 university debt has exceeded initial planning expectations, reaching $6.3 billion in 2025.\nIn 2021, Zimmer was succeeded by Paul Alivisatos, then-provost of the University of California, Berkeley. In 2024, university students set up an encampment on the university's main quad as a part of the nationwide movement in support of Palestine at institutions of higher learning across the country. The encampment was later cleared by University of Chicago Police Department officers.\nCampus.\nMain campus.\nThe main campus of the University of Chicago consists of in the Chicago neighborhoods of Hyde Park and Woodlawn, approximately south of downtown Chicago. The northern and southern portions of campus are separated by the Midway Plaisance, a large, linear park created for the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition. In 2011, \"Travel+Leisure\" listed the university as one of the most beautiful college campuses in the United States.\nThe first buildings of the campus, which make up what are now known as the Main Quadrangles, were part of a master plan conceived by two University of Chicago trustees and plotted by Chicago architect Henry Ives Cobb. The Main Quadrangles consist of six quadrangles, each surrounded by buildings, bordering one larger quadrangle. The buildings of the Main Quadrangles were designed by Cobb, Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, Holabird &amp; Roche, and other architectural firms in a mixture of the Victorian Gothic and Collegiate Gothic styles, patterned on the colleges of the University of Oxford. Mitchell Tower, for example, is modeled after Oxford's Magdalen Tower, and the university Commons, Hutchinson Hall, replicates Christ Church Hall. In celebration of the 2018 Illinois Bicentennial, the University of Chicago Quadrangles were selected as one of the Illinois 200 Great Places by the American Institute of Architects Illinois component.\nAfter the 1940s, the campus's Gothic style began to give way to modern styles. In 1955, Eero Saarinen was contracted to develop a second master plan, which led to the construction of buildings both north and south of the Midway, including the Laird Bell Law Quadrangle (a complex designed by Saarinen); a series of arts buildings; Edith Abbott Hall, designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe; the Keller Center, which is home of the Harris School of Public Policy and was designed by Edward Durrell Stone; and the Regenstein Library, the largest building on campus, a brutalist structure designed by Walter Netsch. Another master plan, designed in 1999 and updated in 2004, produced the Gerald Ratner Athletics Center (2003), the Max Palevsky Residential Commons (2001), South Campus Residence Hall and dining commons (2009), a new children's hospital, and other construction, expansions, and restorations. In 2011, the university completed the glass dome-shaped Joe and Rika Mansueto Library, which provides a grand reading room for the university library and prevents the need for an off-campus book depository.\nThe site of Chicago Pile-1 is a National Historic Landmark and is marked by the Henry Moore sculpture \"Nuclear Energy\". Robie House, a Frank Lloyd Wright building acquired by the university in 1963, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, as well as a National Historic Landmark, as is room 405 of the George Herbert Jones Laboratory, where Glenn T. Seaborg and his team were the first to isolate plutonium. Hitchcock Hall, an undergraduate dormitory, is on the National Register of Historic Places.\nAdjacent to the campus in Jackson Park is the home of the Obama Presidential Center, the Presidential Library for the 44th president of the United States with expected completion in 2026. The Obamas settled in the university's Hyde Park neighborhood, where they raised their children and where Barack Obama began his political career. Michelle Obama served as an administrator at the university and founded the university's Community Service Center.\nTransportation.\nThe Hyde Park campus is served by the CTA Red Line and Green Line, as well as by the Metra Electric District and South Shore Line commuter trains, all of which provide access to downtown Chicago. The campus is also served by a network of CTA bus routes.\nThe university shuttle program includes daytime and nighttime routes, most of which operate within Hyde Park. In 2022, the university added a Downtown Campus Connector to its shuttle program, which connects the main Hyde Park campus to the Gleacher Center and downtown UChicago Medicine clinics.\nIn 2024, the university introduced a Via ride-sharing program ahead of the 2024\u20132025 school year, which provides unlimited free rides on campus in shared vans.\nSafety.\nIn November 2021, a university graduate was robbed and fatally shot on a sidewalk in a residential area in Hyde Park near campus; a total of three University of Chicago students were killed by gunfire incidents in 2021. These incidents prompted student protests and an open letter to university leadership signed by more than 300 faculty members. In response, the university introduced measures including increased foot and vehicular patrols near campus, expanded coordination between the university police department and the Chicago Police Department, and greater use of security cameras and license plate readers. The university continues to maintain one of the largest private police forces in the country.\nSatellite campuses.\nThe university also maintains facilities apart from its main campus. The university's Booth School of Business maintains campuses in Hong Kong, London, and downtown Chicago. The Center in Paris, a campus located on the left bank of the Seine in Paris, hosts various undergraduate and graduate study programs. The university also maintains the Chicago House, based in Luxor, which serves as the Egyptian headquarters for the Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures. In fall 2010, the university opened a center in Beijing, near Renmin University's campus in Haidian District. The most recent additions are a center in New Delhi, India, which opened in 2014, and a center in Hong Kong which opened in 2018. In 2024, the university opened the John W. Boyer Center in Paris, designed by architectural firm Studio Gang and nearly tripling the size of the Center in Paris which had opened in 2003.\nAcademics.\nThe academic bodies of the University of Chicago consist of the college, four divisions of graduate research, seven professional schools, and the Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies. The university also contains a library system, the University of Chicago Press, and the University of Chicago Medical Center, and oversees several laboratories, including the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab), the Argonne National Laboratory, and the Marine Biological Laboratory. The university is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission. It is a member of the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities and the Universities Research Association.\nThe university runs on a quarter system in which the academic year is divided into four terms: Summer (June\u2013August), Autumn (September\u2013December), Winter (January\u2013March), and Spring (March\u2013June). Full-time undergraduate students take three to four courses every quarter for approximately ten weeks before their quarterly academic breaks. The school year typically begins in late September and ends in early June.\nUndergraduate college.\nThe College of the University of Chicago grants Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science degrees in 51 undergraduate courses of study (since 2005 known as majors) and 33 secondary courses of study, now known as minors. The college's academics are divided into four divisions: the Biological Sciences Collegiate Division, the Physical Sciences Collegiate Division, the Social Sciences Collegiate Division, and the Humanities Collegiate Division. Each division is affiliated with the corresponding graduate division of the university.\nThe college introduced a now-widespread model of the liberal arts undergraduate program which featured the Socratic method in undergraduate contexts, the Great Books program, and the core curriculum. Since the 1999\u20132000 school year, 15 courses across seven subjects and demonstrated proficiency in a foreign language are required under the core curriculum.\nGraduate schools and committees.\nThe university graduate schools and committees are divided into four divisions (biological sciences, humanities, physical sciences, and social sciences), seven professional schools, and the Graham School. In the autumn quarter of 2022, the university enrolled 10,546 graduate students on degree-seeking courses: 569 in the biological sciences division, 612 in the humanities division, 2,103 in the physical sciences division, 972 in the social sciences division, and 6,290 in the professional schools (including the Graham School).\nThe university is home to several committees for interdisciplinary scholarship, including the John U. Nef Committee on Social Thought.\nResearch.\nAccording to the National Science Foundation, the University of Chicago spent $423.9\u00a0million on research and development in 2018, ranking it 60th in the nation. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". It is a founding member of the Association of American Universities, and was a member of the Committee on Institutional Cooperation between 1946 and 2016, when the group's name was changed to the Big Ten Academic Alliance. The University of Chicago is not a member of the rebranded consortium, but continues to be a collaborator.\nThe university operates more than 140 research centers and institutes on campus. Among these are the Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures, West Asia &amp; North Africa\u2014a museum and research center for Near Eastern studies owned and operated by the university\u2014and a number of National Resource Centers, including the Center for Middle Eastern Studies. Chicago also operates or is affiliated with several research institutions apart from the university proper. The university manages the Argonne National Laboratory, part of the United States Department of Energy's national laboratory system, and co-manages the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab), a nearby particle physics laboratory. It was also part of the Astrophysical Research Consortium that constructed the Apache Point Observatory in Sunspot, New Mexico. Faculty and students at the adjacent Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago collaborate with the university. In 2013, the university formed an affiliation with the formerly independent Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Mass. The National Opinion Research Center maintains an office at the Hyde Park campus and is affiliated with multiple academic centers and institutes.\nThe University of Chicago has been the site of various experiments and academic movements. The university has played a role in shaping ideas about the free market and is the namesake of the Chicago school of economics, the school of economic thought supported by Milton Friedman and other economists. The university's sociology department was the first independent sociology department in the United States and gave birth to the Chicago school of sociology. The university was the site of the Chicago Pile-1 (the first controlled, self-sustaining human-made nuclear chain reaction, part of the Manhattan Project), of Robert Millikan's oil-drop experiment that calculated the charge of the electron, and of the development of radiocarbon dating by Willard F. Libby in 1946. The chemical experiment that tested how life originated on early Earth, the Miller\u2013Urey experiment, was also conducted at the university. REM sleep was discovered at the university in 1953 by Nathaniel Kleitman and Eugene Aserinsky.\nThe University of Chicago Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics operated the Yerkes Observatory in Williams Bay, Wisconsin from 1897 until 2018, where the largest operating refracting telescope in the world and other telescopes are located.\nProfessional schools.\nThe university contains seven professional schools and the Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies.\nUntil 1989, the University of Chicago Graduate Library School was the graduate-level librarianship school at the University of Chicago. It was established in 1928 to develop a program for the graduate education of librarians with a focus on research. Housed for a time in the Joseph Regenstein Library, the Graduate Library School closed in 1989 when the University of Chicago decided to promote information studies instead of professional education.\nAssociated academic institutions.\nThe university runs a number of academic institutions and programs apart from its undergraduate and postgraduate schools. It operates the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools (a private day school for K-12 students and day care), and a public charter school with three campuses on the South Side of Chicago administered by the university's Urban Education Institute. In addition, the Hyde Park Day School, a school for students with learning disabilities, and the Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School, a residential treatment program for those with behavioral and emotional problems, maintains a location on the University of Chicago campus. Since 1983, the University of Chicago has maintained the University of Chicago School Mathematics Project, a mathematics program used in urban primary and secondary schools. The university runs a program called the Council on Advanced Studies, which administers interdisciplinary workshops to provide a forum for graduate students, faculty, and visiting scholars to present scholarly work in progress. The university also operates the University of Chicago Press, the largest university press in North America.\nLibrary system.\nThe University of Chicago Library system encompasses six libraries that contain a total of 11 million volumes, the 9th most among library systems in the United States. The university's primary library is the Regenstein Library, which contains over 4.5 million print volumes on a variety of subjects and is the largest on campus. The Joe and Rika Mansueto Library, built in 2011, houses a large study space and an automated book storage and retrieval system. The John Crerar Library contains more than 1.4 million volumes in the biological, medical and physical sciences and collections in general science and the philosophy and history of science, medicine, and technology. The university also operates a number of special libraries, including the D'Angelo Law Library, the Social Service Administration Library, and the Eckhart Library for mathematics and computer science. The Harper Memorial Library, the first library of the university, is now a reading and study room.\nArts.\nThe University of Chicago Arts program joins academic departments in the Division of the Arts &amp; Humanities and the undergraduate College, student art programs, and professional organizations including the Court Theatre, the Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures, the Smart Museum of Art, and the Renaissance Society. The university offers graduate degrees in music, cinema and media studies, visual arts, and the humanities, among other subjects. It also offers bachelor's degree programs in visual arts, music, art history, cinema and media studies, and theater and performance studies. Several thousand major and non-major undergraduates enroll annually in creative and performing arts classes.\nThe university was home to the improvisational Compass Players student comedy troupe, which evolved into The Second City in 1959. The university has an artist-in-residence program, which has supported over 32 individual artists as of May 2025. The Reva and David Logan Center for the Arts opened in 2012. It was financed by a $35 million gift from alumnus David Logan and his wife Reva, the single largest cash gift to the arts in the city of Chicago as of 2025. The center includes spaces for exhibitions, performances, classes, and media production.\nReputation and rankings.\nThe University of Chicago is considered one of the most prestigious research universities in the United States.&lt;section begin=\"reputation\" reference=\"\" /&gt;&lt;section end=\"reputation\" reference=\"\" /&gt;The \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" has consistently placed the University of Chicago among the top 10 universities in the world. In 2026, the university was ranked 6th by \"US News &amp; World Report\" and 13th by \"Forbes\". In 2025, \"QS World University Rankings\" placed the university in 13th place worldwide, while \"THE World University Rankings\" ranked the university in a tie for 14th.\nThe university's law and business schools consistently rank among the top three professional schools in the United States. In 2025, the business school was placed in second out of 77 American schools by \"Bloomberg\", fourth in the US by \"US News &amp; World Report,\" and second by \"Fortune.\" In the same year, it was placed fifteenth in the world by \"QS World University Rankings\" and seventeenth by the Financial Times. In 2025, the law school was ranked third in the United States by \"US News &amp; World Report\" and second by \"Above the Law\". In the same year, it was ranked 11th globally by \"QS World University Rankings.\"\nAdministration and finance.\nThe university is governed by a board of trustees. The board oversees the long-term development and plans of the university and manages fundraising efforts, and is composed of 55 members including the university president. Directly beneath the president are the provost, fourteen vice presidents, including the chief financial officer and chief investment officer, and twelve deans. The current chair of the board of trustees is David Rubenstein, who has occupied the position since May 2022. The current provost is Katherine Baicker, who was appointed in March 2023. The current president of the University of Chicago is chemist Paul Alivisatos, who assumed the role on September 1, 2021.\nThe university's endowment was the 21st largest among American educational institutions and state university systems in 2024, valued at roughly $10.1 billion. Since 2016, the university's board of trustees has resisted pressure from students and faculty to divest its investments from fossil fuel companies. As of 2024[ [update]], such investments remain a part of the university's endowment.\nIn fall 2023, the university employed 3,418 academic staff and 23,217 administrative staff, including those from the medical center. In 2024, the university's combined annual budget, including the university proper, the medical center, and the marine biological laboratory, stood at $5.2 billion, with the university's operations making up an additional $2.6 billion. In the same year, the university's total assets were valued at $20.3 billion.\nPart of the financial plan for the university by former university president Robert Zimmer was an increase in accumulation of debt to finance large building projects. This drew both support and criticism from many in the university community. In 2024, the university budget deficit stood at $288 million despite liquidating assets to cover the gap; the administration announced plans in November of that year to close the deficit over the next four years. The financial strain has caused the university to increase its student-faculty ratio, reduce the proportion of classes taught by research faculty, and spend an unusually high percentage of undergraduate tuition on servicing debt.\nIn the summer of 2025, the university announced more than $100 million in budget cuts across capital projects, hiring, and graduate admissions in a response to the growing university deficit, less federal funding, and uncertainty about international student admissions.\nStudent body and admissions.\nIn fall 2024, the university enrolled 7,569 undergraduate students, 10,968 graduate students, and 750 non-degree students. The college class of 2025 is composed of 53% male and 47% female students. Twenty-seven percent of the class identify as Asian, 19% as Hispanic, and 10% as Black. Eighteen percent of the class is international. The university is need-blind for domestic applicants.\nAdmission to the University of Chicago has become highly selective over the past two decades, reflecting changes in the application process, school popularity, and marketing strategy. Between 1996 and 2023, the acceptance rate of the college fell from 71% to 4.7%.\nThe middle 50% band of SAT scores for the undergraduate class of 2025 was 1510\u20131570 (98th\u201399th percentiles), the average MCAT score for students entering the Pritzker School of Medicine class of 2024 was 519 (97th percentile), the median GMAT score for students entering the full-time Booth MBA program class of 2023 was 740 (97th percentile), and the median LSAT score for students entering the Law School class of 2021 was 172 (99th percentile).\nIn 2018, the University of Chicago attracted national headlines by becoming the first major research university to no longer require SAT or ACT scores from college applicants.\nAthletics.\nThe University of Chicago hosts 19 varsity sports teams: 10 men's teams and 9 women's teams, all called the Maroons, with 502 students participating in the 2012\u20132013 school year. The Maroons compete in the NCAA Division III as members of the University Athletic Association (UAA). Their mascot is Phil the Phoenix.\nThe university was a founding member of the Big Ten Conference and participated in the NCAA Division I men's basketball and football. In 1935, the University of Chicago reached the Sweet Sixteen. In 1935, Chicago Maroons football player Jay Berwanger became the first winner of the Heisman Trophy. However, the university chose to withdraw from the Big Ten Conference in 1946 after University president Robert Maynard Hutchins de-emphasized varsity athletics in 1939 and dropped football. In 1969, Chicago reinstated football as a Division III team, resuming play at the new Stagg Field.\nThe University of Chicago is home to the University of Chicago Rugby Football Club (UCRFC). Since 2022, men's rugby competes in the Division II Great Midwest Conference (MWC) under National Collegiate Rugby, having previously competed under USA Rugby. It was ranked 15th in the country at the end of the 2024 fall 15s season, falling to Montana State 19\u201348 in the Sweet Sixteen NCR DII playoff round. It competes in a Rugby 7s circuit in the spring. It shares its conference with Loyola University Chicago, the University of Illinois Chicago, Northwestern University (for which it competes in a yearly cup, the Hutchins-Scott Cup), DePaul University, and Benedictine University. A women's club also exists at the university.\nThe university is also home to the ultimate frisbee team UChicago Fission.\nStudent life.\nStudent organizations.\nStudents at the University of Chicago operate more than 400 clubs and organizations known as Recognized Student Organizations (RSOs). These include cultural and religious groups, academic clubs and teams, and common-interest organizations. Among notable student organizations are the nation's longest continuously running student film society Doc Films, the organizing committee for the University of Chicago Scavenger Hunt, and the weekly student newspaper \"The Chicago Maroon\".\nStudent government.\nAll recognized student organizations are funded by the University of Chicago Student Government. Student Government consists of graduate and undergraduate students elected to represent members from their respective academic units. It is led by an executive committee, chaired by a president with the assistance of two vice presidents (one for administration and the other for student life) who are elected together as a slate by the student body each spring. As of 2025[ [update]], the Undergraduate Student Government annual budget was greater than $2.5\u00a0million.\nFraternities and sororities.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], there were more than 20 Greek organizations operating on campus. According to a 2016 \"Maroon\" article, 19.6% of undergraduates were members of fraternities or sororities.\nStudent housing.\nOn-campus undergraduate students at the University of Chicago participate in a house system in which each student is assigned to one of the university's seven residence hall buildings and to a smaller community within their residence hall called a \"house\". There are 48 houses, with an average of 80 students in each house. The houses are named after former professors and other historical figures in the university community, such as Eugene Fama.\nStudents are required to live in on-campus housing for the first six quarters of enrollment. As of the 2024\u20132025 school year, 58% of undergraduate students live on campus.\nThe university owns and manages more than 300 residential units near campus for graduate students.\nTraditions.\nEvery May since 1987, the University of Chicago has held the University of Chicago Scavenger Hunt, in which teams of students compete to obtain notoriously esoteric items from a list. Every January, the university holds a week-long winter festival, Kuviasungnerk/Kangeiko (Kuvia), which includes early morning exercise routines and fitness workshops. The university also annually holds a carnival and concert called Summer Breeze, which hosts outside musicians and is home to Doc Films, a student film society founded in 1932 that screens films nightly at the university. Since 1946, the university has organized the Latke-Hamantash Debate, which involves humorous discussions about the relative merits and meanings of latkes and hamantashen. Since 2002, the Ida Noyes Pub has hosted Trivia Nights for university affiliates each Tuesday.\nPeople.\nSince the university's establishment in 1890, there have been 101 Nobel laureates across all six categories affiliated with the University of Chicago, 21 of whom were pursuing research or on faculty at the university at the time of their award announcement. Of these 101 Nobel Prizes, 30 were in Physics, 19 in Chemistry, 13 in Physiology/Medicine, 3 in Literature, 1 in Peace, and 31 in Economics. Chicago faculty and alumni also include ten Fields Medalists, seventeen National Medal of Science recipients, four Turing Award winners, fifty-eight MacArthur Fellows, five John Bates Clark Medalists, thirty Marshall Scholars, fifty-five Rhodes Scholars, twenty-seven Pulitzer Prize winners, twenty National Humanities Medalists, and eight Olympic medalists.\nChicago alumni have gone on to become notable in several fields. In particular, alumni include CEOs of firms such as Microsoft, Goldman Sachs, and Credit Suisse; six heads of state or government across five continents; eight U.S. Cabinet Secretaries; ten U.S. Senators; four central bank Presidents or Directors, including the World Bank; one U.S. Supreme Court justice; and presidents of Princeton, Northwestern, and MIT.\nNotable faculty include three Supreme Court Justices, one central bank governor, and numerous Nobel Prize laureates. Former U.S. president Barack Obama, poet T.S. Eliot, and writer Ralph Ellison all served on the faculty.\nIn pop culture.\nThe University of Chicago is the alma mater of fictional characters Harry Burns and Sally Albright (from \"When Harry Met Sally\"), Indiana Jones, and Mark Watney (from \"The Martian\"). It has served as filming locations for scenes in \"Divergent,\" \"The Fugitive\", and \"Sense8\".\nAbe Ravelstein, the titular character of the novel \"Ravelstein,\" was based on UChicago faculty member Allan Bloom.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32128", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32128", "title": "Uniformitarianism", "text": "Assumption that natural laws are constant through time and space\nUniformitarianism, also known as the Doctrine of Uniformity or the Uniformitarian Principle, is the assumption that the same natural laws and processes that operate in our present-day scientific observations have always operated in the universe in the past and apply everywhere in the universe. It refers to invariance in the metaphysical principles underpinning science, such as the constancy of cause and effect throughout space-time, but has also been used to describe spatiotemporal invariance of physical laws. Though an unprovable postulate that cannot be verified using the scientific method, some consider that uniformitarianism should be a required first principle in scientific research.\nIn geology, uniformitarianism has included the gradualistic concept that \"the present is the key to the past\" and that geological events occur at the same rate now as they have always done, though many modern geologists no longer hold to a strict gradualism. Coined by William Whewell, uniformitarianism was originally proposed in contrast to catastrophism by British naturalists in the late 18th century, starting with the work of the geologist James Hutton in his many books including \"Theory of the Earth\". Hutton's work was later refined by scientist John Playfair and popularised by geologist Charles Lyell's \"Principles of Geology\" in 1830. Today, Earth's history is considered to have been a slow, gradual process, punctuated by occasional natural catastrophic events.\nHistory.\n18th century.\nAbraham Gottlob Werner (1749\u20131817) proposed Neptunism, where strata represented deposits from shrinking seas precipitated onto primordial rocks such as granite. In 1785 James Hutton proposed an opposing, self-maintaining infinite cycle based on natural history and not on the Biblical account.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The solid parts of the present land appear in general, to have been composed of the productions of the sea, and of other materials similar to those now found upon the shores. Hence we find a reason to conclude:\n1st, That the land on which we rest is not simple and original, but that it is a composition, and had been formed by the operation of second causes.\n2nd, That before the present land was made, there had subsisted a world composed of sea and land, in which were tides and currents, with such operations at the bottom of the sea as now take place. And,\nLastly, That while the present land was forming at the bottom of the ocean, the former land maintained plants and animals; at least the sea was then inhabited by animals, in a similar manner as it is at present.\nHence we are led to conclude, that the greater part of our land, if not the whole had been produced by operations natural to this globe; but that in order to make this land a permanent body, resisting the operations of the waters, two things had been required;\n1st, The consolidation of masses formed by collections of loose or incoherent materials;\n2ndly, The elevation of those consolidated masses from the bottom of the sea, the place where they were collected, to the stations in which they now remain above the level of the ocean.\nHutton then sought evidence to support his idea that there must have been repeated cycles, each involving deposition on the seabed, uplift with tilting and erosion, and then moving undersea again for further layers to be deposited. At Glen Tilt in the Cairngorm mountains he found granite penetrating metamorphic schists, in a way which indicated to him that the presumed primordial rock had been molten after the strata had formed. He had read about angular unconformities as interpreted by Neptunists, and found an unconformity at Jedburgh where layers of greywacke in the lower layers of the cliff face have been tilted almost vertically before being eroded to form a level plane, under horizontal layers of Old Red Sandstone. In the spring of 1788 he took a boat trip along the Berwickshire coast with John Playfair and the geologist Sir James Hall, and found a dramatic unconformity showing the same sequence at Siccar Point. Playfair later recalled that \"the mind seemed to grow giddy by looking so far into the abyss of time\", and Hutton concluded a 1788 paper he presented at the Royal Society of Edinburgh, later rewritten as a book, with the phrase \"we find no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end\".\nBoth Playfair and Hall wrote their own books on the theory, and for decades robust debate continued between Hutton's supporters and the Neptunists. Georges Cuvier's paleontological work in the 1790s, which established the reality of extinction, explained this by local catastrophes, after which other fixed species repopulated the affected areas. In Britain, geologists adapted this idea into \"diluvial theory\" which proposed repeated worldwide annihilation and creation of new fixed species adapted to a changed environment, initially identifying the most recent catastrophe as the biblical flood.\n19th century.\nFrom 1830 to 1833 Charles Lyell's multi-volume \"Principles of Geology\" was published. The work's subtitle was \"An attempt to explain the former changes of the Earth's surface by reference to causes now in operation\". He drew his explanations from field studies conducted directly before he went to work on the founding geology text, and developed Hutton's idea that the earth was shaped entirely by slow-moving forces still in operation today, acting over a very long period of time. The terms \"uniformitarianism\" for this idea, and \"catastrophism\" for the opposing viewpoint, was coined by William Whewell in a review of Lyell's book. \"Principles of Geology\" was the most influential geological work in the middle of the 19th century.\nSystems of inorganic earth history.\nGeoscientists support diverse systems of Earth history, the nature of which rests on a certain mixture of views about the process, control, rate, and state which are preferred. Because geologists and geomorphologists tend to adopt opposite views over process, rate, and state in the inorganic world, there are eight different systems of beliefs in the development of the terrestrial sphere. All geoscientists stand by the principle of uniformity of law. Most, but not all, are directed by the principle of simplicity. All make definite assertions about the quality of rate and state in the inorganic realm.\nLyell.\nLyell's uniformitarianism is a family of four related propositions, not a single idea:\nNone of these connotations requires another, and they are not all equally inferred by uniformitarians.\nGould explained Lyell's propositions in \"Time's Arrow, Time's Cycle\" (1987), stating that Lyell conflated two different types of propositions: a pair of methodological assumptions with a pair of substantive hypotheses. The four together make up Lyell's uniformitarianism.\nMethodological assumptions.\nThe two methodological assumptions below are accepted to be true by the majority of scientists and geologists. Gould claims that these philosophical propositions must be assumed before you can proceed as a scientist doing science. \"You cannot go to a rocky outcrop and observe either the constancy of nature's laws or the working of unknown processes. It works the other way around.\" You first assume these propositions and \"then you go to the outcrop.\"\n* Uniformity of law across time and space: Natural laws are constant across space and time.\nThe axiom of uniformity of law is necessary in order for scientists to extrapolate (by inductive inference) into the unobservable past. The constancy of natural laws must be assumed in the study of the past; else we cannot meaningfully study it.\n* Uniformity of process across time and space: Natural processes are constant across time and space.\nThough similar to uniformity of law, this second \"a priori\" assumption, shared by the vast majority of scientists, deals with geological causes, not physicochemical laws. The past is to be explained by processes acting currently in time and space rather than inventing extra esoteric or unknown processes \"without good reason\", otherwise known as parsimony or Occam's razor.\nSubstantive hypotheses.\nThe substantive hypotheses were controversial and, in some cases, accepted by few. These hypotheses are judged true or false on empirical grounds through scientific observation and repeated experimental data. This is in contrast with the previous two philosophical assumptions that come before one can do science and so cannot be tested or falsified by science.\n* Uniformity of rate across time and space: Change is typically slow, steady, and gradual.\nUniformity of rate (or gradualism) is what most people (including geologists) think of when they hear the word \"uniformitarianism\", confusing this hypothesis with the entire definition. As late as 1990, Lemon, in his textbook of stratigraphy, affirmed that \"The uniformitarian view of earth history held that all geologic processes proceed continuously and at a very slow pace.\"\nGould explained Hutton's view of uniformity of rate; mountain ranges or grand canyons are built by the accumulation of nearly insensible changes added up through vast time. Some major events such as floods, earthquakes, and eruptions, do occur. But these catastrophes are strictly local. They neither occurred in the past nor shall happen in the future, at any greater frequency or extent than they display at present. In particular, the whole earth is never convulsed at once.\n* Uniformity of state across time and space: Change is evenly distributed throughout space and time.\nThe uniformity of state hypothesis implies that throughout the history of our earth there is no progress in any inexorable direction. The planet has almost always looked and behaved as it does now. Change is continuous but leads nowhere. The earth is in balance: a dynamic steady state.\n20th century.\nStephen Jay Gould's first scientific paper, \"Is uniformitarianism necessary?\" (1965), reduced these four assumptions to two. He dismissed the first principle, which asserted spatial and temporal invariance of natural laws, as no longer an issue of debate. He rejected the third (uniformity of rate) as an unjustified limitation on scientific inquiry, as it constrains past geologic rates and conditions to those of the present. So, Lyell's uniformitarianism was deemed unnecessary.\nUniformitarianism was proposed in contrast to catastrophism, which states that the distant past \"consisted of epochs of paroxysmal and catastrophic action interposed between periods of comparative tranquility\" Especially in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, most geologists took this interpretation to mean that catastrophic events are not important in geologic time; one example of this is the debate of the formation of the Channeled Scablands due to the catastrophic Missoula glacial outburst floods. An important result of this debate and others was the re-clarification that, while the same principles operate in geologic time, catastrophic events that are infrequent on human time-scales can have important consequences in geologic history.\nDerek Ager has noted that \"geologists do not deny uniformitarianism in its true sense, that is to say, of interpreting the past by means of the processes that are seen going on at the present day, so long as we remember that the periodic catastrophe is one of those processes. Those periodic catastrophes make more showing in the stratigraphical record than we have hitherto assumed.\"\nModern geologists do not apply uniformitarianism in the same way as Lyell. They question if rates of processes were uniform through time and only those values measured during the history of geology are to be accepted. The present may not be a long enough key to penetrating the deep lock of the past. Geologic processes may have been active at different rates in the past that humans have not observed. \"By force of popularity, uniformity of rate has persisted to our present day. For more than a century, Lyell's rhetoric conflating axiom with hypotheses has descended in unmodified form. Many geologists have been stifled by the belief that proper methodology includes an a priori commitment to gradual change, and by a preference for explaining large-scale phenomena as the concatenation of innumerable tiny changes.\"\nThe current consensus is that Earth's history is a slow, gradual process punctuated by occasional natural catastrophic events that have affected Earth and its inhabitants. In practice it is reduced from Lyell's conflation, or blending, to simply the two philosophical assumptions. This is also known as the principle of geological actualism, which states that all past geological action was like all present geological action. The principle of actualism is the cornerstone of paleoecology.\nSocial sciences.\nUniformitarianism has also been applied in historical linguistics, where it is considered a foundational principle of the field. Linguist Donald Ringe gives the following definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"If\" language was normally acquired in the past in the same way as it is today \u2013 usually by native acquisition in early childhood \u2013 and \"if\" it was used in the same ways \u2013 to transmit information, to express solidarity with family, friends, and neighbors, to mark one's social position, etc. \u2013 \"then\" it must have had the same \"general\" structure and organization in the past as it does today, and it must have changed in the same ways as it does today.The principle is known in linguistics, after William Labov and associates, as the Uniformitarian Principle or Unifomitarian Hypothesis.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32129", "revid": "14176211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32129", "title": "Universal Decimal Classification", "text": "Bibliographic and library classification system\nThe Universal Decimal Classification (UDC) is a bibliographic and library classification representing the systematic arrangement of all branches of human knowledge organized as a coherent system in which knowledge fields are related and inter-linked. The UDC is an analytico-synthetic and faceted classification system featuring detailed vocabulary and syntax that enables powerful content indexing and information retrieval in large collections. Since 1991, the UDC has been owned and managed by the UDC Consortium, a non-profit international association of publishers with headquarters in The Hague, Netherlands.\nUnlike other library classification schemes that started their life as national systems, the UDC was conceived and maintained as an international scheme. Its translation into other languages started at the beginning of the 20th century and has since been published in various printed editions in over 40 languages. UDC Summary, an abridged Web version of the scheme, is available in over 50 languages. The classification has been modified and extended over the years to cope with increasing output in all areas of human knowledge, and is still under continuous review to take account of new developments.\nAlbeit originally designed as an indexing and retrieval system, due to its logical structure and scalability, UDC has become one of the most widely used knowledge organization systems in libraries, where it is used for either shelf arrangement, content indexing or both. UDC codes can describe any type of document or object to any desired level of detail. These can include textual documents and other media such as films, video and sound recordings, illustrations, maps as well as realia such as museum objects.\nHistory.\nThe UDC was developed by the Belgian bibliographers Paul Otlet and Henri La Fontaine at the end of the 19th century. In 1895, they created the Universal Bibliographic Repertory (\"R\u00e9pertoire Bibliographique Universel\") (RBU) which was intended to become a comprehensive classified index to all published information. The idea that the RBU should take the form of a card catalogue came from the young American zoologist Herbert Haviland Field, who was at the time himself setting up a bibliographical agency in Zurich, the Concilium Bibliographicum. A means of arranging the entries would be needed, and Otlet, having heard of the Dewey Decimal Classification, wrote to Melvil Dewey and obtained permission to translate it into French. The idea outgrew the plan of mere translation, and a number of radical innovations were made, adapting the purely enumerative classification (in which all the subjects envisaged are already listed and coded) into one which allows for synthesis (that is, the construction of compound numbers to denote interrelated subjects that could never be exhaustively foreseen); various possible relations between subjects were identified, and symbols assigned to represent them. In its first edition in French, \"Manuel du R\u00e9pertoire bibliographique universel\" (1905), the UDC already included many features that were revolutionary in the context of knowledge classifications: tables of generally applicable (aspect-free) concepts\u2014called common auxiliary tables; a series of special auxiliary tables with specific but re-usable attributes in a particular field of knowledge; an expressive notational system with connecting symbols and syntax rules to enable coordination of subjects and the creation of a documentation language proper.\nThe Universal Bibliographic Repertory grew to more than eleven million records in the period before World War I. The catalogue and its content organized by UDC can still be seen in Mundaneum in Mons, Belgium. In 2013 this catalogue was accepted onto the UNESCO Memory of the World international register, recognising it as documentary heritage of global importance.\nApplication.\nUDC is used in around 150,000 libraries in 130 countries and in many bibliographical services which require detailed content indexing. In a number of countries it is the main classification system for information exchange and is used in all types of libraries: public, school, academic and special libraries.\nUDC is also used in national bibliographies of around 30 countries. Examples of large databases indexed by UDC include: \nUDC has traditionally been used for the indexing of scientific articles which was an important source of information of scientific output in the period predating electronic publishing. Collections of research articles in many countries covering decades of scientific output contain UDC codes. Examples of journal articles indexed by UDC:\nThe design of UDC lends itself to machine readability, and the system has been used both with early automatic mechanical sorting devices, and modern library OPACs. Since 1993, a standard version of UDC has been maintained and distributed in a database format: UDC Master Reference File (UDC MRF) which is updated and released regularly. The 2011 version of the MRF (released in 2012) contains over 70,000 classes. In the past full printed editions used to have around 220,000 subdivisions.\nStructure.\nNotation.\nA notation is a code commonly used in classification schemes to represent a class, i.e. a subject and its position in the hierarchy, to enable mechanical sorting and filing of subjects. UDC uses Arabic numerals arranged decimally. Every number is thought of as a decimal fraction with the initial decimal point omitted, which determines the filing order. An advantage of decimal notational systems is that they are infinitely extensible, and when new subdivisions are introduced, they need not disturb the existing allocation of numbers. For ease of reading, a UDC notation is usually punctuated after every third digit:\nIn UDC the notation has two features that make the scheme easier to browse and work with: \nBasic features and syntax.\nUDC is an analytico-synthetic and faceted classification. It allows an unlimited combination of attributes of a subject and relationships between subjects to be expressed. UDC codes from different tables can be combined to present various aspects of document content and form, e.g. codice_12 \"History\" (main subject) of \"United Kingdom\" (place) in \"20th century\" (time), a \"textbook\" (document form). Or: codice_13 \"Relationship between Education and Religion\". Complex UDC expressions can be accurately parsed into constituent elements.\nUDC is also a disciplinary classification covering the entire universe of knowledge. This type of classification can also be described as \"aspect\" or \"perspective\", which means that concepts are subsumed and placed under the field in which they are studied. Thus, the same concept can appear in different fields of knowledge. This particular feature is usually implemented in UDC by re-using the same concept in various combinations with the main subject, e.g. a code for language in common auxiliaries of language is used to derive numbers for ethnic grouping, individual languages in linguistics and individual literatures. Or, a code from the auxiliaries of place, e.g. codice_14 \"United Kingdom\", uniquely representing the concept of United Kingdom can be used to express codice_15 \"Regional geography of United Kingdom\" and codice_16 \"History of United Kingdom\".\nOrganization.\nConcepts are organized in two kinds of tables:\nMain classes.\nThe vacant class 4 is the result of a planned schedule expansion. This class was freed by moving linguistics into class 8 in the 1960s to make space for future developments in the rapidly expanding fields of knowledge; primarily natural sciences and technology.\nCommon auxiliary tables.\n\"Common auxiliaries\" are aspect-free concepts that can be used in combination with any other UDC code from the main classes or with other common auxiliaries. They have unique notational representations that make them stand out in complex expressions. Common auxiliary numbers always begin with a certain symbol known as a facet indicator. For example, an equals sign always indicates a language; numbers starting with zero and enclosed in parentheses always indicate a document form. Thus codice_17 \"Textbook\" and codice_18 \"English\" can be combined to express, for example, codice_19 \"Textbooks in English\". When combined with numbers from the main UDC tables one might get: codice_20 \"Religion textbooks in English\" or codice_21 \"Mathematics textbooks in English\".\nConnecting signs.\nIn order to preserve the precise meaning and enable accurate parsing of complex UDC expressions, a number of connecting symbols are made available to relate and extend UDC numbers. These are:\nOutline.\nUDC classes in this outline are taken from the Multilingual Universal Decimal Classification Summary (UDCC Publication No. 088) released by the UDC Consortium under the Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license (first release 2009, subsequent update 2012).\nMain tables.\n2 Religion. Theology.\nThe UDC tables for religion are fully faceted. The second table below lists special auxiliary numbers that can be used to express attributes (facets) of any specific faith. Any special number can be combined with any religion e.g. codice_22 \"Worship\" can be used to express, for example, codice_23 \"Worship in Judaism\", codice_24 \"Worship in Christianity\", or codice_25 \"Worship in Buddhism\". The complete special auxiliary tables contain around 2000 subdivisions of various attributes that can be attached to express various aspects of individual faiths to a great level of specificity allowing equal level of detail for every religion.\n4 Currently Vacant.\nThis section is currently vacant.\n6 Applied sciences. Medicine. Technology.\nClass 6 occupies the largest proportion of UDC schedules. It contains over 44,000 subdivisions. Each specific field of technology or industry usually contains more than one special auxiliary table with concepts needed to express operations, processes, materials and products. As a result, UDC codes are often created through the combination of various attributes. Equally, some parts of this class enumerate concepts to a great level of detail, for example, codice_26 \"Hexagon screws with additional shapes. Including: Flank screws. Collar screws. Cap screws\"\n8 Language. Linguistics. Literature.\nTables for class 8 are fully faceted and details are expressed through combination with common auxiliaries of language () and a series of special auxiliary tables to indicate other facets or attributes in Linguistics or Literature. As a result, this class allows for great specificity in indexing although the schedules themselves occupy very little space in UDC. The subdivisions of codice_27 \"Languages\" or codice_28 \"Literature\", for example, are derived from common auxiliaries of language codice_29 (Table 1c) by substituting a point for the equals sign. Thus codice_30 \"English language\" (as a subject of a linguistic study) and codice_31 \"English literature\" derive from codice_18 \"English language\". Common auxiliaries of place and time are also frequently used in this class to express place and time facets of Linguistics or Literature, e.g. codice_33 \"English literature of Canada in the 19th century\".\n9 Geography. Biography. History.\nTables for Geography and History in UDC are fully faceted and place, time and ethnic grouping facets are expressed through combination with common auxiliaries of place (), ethnic grouping () and time ()\nCommon auxiliary tables.\nTable 1f: Human ancestry and grouping.\nThey are derived mainly from the common auxiliaries of language codice_34 () and so may also usefully distinguish linguistic-cultural groups. For example codice_18 \"English\" is used to represent codice_36 \"English speaking peoples\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32131", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32131", "title": "Ultima (series)", "text": "Role-playing video game series\nUltima is a series of open world fantasy role-playing video games from Origin Systems, created by Richard Garriott. Electronic Arts has owned the brand since 1992. The series had sold over 2 million copies by 1997.\nA significant series in computer game history, it is considered, alongside \"Wizardry\" and \"Might and Magic\", to be one of the norm-establishers of the computer role-playing game genre. Several games of the series are considered seminal entries in their genre, and the early installments especially introduced new innovations which then were widely copied by other games.\nThe Ultima games are primarily within the scope of fantasy fiction but contain science fiction elements as well. They take place for the most part in a world called Britannia; the constantly recurring hero is initially called the Stranger, until he attains the role of Avatar in \"Ultima IV\" and is known by that appellation from then on.\nGames.\nThe main \"Ultima\" series consists of nine installments (with the seventh title divided into two parts) grouped into three trilogies, or \"Ages\": The Age of Darkness (\"Ultima\u00a0I-III\"), The Age of Enlightenment (\"Ultima\u00a0IV-VI\"), and The Age of Armageddon (\"Ultima\u00a0VII-IX\"). The last is also sometimes referred to as \"The Guardian Saga\" after its chief antagonist. The first trilogy is set in a fantasy world named Sosaria, but during the cataclysmic events of The Age of Darkness, it is sundered and three quarters of it vanish. What is left becomes known as Britannia, a realm ruled by the benevolent Lord British, and is where the later games mostly take place. The protagonist in all the games is a resident of Earth who is called upon by Lord British to protect Sosaria and, later, Britannia from a number of dangers. Originally, the player character was referred to as \"the Stranger\", but by the end of \"Ultima\u00a0IV\" he becomes universally known as the Avatar.\nMain series.\nThe Age of Darkness: \"Ultima\u00a0I\u2013III\".\nIn \" (1981), the Stranger is first summoned to Sosaria to defeat the evil wizard Mondain who aims to enslave it. Since Mondain possesses the Gem of Immortality, which makes him invulnerable, the Stranger locates a time machine, travels back in time to kill Mondain before he creates the Gem, and shatters the incomplete artifact.\n\" (1982) details Mondain's secret student and lover Minax's attempt to avenge him. When Minax launches an attack on the Stranger's homeworld of Earth, her actions cause doorways to open to various times and locations throughout Earth's history, and brings forth legions of monsters to all of them. The Stranger, after obtaining the Quicksword that alone can harm her, locates the evil sorceress at Castle Shadowguard at the origin of time and defeats her.\n\"\" (1983) reveals that Mondain and Minax had an offspring, the eponymous Exodus, \"neither human, nor machine\", according to the later games (it is depicted as a computer at the conclusion of the game, and it appears to be a demonic, self-aware artificial intelligence). Some time after Minax's death, Exodus starts its own attack on Sosaria and the Stranger is summoned once again to destroy it. \"Exodus\" was the first installment of the series featuring a player party system, which was used in many later games.\nThe Age of Enlightenment: \"Ultima\u00a0IV\u2013VI\".\n\"\" (1985) marked a turning point in the series from the traditional \"hero vs. villain\" plots, instead introducing a complex alignment system based upon the Eight Virtues derived from the combinations of the Three Principles of Love, Truth and Courage. Although Britannia now prospers under Lord British's rule, he fears for his subjects' spiritual well-being and summons the Stranger again to become a spiritual leader of Britannian people by example. Throughout the game, the Stranger's actions determine how close he comes to this ideal. Upon achieving enlightenment in every Virtue, he can reach the Codex of Ultimate Wisdom and becomes the \"Avatar\", the embodiment of Britannia's virtues.\nIn \" (1988), the Avatar returns to Britannia to find that after Lord British had been lost in the Underworld, Lord Blackthorn, who rules in his stead, was corrupted by the Shadowlords and enforces a radically twisted vision of the Virtues, deviating considerably from their original meaning. The Avatar and his companions proceed to rescue the true king, overthrow the tyrant, and restore the Virtues in their true form.\n\" (1990) details the invasion of Britannia by Gargoyles, which the Avatar and his companions have to repel. Over the course of the game, it is revealed that the Gargoyles have valid reasons to loathe the Avatar. Exploring the themes of racism and xenophobia, the game tasks the Avatar with understanding and reconciling two seemingly opposing cultures.\nThe Age of Armageddon: \"Ultima\u00a0VII\u2013IX\".\n\"\" (1992) sees the Avatar entangled in the plan of an ostensibly virtuous and benevolent organization named the Fellowship (inspired by Scientology) to create a gateway for the evil entity known as the Guardian to enter Britannia. Though all of the main line of \"Ultima\" games are arranged into trilogies, Richard Garriott later revealed that \"Ultima\u00a0VII\" was the first game where he did any sort of planning ahead for future games in the series. He elaborated that \"the first three didn't have much to do with each other, they were 'Richard Garriott learns to program'; IV through VI were a backwards-designed trilogy, in the sense that I tied them together as I wrote them; but VII-IX, the story of the Guardian, were a preplanned trilogy, and we had a definite idea of where we wanted to go.\" An expansion pack was released named \"Forge of Virtue\" that added a newly arisen volcanic island to the map that the Avatar was invited to investigate. The tie-in storyline was limited to this island, where a piece of Exodus (his data storage unit) had resurfaced. To leave the island again, the Avatar had to destroy this remnant of Exodus. In the process of doing so, he also created The Black Sword, an immensely powerful weapon possessed by a demon.\n' (1993) was released as the second part of \"Ultima\u00a0VII\" because it used the same game engine as \"Ultima\u00a0VII\". According to interviews, Richard Garriott felt it therefore did not warrant a new number. Production was rushed due to deadlines set to the developers, and the storyline was cut short; remains of the original, longer storyline can be found in the database. Following the Fellowship's defeat, its founder Batlin flees to the Serpent Isle, pursued by the Avatar and companions. Serpent Isle is revealed as another fragment of former Sosaria, and its history which is revealed throughout the game provides many explanations and ties up many loose ends left over from the Age of Darkness era. Magical storms herald the unraveling of the dying world's very fabric, and the game's mood is notably melancholic, including the voluntary sacrificial death of a long-standing companion of the Avatar, Dupre. By the end of the game, the Avatar is abducted by the Guardian and thrown into another world, which becomes the setting for the next game in the series. ' was an expansion pack for \"Ultima\u00a0VII Part 2\" where the Avatar travels back in time to plant a silver seed, thus balancing the forces that hold the Serpent Isle together. Like \"Forge of Virtue\", the expansion contained an isolated sub-quest that was irrelevant to the main game's storyline, but provided the Avatar with a plethora of useful and powerful artifacts.\nIn \"\" (1994), the Avatar finds himself exiled by the Guardian to a world called \"Pagan\". The Britannic Principles and Virtues are unknown here. Pagan is ruled by the Elemental Titans, god-like servants of the Guardian. The Avatar defeats them with their own magic, ascending to demi-godhood himself, and finally returns to Britannia. A planned expansion pack, \"The Lost Vale\", was canceled after \"Ultima\u00a0VIII\" failed to meet sales expectations.\n\"\" (1999), the final installment of the series, sees Britannia conquered and its Virtues corrupted by the Guardian. The Avatar has to cleanse and restore them. The Guardian is revealed to be the evil part of the Avatar himself, expelled from him when he became the Avatar. To stop it, he has to merge with it, destroying himself as a separate entity. The featured a more apocalyptic ending, with the Guardian and Lord British killed, Britannia destroyed, and the Avatar ascending to a higher plane of existence.\nSpin-offs and other games.\n\"\" was released in 1979, and is sometimes considered a precursor to the \"Ultima\" series.\nSierra On-Line also produced \"\" in 1983. The maze game has nothing in common with the others, but is highly sought after by collectors due to extreme rarity.\nThe \"Worlds of Ultima\" series is a spin-off of \"Ultima VI\" using the same game engine, following the Avatar's adventures after the game's conclusion:\nThe second spin-off series, \"Ultima Underworld\", consisted of three games with a first-person perspective:\nConsole games.\nConsole versions of \"Ultima\" have allowed further exposure to the series, especially in Japan where the games have been bestsellers and were accompanied by several tie-in products including \"Ultima\" cartoons and manga. In most cases, gameplay and graphics have been changed significantly.\n\"Ultima Online\" MMORPG.\n\"Ultima Online\" (1997), a MMORPG spin-off of the main series, has become an unexpected hit, making it one of the earliest and longest-running successful MMORPGs of all time. Its lore retconned the ending of \"Ultima\u00a0I\", stating that when the Stranger shattered the Gem of Immortality, he discovered that it was tied to the world itself, therefore its shards each contained a miniature version of Britannia. The player characters in \"Ultima Online\" exist on these \"shards\". Eight expansion packs for \"UO\" have been released (', ', ', ', ', ', ' and '). The aging \"UO\" graphic engine was renewed in 2007 with the official ' client. \"Ultima Online 2\", later renamed to ' and canceled in 2001, would have introduced steampunk elements to the game world, following Lord British's unsuccessful attempt to merge past, present, and future shards together.\n\"UO\" spawned two sequel efforts that were canceled before release: ' (canceled in 2001, though the game's storyline was published in the Technocrat War trilogy) and ' (canceled in 2004). \"Ultima\u00a0X: Odyssey\" would have continued the story of \"Ultima\u00a0IX\". Now merged with the Guardian, the Avatar creates a world of Alucinor inside his mind, where the players were supposed to pursue the Eight Virtues in order to strengthen him and weaken the Guardian. \"Ultima\u00a0X\" was developed without participation of the original creator Richard Garriott and he no longer owns the rights to the series. However, he still owns the rights to several of the game characters so it is impossible for either him or Electronic Arts to produce a new \"Ultima\" title without getting permission from each other.\n\"Lord of Ultima\".\n\"Lord of Ultima\" is a defunct free-to-play browser-based MMORTS released in 2010 by EA Phenomic. It was the first release in the \"Ultima\" series since \"Ultima Online\", and also the first title to have no involvement from series creator Garriott or founding company Origin. It has been criticized for having slow-paced gameplay and very weak connections to the Ultima franchise lore.\nEA announced on February 12, 2014, that \"Lord of Ultima\" would be shut down and taken offline as of May 12, 2014.\n\"Ultima Forever: Quest for the Avatar\".\nAnnounced in summer 2012, \"Ultima Forever\" is a defunct free-to-play online action role-playing game. In contrast to \"Lord of Ultima\", \"Ultima Forever\" returns to the lore of the original game series.\nAs of August 29, 2014. Ultima Forever's servers were shut down.\nRelated Video Games.\nA group of volunteer programmers created \"\" in 2005, a remake of \"Ultima V\" using the \"Dungeon Siege\" engine.\nThe \"Exult\" open-source project aims to recreate Ultima VII for modern operating systems, using the game's original plot, data, and graphics files.\nOther media.\nSeveral novels were released under the \"Ultima\" name, including:\nIn Japan, various novels, multiple gamebooks, a soundtrack CD, two kinds of wrist watches, a tape dispenser, a pencil holder, a board game, a jacket, and a beach towel were released. There were rumours of an \"Ultima\" anime cartoon, but its existence has been described as unlikely.\nFour main manga comics were released in Japan:\nPackaging.\n\"Ultima\" game boxes often contained so-called \"feelies\"; e.g. from \"Ultima\u00a0II\" on, every game in the main series came with a cloth map of the game world. Starting with \"Ultima\u00a0IV\", small trinkets like pendants, coins and magic stones were included. Made of metal or glass, they usually represented an important object found within the game itself.\nNot liking how games were sold in zip lock bags with a few pages printed out for instructions, Richard Garriott insisted \"Ultima\u00a0II\" be sold in a box, with a cloth map, and a manual. Sierra was the only company at that time willing to agree to this, and thus he signed with them.\nCopy protection measures.\nIn the Atari 8bit version of \"Ultima\u00a0IV\" one of the floppy disks had an unformatted track. In its absence the player would lose on every fight, which would not be obvious as a copy protection effect right away as one could assume that this was just due to either lack of experience or proper equipment. The protection mechanism was subtle enough to be overlooked by the German distributor that originally delivered Atari 8bit packages with floppies that were formatted regularly, and thus these paid copies acted like unlicensed copies, causing players to lose every battle.\nIn \"Ultima V\", there were one or two instances where ostensibly insignificant information found in the accompanying booklet were asked by person(s) encountered in the game. The game also used runic script in some places and a special language for spell names, for both of which the necessary translation tables / explanations were provided in the booklet. Similarly, a journal of Lord British's doomed expedition into the underworld was included with the box; over the course of the game it turns out that the player will have to retrace the expedition's steps to recover a vital item. These can be seen as subtle copy-protection measures, well fitted for the context of history and fantasy so that a casual player didn't take them for copy protection.\n\"Ultima VI\" introduced a more systematic use of copy protection in the form of in-game questions, preventing the player from progressing any further if the questions were answered incorrectly. In \"Ultima\u00a0VII\", this practice was continued, although in both games the player had an unlimited number of tries to answer the questions correctly. Answers could be obtained by consulting the manual or cloth map, although the manual released with the \"Ultima Collection\" contained all copy protection answers for every game.\nIn \"Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle\", the copy protection was changed slightly. Players were asked questions at two points in the game, and if they could not answer after two attempts, all NPCs said nothing but altered versions of famous quotes. Everything would also be labeled \"Oink!\", preventing the game from being played. From Ultima\u00a0VIII onward, copy protection questions were discontinued.\nCommon elements.\nSetting.\nOriginally, the world of \"Ultima\" was made up of four continents. These were Lord British's Realm, ruled by Lord British and the Lost King; The Lands of Danger and Despair, ruled by Lord Shamino and the King of the White Dragon; The Lands of the Dark Unknown, ruled by Lord Olympus and the King of the Black Dragon; and The Lands of the Feudal Lords, ruled by the lords of Castle Rondorin and Castle Barataria.\nAfter the defeat of Mondain and the shattering of his Gem of Immortality in \"Ultima\u00a0I\", there was a cataclysm that changed the structure of the world. Three of the four continents seemingly disappeared, leaving only Lord British's realm in the world. This remaining continent was referred from then on as \"Sosaria\". The Lands of Danger and Despair were later rediscovered as the Serpent Isle, which had been moved to a different dimension or plane, so it seems likely that the other two continents still exist. \"Ultima\u00a0II\" shows Castle Barataria on Planet X, suggesting that the Lands of the Feudal Lords became this planet; \"Ultima Online: Samurai Empire\" posits that the Lands of the Feudal Lords was transformed into the Tokuno Islands by the cataclysm.\nAfter the defeat of Exodus in \"Ultima\u00a0III\", Sosaria became Britannia in order to honor its ruler, Lord British. Serpent Isle remained connected with Britannia via a gate in the polar region. The Fellowship leader, Batlin, fled here after the Black Gate was destroyed in \"Ultima\u00a0VII\", preventing the Guardian's first invasion. Ninety percent of the island's population was destroyed by evil Banes released by Batlin in a foolish attempt to capture them for his own use in \"Ultima\u00a0VII Part 2\".\nVirtues.\nIn Ultima, the player takes the role of the Avatar, who embodies eight virtues. First introduced in , the Three Principles and the Eight Virtues marked a reinvention of the game focus from a traditional role-playing model into an ethically framed one. Each virtue is associated with a party member, one of Britannia's cities, and one of the eight other planets in Britannia's solar system. Each virtue also has a mantra and each principle a word of power that the player must learn. The Eight Virtues explored in \"Ultima\" are Honesty, Compassion, Valor, Justice, Sacrifice, Honor, Spirituality, and Humility. These Eight Virtues are based on the Three Principles of Truth, Love, and Courage. The Principles are derived from the One True Axiom, the combination of all Truth, all Love, and all Courage, which is Infinity.\nThe virtues were first introduced in \"\" (1985), where the goal of the game is to practice them and become a moral exemplar. Virtues and their variations are present in all later installments. Richard Garriott's motives in designing the virtue system were to build on the fact that games were provoking thought in the player, even unintentionally. As a designer, he \"wasn't interested in teaching any specific lesson; instead, his next game would be about making people think about the consequences of their actions.\" The original virtue system in Ultima was partially inspired by the 16 ways of purification (sanskara) and character traits (samskara) which lead to Avatarhood in Hinduism. He also drew on his interpretation of characters from \"The Wizard of Oz\", with the Scarecrow representing truth, the Tin Woodsman representing love, and the Cowardly Lion representing courage.\nThe Virtues have become a frequent theme in the Ultima games following ', with many different variants used throughout the series. ' saw Lord Blackthorn turn the virtue system into a rigid and draconian set of laws. The rigid system of Blackthorn unintentionally causes the Virtues to actually achieve their polar opposites, in part due to the influence of the Shadowlords. This shows that the Virtues always come from one's own self, and that codifying ethics into law does not automatically make evil people good. ' confronted the Avatar with the fact that, from another point of view, the Avatar's quests for Virtue may not appear virtuous at all, presenting an alternative set of virtues. In ', an order known as the Fellowship displaced the Virtues with its own seemingly benevolent belief system, casting Britannia into disarray; and in \"\", the Virtues had been inverted into their opposite anti-virtues.\nUltima's virtue system was considered a new frontier in game design, and has become \"an industry standard, especially within role-playing games.\" The original system from \"Ultima\u00a0IV\" has influenced moral systems in games such as \"Black &amp; White\", \"\" and the \"Fable\" series. However, Ultima can only be won by being virtuous, while other games typically offer a choice to be vicious. Mark Hayse specifically praises Ultima's virtue system for its subtlety. The game emphasizes the importance of virtue, but leaves the practice ambiguous with no explicit point values and limited guidance. This makes the virtue system more of a \"philosophical journey\" than an ordinary game puzzle.\nCharacters.\nThe Stranger and the Avatar.\nThe early \"Ultima\" games referred to the player-protagonist as the \"Stranger\", with an open game design that allowed players to complete quests through theft or violence. After the release of \"\", creator Richard Garriott received letters from parents that criticized the \"Ultima\" series for allowing immoral actions, such as theft or murder against peaceful citizens. Garriott also received criticism about supposed Satanic content, particularly the demonic nature of the antagonist of \"Ultima III\" who appeared on the game packaging. In \"The Official Book of Ultima\", Shay Addams described Richard Garriott's thinking, that \"if people were going to look for hidden meaning in his work when they didn't even exist, he would introduce ideas and symbols with meaning and significance he deemed worthwhile, to give them something they could really think about.\" After watching a television show on Hinduism and the concept of the Avatar, Garriott was inspired to create his own system of eight Virtues for the next protagonist in \"Ultima IV\", the Avatar.\nThe Avatar makes his first appearance in the , where his goal is to follow the path of the Virtues, and retrieve the Codex of Ultimate Wisdom from the Great Stygian Abyss. In the , the Avatar defeats a repressive regime in Britannia, and in the , he brings peace between men and gargoyles. In \"Ultima VII and \", the Avatar battles the Guardian, finally destroying both himself and his foe in \"\".\nWith the exception of \"Ultima IX: Ascension\", the player can choose the Avatar's name. \"Ultima VIII: Pagan\" fixed the Avatar's identity as a blond-haired blue-eyed male, while the other games allowed the player to select the Avatar's race, gender, and appearance. In \"Ultima IV\" onward, the player activates the Avatar's speech using singular keywords, until \"Ultima VII\" and \"Ultima Underworld\" allowed full dialog. \"Ultima IX\" added digitized speech to accompany the text.\nThe Avatar was initially designed to be a blank slate through which players could reflect their own personality The use of the word \"avatar\" in this manner is the first time that the word represented a concept defined by its modern virtual context. The Avatar was one of the first times that a player could select the race and gender of the protagonist, and can be interpreted as a representative of the player, allowing them to reflect on their actions in the game. However, the Avatar eventually evolved to take on a more specific appearance and character.\nLord British.\nLord British is the ruler of Britannia, and an in-game personification of the creator of the series, Richard Garriott. His name comes from a nickname given to him by friends at a computer camp, who felt that his way of saying \"hello\" was distinctly \"British.\" The \"Lord\" prefix was added when he played the dungeon master in Dungeons &amp; Dragons games. Garriott released early games, such as \"\", under the name and occasionally appeared in \"Ultima Online\" playing as Lord British. He is still known as Lord British even after his departure from \"Ultima\" maker Origin Systems: Garriott retained the trademark rights to the name Lord British with its associated symbols, and the character appeared in his latest (and now defunct) online game, \"Tabula Rasa\" as General British.\nLord Blackthorn.\nLord Blackthorn becomes regent of Britannia when Lord British disappears while exploring the Underworld in '. Originally, he is a wise and just ruler, but he is twisted by the Shadowlords and becomes an oppressive tyrant. By the game's conclusion, Lord British is restored to his throne and Blackthorn sent to exile through a red moongate to an unknown world. ' explains that his destination is the Serpent Isle. While on Serpent Isle, Blackthorn takes refuge among the Xenkan Monks and finds redemption, eventually joining their order. But \"Ultima IX\" diverges from this restoration of Lord Blackthorn having him leave the island before the Avatar arrives on the Serpent Island. Blackthorn returns again as a villain in \"\", this time as a servant of the Guardian, which again contradicts the restorative end on \"Ultima VII: Part Two: Serpent Isle\". In the end Blackthorn perishes at the hand of Lord British after an extensive magical duel at the center of the Great Stygian Abyss, completely contradicting everything written prior to Ascension and after \"Ultima VII\".\nIn \"Ultima Online\", the timeline of which diverges from the main series after \"\", Blackthorn is the closest friend of Lord British, but at the same time he is also his fiercest enemy. He has been defending the peoples' individuality and freedom of belief by creating his own virtue, chaos. In this case, chaos does not represent the destructive force with which it is usually associated. He eventually forged an alliance with various dark magics and emerged as an evil force. After \"surviving\" through a few years, he was seemingly killed in an assault on the city of Yew. The evil form was later retconned into being an facsimile, and the original Lord Blackthorn became the king of Britannia. Lord Blackthorn was the virtual persona of Ultima Online project director Starr Long.\nThe Guardian.\nThe Guardian is an alien being of immense power from another dimension. A large red humanoid, he is described as a conqueror of worlds. He first appears in \"\" although for the majority of the game he is only a disembodied voice. Having conquered other worlds, he first attempts to conquer Britannia through his agent Batlin, the founder and leader of the Fellowship. The ultimate plan was to create a black moongate to allow the Guardian to physically enter Britannia and conquer it. The Avatar discovers the Guardian's plan and destroys the black moongate as the Guardian is attempting to enter.\nArtificial scripts and language.\nThe \"Ultima\" series of computer games employed several different artificial scripts. The people of Britannia, the fantasy world where the games are set, speak English, and most of the day-to-day things are written in Latin alphabet. However, there still are other scripts, which are used by tradition.\nBritannian runes are the most commonly seen script. In many of the games of the series, most signs are written in runic. The runes are based on Germanic runes, but closer to Dwarven runes in Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\", which creator Richard Garriott has stated he has read. They gained steadier use since ', which was the first game in the series to use a runic font for in-game signs. Runes in earlier games were mostly found in hard copy materials, such as maps and the decorative covers of booklets. Runes appear less in ' and in later games.\nGargish is the language of the gargoyles of Britannia and the language used in spellcasting within the game. Unlike the runic script, which is usually used simply as a visual cipher for English, the Gargish script encodes a genuine constructed language, based on (but expanding greatly upon) the magical words of power that first saw use in ', as well as the mantras for each of the Shrines of Virtue, which had remained consistent since '. The lexicon mostly comprises deformed or truncated Latinate stems (\"flam\" \"fire\" \u2190 Latin \"flamma\"; \"lap\" \"stone\" \u2190 Latin \"lapis\"; \"leg\" \"to read\" \u2190 Latin \"leg\u014d\"), but other origins are also apparent (\"uis\" \"wisdom\" \u2190 English \"wise\"; \"kas\" \"helmet\" \u2190 French \"casque\"). But the grammar is \"de novo\" and bears little resemblance to Latin, being largely analytic in structure instead. Gargish uses suffixes to denote grammatical tense and aspect, and also in some forms of derivation. The Gargish alphabet is featured in ', though it is seen only in specific game contexts. ' and onward does not feature anything written in the alphabet, with the sole exception of some books to be found in the gargoyle colony in the underwater city of Ambrosia in \"\". The Gargish language and alphabet were designed by Herman Miller.\nThe Ophidian alphabet, featured in \"Ultima\u00a0VII Part Two: Serpent Isle\", was used by the Ophidian civilization that inhabited the Serpent Isle. It is based on various snake forms. Ophidian lettering was quite difficult to read, so the game included a \"Translation\" spell that made the letters look like Latin letters.\nReception.\nIn the United States, the first five \"Ultima\" games had collectively sold more than copies for home computers by 1990. In Japan, total sales of Pony Canyon's Japanese versions of the \"Ultima\" series had reached nearly 100,000 copies on home computers and over 300,000 units on the Famicom (Nintendo Entertainment System), by 1990.\nIn 1996, \"Next Generation\" ranked the \"Ultima\" series as collectively the 55th top game of all time, commenting that, \"While the graphics and playing style change with the technological leaps of the day, [it] has been the most consistent source of roleplaying excitement in history.\" In 1999, \"Next Generation\" listed the \"Ultima\" series as number 18 on their \"Top 50 Games of All Time\", commenting that, \"Most PC RPGs are about hacking and slashing through anything that moves, usually while crawling through a dungeon. The \"Ultima\" series, however, has always been firmly grounded in a world where a character's virtues are as important as their armor class in determining success.\" In 2000, Britannia was included in GameSpot's list of the ten best game worlds, called \"the oldest and one of the most historically rich gameworlds.\"\nImpact and legacy.\nMany innovations of the early \"Ultimas\" \u2013 in particular \"\" (1983) \u2013 eventually became standard among later RPGs, such as the use of tiled graphics and party-based combat, its mix of fantasy and science-fiction elements, and the introduction of time travel as a plot device. In turn, some of these elements were inspired by \"Wizardry\", specifically the party-based combat. \"Exodus\" was also revolutionary in its use of a written narrative to convey a larger story than the typically minimal plots that were common at the time. Most video games \u2013 including Garriott's own \"Ultima\u00a0I\" and \"II\" and \"Akalabeth\" \u2013 tended to focus primarily on things like combat without venturing much further. In addition, Garriott would introduce in \"Ultima\u00a0IV\" a theme that would persist throughout later \"Ultimas\" \u2013 a system of chivalry and code of conduct in which the player, or \"Avatar\", is tested periodically (in both obvious and unseen ways) and judged according to his or her actions. This system of morals and ethics was unique, in that in other video games players could for the most part act and do as they wished without having to consider the consequences of their actions.\n\"Ultima III\" would go on to be released for many other platforms and influenced the development of such RPGs as \"Excalibur\", \"The Legend of Zelda\" and \"Dragon Quest\"; and many consider the game to be the first modern computer role-playing game.\nOn June 30, 2020, Garriott said he was turned down by EA for any attempts to revive or remaster the Ultima series.\n\"Shroud of the Avatar: Forsaken Virtues\".\nRichard Garriott's new company Portalarium developed an RPG/MMORPG that Garriott has described as a clear spiritual successor of the \"Ultima\" series. On March 8, 2013, Portalarium launched a Kickstarter campaign for \"\". \"Forsaken Virtues\" is the first of five full-length episodic installments in \"Shroud of the Avatar\" and was designed as a \"Selective Multiplayer Game\". This allowed the player to determine his or her level of multiplayer involvement that ranges from MMO to single player offline. Despite original plans to launch in Summer 2017, with Episodes 2 through 5 estimated for subsequent yearly releases, the first episode would ultimately be released on March 27, 2018, to mixed reception. Further episodes have not yet been released.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32133", "revid": "7226930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32133", "title": "Urethra", "text": "Tube that connects the urinary bladder to the external urethral orifice\nThe urethra (pl.: urethras or urethrae) is the tube that transports semen through the penis during ejaculation and urine from the urinary bladder to the external urethral orifice of the penis or vulva in placental mammals.\nThe external urethral sphincter is a striated muscle that allows voluntary control over urination. The internal sphincter, formed by the involuntary smooth muscles lining the bladder neck and urethra, is innervated by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system and is found both in males and females.\nStructure.\nThe urethra is a fibrous and muscular tube which connects the urinary bladder to the external urethral meatus. Its length differs between the sexes, because it passes through the penis in males.\nMale.\nIn the human male, the urethra is on average long and opens at the end of the external urethral meatus.\nThe urethra is divided into four parts in men, named after the location:\nThere is inadequate data for the typical length of the male urethra; however, a study of 109 men showed an average length of 22.3\u00a0cm (SD = 2.4\u00a0cm), ranging from 15\u00a0cm to 29\u00a0cm.\nThe urethra in male placental mammals is typically longer than in females.\nFemale.\nIn the human female, the urethra is about 4\u00a0cm long, having 6\u00a0mm diameter, and exits the body between the clitoris and the vaginal opening, extending from the internal to the external urethral orifice. The meatus is located below the clitoris. It is placed behind the symphysis pubis, embedded in the anterior wall of the vagina, and its direction is obliquely downward and forward; it is slightly curved with the concavity directed forward. The proximal two-thirds of the urethra is lined by transitional epithelial cells, while the distal third is lined by stratified squamous epithelial cells.\nBetween the superior and inferior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm, the female urethra is surrounded by the urethral sphincter.\nThe urethra in female placental mammals is typically shorter than in the male.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe cells lining the urethra (the epithelium) start off as transitional cells as it exits the bladder, which are variable layers of flat to cuboidal cells that change shape depending on whether they are compressed by the contents of the urethra. Further along the urethra there are pseudostratified columnar and stratified columnar epithelia. The lining becomes multiple layers of flat cells near the end of the urethra, which is the same as the external skin around it.\nThere are small mucus-secreting urethral glands, as well as bulbo-urethral glands of Cowper, that secrete mucous acting to lubricate the urethra.\nThe urethra consists of three coats: muscular, erectile, and mucous, the muscular layer being a continuation of that of the bladder.\nBlood and nerve supply and lymphatics.\nSomatic (conscious) innervation of the external urethral sphincter is supplied by the pudendal nerve.\nDevelopment.\nIn the developing embryo, at the hind end lies a cloaca. This, over the fourth to the seventh week, divides into a urogenital sinus and the beginnings of the anal canal, with a wall forming between these two inpouchings called the urorectal septum. The urogenital sinus divides into three parts, with the middle part forming the urethra; the upper part is largest and becomes the urinary bladder, and the lower part then changes depending on the biological sex of the embryo. The cells lining the urethra (the epithelium) come from endoderm, whereas the connective tissue and smooth muscle parts are derived from mesoderm.\nAfter the third month, urethra also contributes to the development of associated structures depending on the biological sex of the embryo. In the male, the epithelium multiples to form the prostate. In the female, the upper part of the urethra forms the urethra and paraurethral glands.\nFunction.\nUrination.\nThe urethra is the vessel through which urine exits the bladder. During urination, the urethra's smooth muscle relaxes as the bladder contracts to expel urine in a pressurized stream. Following this, the urethra re-establishes muscle tone by contracting the smooth muscle layer, and the bladder returns to a relaxed, quiescent state. Urethral smooth muscle cells are mechanically coupled to each other to coordinate mechanical force and electrical signaling in an organized, unitary fashion.\nEjaculation.\nThe male urethra is the conduit for semen during orgasm. Urine is removed before ejaculation by pre-ejaculate fluid \u2013 called Cowper's fluid \u2013 from the bulbourethral gland.\nClinical significance.\nInfection of the urethra is urethritis, which often causes purulent urethral discharge. It is most often due to a sexually transmitted infection such as gonorrhoea or chlamydia, and less commonly due to other bacteria such as ureaplasma or mycoplasma; trichomonas vaginalis; or the viruses herpes simplex virus and adenovirus. Investigations such as a gram stain of the discharge might reveal the cause; nucleic acid testing based on the first urine sample passed in a day, or a swab of the urethra sent for bacterial culture and sensitivity may also be used. Treatment usually involves antibiotics that treat both gonorrhoea and chlamydia, as these often occur together. A person being treated for urethritis should not have sex until the infection is treated, so that they do not spread the infection to others. Because of this spread, which may occur during an incubation period before a person gets symptoms, there is often contact tracing so that sexual partners of an affected person can be found and treatment offered.\nCancer can also develop in the lining of the urethra. When cancer is present, the most common symptom in an affected person is blood in the urine; a physical medical examination may be otherwise normal, except in late disease. Cancer of the urethra is most often due to cancer of the cells lining the urethra, called transitional cell carcinoma, although it can more rarely occur as a squamous cell carcinoma if the type of cells lining the urethra have changed, such as due to a chronic schistosomiasis infection. Investigations performed usually include collecting a sample of urine for an inspection for malignant cells under a microscope, called cytology, as well as examination with a flexible camera through the urethra, called urethroscopy. If a malignancy is found, a biopsy will be taken, and a CT scan will be performed of other body parts (a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis) to look for additional lesions. After the cancer is staged, treatment may involve chemotherapy.\nInjury.\nPassage of kidney stones through the urethra can be painful. Damage to the urethra by kidney stones, chronic infection, cancer, or catheterisation can cause narrowing, called a urethral stricture. A retrograde urethrogram in which dye is injected into the urethra can reveal the location and structure of the narrowing. Other forms of imaging such as ultrasound, computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging may also provide further details.\nInjuries to the urethra (e.g., from a pelvic fracture)\nForeign bodies in the urethra are uncommon, but there have been medical case reports of self-inflicted injuries, a result of insertion of foreign bodies into the urethra such as an electrical wire.\nOther.\nHypospadias and epispadias are abnormal developments of the male urethra where the meatus is not at the distal end of the penis (it occurs lower than normal with hypospadias, and higher with epispadias). In a severe chordee, the urethra can develop between the penis and the scrotum.\nCatheterisation.\nA tube called a catheter can be inserted through the urethra to drain urine from the bladder, called an indwelling urinary catheter; or, to bypass the urethra, a catheter may be directly inserted through the abdominal wall into the bladder, called a suprapubic catheter. This may be to relieve or bypass an obstruction, to monitor how much urine someone produces, or because a person has difficulty urinating, for example due to a neurological cause such as multiple sclerosis. Complications that are associated with catheter insertion can include catheter-associated infections, injury to the urethra or nearby structures, or pain.\nOther animals.\nIn all mammals, with the exception of monotremes, and in both sexes, the urethra serves primarily to drain and excrete urine, which in mammals, collects in the urinary bladder and is released from there into the urethra. In addition, the closing mechanisms of the urethra, together with immunoglobulins, largely prevent germs from penetrating the inside of the body. In marsupials, the female's urethra empties into the urogenital sinus.\nHistory.\nThe word \"urethra\" comes from the Ancient Greek \u03bf\u1f50\u03c1\u03ae\u03b8\u03c1\u03b1 \u2013 \"our\u1e17thr\u0101\". The stem \"uro\" relating to urination, with the structure described as early as the time of Hippocrates. Confusingly however, at the time it was called \"ureter\". Thereafter, terms \"ureter\" and \"urethra\" were variably used to refer to each other thereafter for more than a millennium. It was only in the 1550s that anatomists such as Bartolomeo Eustacchio and Jacques Dubois began to use the terms to specifically and consistently refer to what is in modern English called the ureter and the urethra. Following this, in the 19th and 20th centuries, multiple terms relating to the structures such as urethritis and urethrography, were coined.\nKidney stones have been identified and recorded about as long as written historical records exist. The urinary tract as well as its function to drain urine from the kidneys, has been described by Galen in the second century AD. Surgery to the urethra to remove kidney stones has been described since at least the first century AD by Aulus Cornelius Celsus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32134", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32134", "title": "Urethritis", "text": "Inflammation of the urethra\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nUrethritis is the inflammation of the urethra. The most common symptoms include painful or difficult urination and urethral discharge. It is a commonly treatable condition usually caused by infection with bacteria. This bacterial infection is often sexually transmitted, but not in every instance; it can be idiopathic, for example. Some incidence of urethritis can appear asymptomatic as well.\nSymptoms and signs.\nSymptoms vary based on the cause of the diseases. For infectious causes of urethritis, symptoms may start a few weeks to several months after infection. Non-infectious causes of urethritis commonly show symptoms after a few days. Common symptoms include painful urination, continuous urge to urinate, itching, and urethral discharge. Additional symptoms vary based on sex. Men may experience blood in the urine or semen, itching, tenderness, or swelling of the penis, enlarged lymph nodes in the groin area, and/or pain with intercourse or ejaculation. Women may experience abdominal pain, pelvic pain, pain with intercourse, or vaginal discharge. Non-gonococcal urethritis typically does not have noticeable symptoms in women, however, the infection can spread to parts of the reproductive system.\nComplications.\nSerious, yet rare complications associated with \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", may include penile edema, abscessed tissue surrounding the urethra, urethral strictures such as scarring, and penile lymphangitis. If left untreated, the bacteria that cause non-gonococcal urethritis can lead to various complications. In males, complications can lead to epididymitis, reactive arthritis, conjunctivitis, skin lesions, and discharge. In females, complications can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease, chronic pelvic pain, vaginitis, mucopurulent cervicitis, and miscarriages.\nCauses.\nThe disease is classified as either gonococcal urethritis, caused by \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", or non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU), most commonly caused by \"Chlamydia trachomatis,\" which is accounted for 20-50% of routinely tested cases. NGU, sometimes called nonspecific urethritis (NSU), has both infectious and noninfectious causes.\nOther causes include:\nDiagnosis.\nUrethritis is usually diagnosed through collecting history on the individual and through a physical examination. In women, urethritis can be diagnosed with a number of tests including: urine test, blood test, vaginal culture, cytoscopy, or a nucleic acid test. Women will also have abdominal and pelvic exams to check for urethral discharge, and tenderness of the lower abdomen or urethra.\nIn men, urethritis is diagnosed by at least one of the following: mucopurulent or purulent urethral discharge on examination, \u2265 2 white blood cells per oil immersion field from a Gram stain of a urethral swab, or positive leukocyte esterase and/or \u226510 white blood cells per high power field of the first-void urine. Men who meet the criteria for urethritis commonly get nucleic acid amplification testing for \"Chlamydia trachomatis\" and \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" to determine the type of urethritis. Men will have an exam on the abdomen, bladder area, penis, and scrotum. Additionally, a digital rectal examination of the prostate may be used if rectal pain is reported or if the individual is of older age.\nPrevention.\nPrimary prevention can be accomplished by the reduction of modifiable risk factors that increase the likelihood of developing urethritis. These factors include, but are not limited to, sexual intercourse (particularly unprotected intercourse) and genital irritation from contact with tight clothing, physical activity, and various irritants such as soap, lotion and spermicides.\nBacterial infections leading to gonococcal and non-gonococcal urethritis can be prevented by:\nChlorhexidine is an antibacterial agent that covers a wide spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Rinsing with 15 ml of a 0.12% or 10 ml of 0.2% chlorhexidine solution for 30 seconds produced large and prolonged reductions in salivary bacterial counts within 7 hours of its use. One hypothesis in 2010 posed the potential use of chlorhexidine rinsing before oral sex as a prevention strategy of recurrent non-gonococcal urethritis caused by bacteria entering the urethra from oral cavity following \"insertive oral intercourse\", particularly in men. However, actual clinical studies are yet to be carried out in order to prove this hypothesis.\nTreatment.\nAntimicrobials are generally the drug of choice for gonococcal and non-gonococcal infections. The CDC in 2015 suggests using a dual therapy that consists of two antimicrobials that have different mechanisms of action would be an effective treatment strategy for urethritis and it could also potentially slow down antibiotic resistance.\nA variety of drugs may be prescribed based on the cause of urethritis:\nTreatment for both gonococcal and non-gonococcal urethritis is suggested to be given under direct observation in a clinic or healthcare facility in order to maximize compliance and effectiveness.\nFor non-medication management, proper perineal hygiene should be stressed. This includes avoiding use of vaginal deodorant sprays and proper wiping after urination and bowel movements. Sexual intercourse should be avoided at least 7 days after completion of treatment (and until symptoms resolves, if present). Past and current sexual partners should also be assessed and treated.\nIndividuals displaying persistence or recurrence of symptoms should be instructed for possible re-evaluation. Although there is no standard definition, persistent urethritis is defined as urethritis that has failed to display improvement within the first week of initial therapy. Additionally, recurrent urethritis is defined as urethritis reappearing within 6 weeks after a previous episode of non-gonococcal urethritis. If recurrent symptoms are supported by microscopic evidence of urethritis, then re-treatment is appropriate. The following treatment recommendations are limited and based on clinical experience, expert opinions and guidelines for recurrent or persistent non-gonococcal urethritis:\nAppropriate treatment for these individuals may require further referral to a urologist if symptoms persist after initial treatment.\nEpidemiology.\nUrethritis is one of the most common sexually transmitted infections found in men. Gonorrhea and chlamydia are the main pathogens causing urethritis. Health organizations break down the rate of urethritis based on its etiology. The estimated global prevalence of gonorrhoea is 0.9% in women and 0.7% in men. An estimated 87 million new infections of gonorrhoea occurred in 2016. Low-income countries have the highest prevalence of gonorrhoea. Gonorrhea is more commonly seen in males than in females and infection rates are higher in adolescents and young adults.\nThe estimated global prevalence of chlamydia, which is the most common cause of non-gonococcal urethritis, is 3.8% in women and 2.7% in men. An estimated 127 million new chlamydia cases occurred in 2016. Upper-middle income countries had the highest prevalence of chlamydia. The rate of chlamydia is around two times higher in females than in males. Rates are also higher among adolescents and young adults.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32135", "revid": "44487672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32135", "title": "United States Virgin Islands", "text": "U.S. territory in the Caribbean\nThe United States Virgin Islands, officially the Virgin Islands of the United States, are a group of Caribbean islands and a territory of the United States. The islands are geographically part of the Virgin Islands archipelago and are located in the Leeward Islands of the Lesser Antilles. The islands have a tropical climate.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands consist of the main islands of Saint Croix, Saint John, and Saint Thomas and 50 other surrounding minor islands and cays. The total land area of the territory is . The territory's capital is Charlotte Amalie on the island of St. Thomas.\nPreviously known as the Danish West Indies of the Kingdom of Denmark\u2013Norway (from 1754 to 1814) and the independent Kingdom of Denmark (from 1814 to 1917), they were sold to the United States by Denmark for $25,000,000 in the 1917 Treaty of the Danish West Indies &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) in which the United States also recognized Denmark's control over Greenland, and have since been an organized, unincorporated United States territory. The U.S. Virgin Islands are organized under the 1954 Revised Organic Act of the Virgin Islands and have since held five constitutional conventions. As with other territories in the United States, the U.S. Virgin Islands elects a delegate who can participate in debates in the House of Representatives but cannot vote.\nThe primary economic activities on the islands are tourism and services.\nEtymology.\nThe islands were named \"Santa \u00darsula y las Once Mil V\u00edrgenes\" by Christopher Columbus in 1493 after the legend of Saint Ursula and the 11,000 virgins. The name was later shortened to the \"Virgin Islands\".\nHistory.\nPre-European contact.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands were originally inhabited by the Ciboney and Arawaks, with some scholars thinking that the islands were inhabited from as early as 1000\u00a0BC. The Kalinago (Island Caribs) arrived around the mid-15th century AD.\nEarly European settlers.\nChristopher Columbus, on his second voyage in 1493, is thought to have been the first European to see the islands, giving them their current name. The Spanish later settled in 1555, with English and French settlers arriving on St.\u00a0Croix from 1625. There followed a complex period in which the islands were disputed among Spain, France, Great Britain, and the Netherlands.\nDanish period.\nDenmark\u2013Norway also took an interest in the islands, and the Danish West India Company settled on St.\u00a0Thomas in 1672 and St.\u00a0John in 1694, later buying St.\u00a0Croix from France in 1733. The islands became royal Danish colonies in 1754, named the Danish West Indian Islands (). Initially the currency was the Danish West Indian rigsdaler, replaced by the daler in 1849. The islands proved ideal for sugar plantations: sugarcane, produced by enslaved Africans, drove the islands' economy during the 18th and early 19th centuries. Other plantation crops included cotton and indigo dye. During the 17th and 18th centuries, a sizable Jewish community also began to settle on the islands.\nIn 1733, St.\u00a0John was the site of one of the first significant slave rebellions in the New World when Akan\u2013Akwamu slaves from the Gold Coast (modern Ghana) took over the island for six months. The Danish were able to defeat the enslaved Africans with help from the French in Martinique. Instead of allowing themselves to be recaptured, more than a dozen of the ringleaders shot themselves before the French forces could capture them. It is estimated that by 1775, slaves outnumbered the Danish settlers by a ratio of 8:1.\nAfter another slave rebellion occurred on St.\u00a0Croix, slavery was abolished by Governor Peter von Scholten on July\u00a03, 1848, now celebrated as Emancipation Day. Over the following years, strict labor laws were implemented several times, leading to the 1878 St.\u00a0Croix labor riot.\nWith the plantations no longer as profitable, Danish settlers began to abandon their estates, causing a significant drop in population and the overall economy. Additionally, the 1867 hurricane and earthquake and tsunami further impacted the economy. For the remainder of the period of Danish rule, the islands were not economically viable and significant transfers had to be made from the Danish state budget to the authorities in the islands.\nThe United States began to take an interest in the islands, and in 1867 a treaty to sell St.\u00a0Thomas and St.\u00a0John to the U.S. was agreed but never effected. A number of reforms aimed at reviving the islands' economy were attempted, but none had great success. A second draft treaty to sell the islands to the United States was negotiated in 1902 but was defeated in the upper house of the Danish parliament in a tie vote (because the opposition carried a 97-year-old life member into the chamber).\nThe onset of World War I brought the reform period to a close and again left the islands isolated. During the submarine warfare phases of the war, the United States, fearing that the islands might be seized by Germany as a submarine base, again approached Denmark about buying them. After a few months of negotiations, a selling price of $25\u00a0million in United States gold coin was agreed, equivalent to $614 million in 2024 US dollars. At the same time, the economics of continued possession weighed heavily on the minds of Danish decision makers, and a consensus in favor of selling emerged in the Danish parliament.\nThe Treaty of the Danish West Indies was signed on August\u00a04, 1916, with a referendum on the sale held in Denmark in December 1916 in which voters approved the decision to sell. The deal was finalized on January\u00a017, 1917, when the United States and Denmark exchanged their respective treaty ratifications.\nAmerican period.\nThe United States took possession of the islands on March\u00a031, 1917, and the territory was renamed the \"Virgin Islands of the United States\". Every year, Transfer Day is recognized as a holiday, to commemorate the acquisition of the islands by the United States. Rear Admiral James H. Oliver was the first American governor of the islands. Paul Martin Pearson, the first civilian governor, was appointed by Herbert Hoover and was inaugurated March\u00a018, 1931.\nU.S. citizenship was granted to many inhabitants of the islands in 1927 and 1932. The Danish West Indian daler was replaced by the U.S. dollar in 1934, and from 1935 to 1939 the islands were a part of the United States customs area. The 1936 Organic Act and the 1954 Revised Organic Act established the local government. Tourism began to develop following World War II, over time becoming the most important sector of the islands' economy. The Virgin Islands National Park was established in 1956 on St. John, and by 1959, after the embargo of Americans on travel to Cuba, the U.S. Virgin Islands became a popular tourist destination. In 1970, Virgin Islanders elected their first governor, Melvin H. Evans, and from 1976 the islands began work on creating their own constitution.\nWater Island, a small island to the south of St.\u00a0Thomas, was initially administered by the U.S. federal government and did not become a part of the U.S. Virgin Islands territory until 1996, when of land was transferred to the territorial government. The remaining of the island was acquired from the United States Department of the Interior in May\u00a02005 for $10, a transaction that marked the official change in jurisdiction.\nIn 1966, Hess Oil began construction on an oil refinery. Until February\u00a02012, the Hovensa plant, located on St.\u00a0Croix, was one of the world's largest petroleum refineries, refining , and contributed about 20% of the territory's GDP. The refinery ceased operation in 2012, and the facility stopped exporting petroleum products in 2014. In the final year of full refinery operations, the value of exported petroleum products was $12.7\u00a0billion (2011 fiscal year). Since refining ended, the 34-million-barrel tank farm has operated as a crude oil and petrochemical storage facility for third-party customers. The refinery's closure provoked a local economic crisis. Following the acquisition of the 1,500-acre complex by ArcLight Capital Partners, LLC, in 2016, Limetree Bay Ventures, LLC, was formed, and is currently executing a project to refurbish and restart the refinery, with a processing capability of up to .\nHurricane Hugo struck the U.S. Virgin Islands in 1989, causing catastrophic physical and economic damage, particularly on the island of St.\u00a0Croix. The territory was again struck by Hurricane Marilyn in 1995, killing eight people and causing more than $2\u00a0billion in damage. The islands were again struck by hurricanes Bertha, Georges, Lenny, and Omar in 1996, 1998, 1999, and 2008, respectively, but damage was not as severe in those storms.\nIn September\u00a02017, Category\u00a05 Hurricane Irma caused catastrophic damage, particularly to St.\u00a0John and St.\u00a0Thomas. Just two weeks later, Category 5 Hurricane Maria ravaged all three islands. Sustained winds at the Sandy Point National Wildlife Refuge on St.\u00a0Croix reached and gusted to . Even stronger winds likely occurred somewhere across the island's west end. The British Virgin Islands and the other two U.S. Virgin Islands, St.\u00a0John and St.\u00a0Thomas, were far enough northeast to avoid the worst from Maria, but were still massively impacted, with great destruction everywhere. A wind gust to was reported at St.\u00a0Thomas. Weather stations on St.\u00a0Croix recorded of rain from the hurricane, and estimates for St.\u00a0John and St.\u00a0Thomas were somewhat less. The hurricane killed two people, both in their homes: one person drowned and another was trapped by a mudslide. A third person had a fatal heart attack during the hurricane. The hurricane caused extensive and severe damage to St.\u00a0Croix. After both hurricanes, the office of Virgin Islands congresswoman Stacey Plaskett stated that 90% of buildings in the Virgin Islands were damaged or destroyed and 13,000 of those buildings had lost their roofs. The Luis Hospital suffered roof damage and flooding, but remained operational.\nGeography.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands are in the Atlantic Ocean, about east of Puerto Rico and immediately west of the British Virgin Islands. They share the Virgin Islands archipelago with the Puerto Rican Virgin Islands of Vieques and Culebra (administered by Puerto Rico), and the British Virgin Islands.\nThe territory consists of three main islands: St. Thomas, St. John, and St. Croix, as well as several dozen smaller islands. The main islands have nicknames often used by locals: \"Twin City\" (St. Croix), \"Rock City\" (St. Thomas), and \"Love City\" (St. John). The combined land area of the islands is roughly twice the size of Washington, D.C.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands are known for their white sand beaches, including Magens Bay and Trunk Bay, and deepwater harbors along the Anegada Passage, including Charlotte Amalie (the capital) and Christiansted. Like most Caribbean islands, most of the islands of the Virgin Islands, including St. Thomas and St. John, are volcanic in origin and hilly. The highest point is Crown Mountain on St. Thomas at . The easternmost point of the United States is Point Udall (U.S. Virgin Islands) on St. Croix.\nSt. Croix, the largest of the U.S. Virgin Islands, lies to the south and has a flatter terrain because of its coral origin. The National Park Service manages more than half of St. John, nearly all of Hassel Island, and many acres of coral reef.\nThere are several national park sites, such as the Virgin Islands National Park, Virgin Islands Coral Reef National Monument, Buck Island Reef National Monument, Christiansted National Historic Site, and Salt River Bay National Historical Park and Ecological Preserve.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands lie on the boundary of the North American Plate and the Caribbean Plate. Natural hazards include earthquakes, hurricanes and tsunamis.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands contain the Leeward Islands moist forests and Leeward Islands xeric scrub terrestrial ecoregions.\nClimate.\nThe United States Virgin Islands experience a tropical climate, with little seasonal change throughout the year. Rainfall is concentrated in the high-sun period (May through October), while in the winter the northeast trade winds prevail. Summer and winter high temperatures differ by or less on average.\nPolitics and government.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands are an organized, unincorporated United States territory. Although those born on the islands are U.S. citizens, U.S. Virgin Islanders residing in the territory are ineligible to vote for the president of the United States. People born in the U.S. Virgin Islands derive their U.S. citizenship from congressional statute.\nThe U.S. Democratic and Republican parties allow U.S. Virgin Islands citizens to vote in their presidential primary elections for delegates to the respective national conventions. The main political parties in the U.S. Virgin Islands themselves are the Democratic Party of the Virgin Islands, the Independent Citizens Movement, and the Republican Party of the Virgin Islands. Additional candidates run as independents.\nAt the national level, the U.S. Virgin Islands elect a delegate to Congress from their at-large . The elected delegate, while able to vote in committee, cannot participate in floor votes. The current House of Representatives delegate is Stacey Plaskett, a Democrat. Like other territories, the U.S. Virgin Islands does not have U.S. senators.\nAt the territorial level, fifteen senators\u2014seven from the district of St.\u00a0Croix, seven from the district of St.\u00a0Thomas and St.\u00a0John, and one senator at large who must be a resident of St.\u00a0John\u2014are elected for two-year terms to the unicameral Virgin Islands legislature. There is no limit as to the number of terms they can serve.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands have elected a territorial governor every four years since 1970. Previous governors were appointed by the president of the United States.\nLegal system.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands have a Superior Court and Supreme Court. The District Court of the Virgin Islands is responsible for cases brought under federal law, and the U.S. attorney for the District of the Virgin Islands can bring federal criminal cases there. The Superior Court is responsible for hearing cases under U.S. Virgin Islands law at the trial level, and the Supreme Court is responsible for appeals from the Superior Court for all appeals filed on or after January\u00a029, 2007. (Appeals filed prior to that date were heard by the Appellate Division of the District Court.) Appeals from the federal District Court are heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. District Court judges are appointed by the U.S. president, while Superior Court and Supreme Court judges are appointed by the governor.\nAs of 2019, the USVI courts apply both American common law and the 2019 US Virgin Islands Code as passed by the territorial legislature. Because the USVI is not a state and Congress has not determined otherwise, the federal district court is an Article IV tribunal, subject to the authority of the United States secretary of the interior and without lifetime appointment for judges. Elements of Danish law have all been repealed, except for two 1914 laws having to do with customs and ship duties for St. Thomas and St. John.\nAttorneys who practice law in the U.S. Virgin Islands must be admitted to the Virgin Islands Bar through either a bar exam or meeting certain requirements for admission on the basis of experience in another reciprocal jurisdiction. The bar exam consists of a standard American Bar Association multistate exam and a local law essay exam. As in the mainland United States, attorneys practice in a variety of settings including private law firms, government, or corporate offices.\nConstitution.\nOn October 21, 1976, President Gerald Ford signed Pub. L.\u00a0 authorizing the people of the United States Virgin Islands to organize a government pursuant to a constitution, which would be automatically approved if Congress did not act within 60 days.\nIn 2004, an act was passed by the legislature of the Virgin Islands calling for a fifth constitutional convention, and 30 delegates to the convention were elected in 2007. On May\u00a026, 2009, the convention adopted a proposed Constitution of the Virgin Islands. However, in June 2009, Governor John de Jongh Jr. rejected the resulting constitutional draft, saying the terms of the document would \"violate federal law, fail to defer to federal sovereignty and disregard basic civil rights\". A lawsuit filed by members of the convention to force Governor de Jongh to forward the document to President Barack Obama was ultimately successful. President Obama forwarded the proposal to Congress in May 2010, along with a report noting concerns raised by the United States Department of Justice that the powers sought exceeded what would be considered allowable under territorial status and restating the issues noted by Governor de Jongh. A U.S. Congressional resolution disapproving of the proposed constitution and requesting that the Fifth Constitutional Convention reconvene to consider changes to address these issues was signed into law by President Obama on June 30, 2010.\nMonths later, a federal lawsuit was filed in the federal District Court of the Virgin Islands. The lawsuit claimed that the United States had to provide U.S. Virgin Islanders with the ability to be represented in Congress and vote for U.S. president. It alleged that racial discrimination present in the all-white and segregated U.S. Congress of 1917 was the impetus to deny the right to vote to a majority nonwhite constituency. The case was ultimately dismissed on August\u00a016, 2012.\nThe Fifth Constitutional Convention of the U.S. Virgin Islands met in October 2012 but was not able to produce a revised constitution before its October\u00a031 deadline.\nOn November 3, 2020, the U.S. Virgin Islands held a referendum on whether to convene a sixth constitutional convention. The proposal was approved with nearly 72% voting in favor.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAdministratively, the U.S. Virgin Islands are divided into two districts: the St.\u00a0Thomas and St.\u00a0John district, and the St.\u00a0Croix district. However, the U.S. Census Bureau divides each of the three main islands into three separate statistical entities (which are further divided into 20 subdistricts). Below is the U.S. Census Bureau's division model.\nEach of the three main islands of the U.S. Virgin Islands is counted as a county equivalent by the U.S. Census Bureau, with the following FIPS codes: 78010 for St.\u00a0Croix, 78020 for St.\u00a0John, and 78030 for St.\u00a0Thomas.\nWhile a Danish possession, the islands were divided into \"quarters\" (five on St. John and nine on St. Croix), which were further divided into many dozens of \"estates\". Estate names are still used to write addresses; estates and quarters are used in describing real estate, especially on St.\u00a0John and St. Croix. More densely populated towns such as Frederiksted and Christiansted on St. Croix were historically referred to as \"districts\", in contrast to the surrounding plantation land.\nAll historic towns in the U.S. Virgin Islands meet all the following criteria:\n* Charlotte Amalie - The town\u2019s Main Street is named \"Dronningens Gade\" (Queen\u2019s Street) in honor of the same queen.\n* Christiansted (Christian Place) - Its Main Street is named King's Street (historically called \"Kongens Gade\"), reflecting the Danish monarchy, King Christian VI.\n* Frederiksted (Frederik Place) - Its Main Street is named King's Street (historically called \"Kongens Gade\"), reflecting the Danish monarchy, King Frederik V.\nIn contrast to the historical towns of the U.S. Virgin Islands, Census-Designated Places (CDPs) are modern statistical areas defined by the U.S. Census Bureau for demographic purposes. While CDPs in the U.S. Virgin Islands may have commercial hubs and residential developments, they do not necessarily have the same historical or administrative significance as the historical towns. CDPs in the U.S. Virgin Islands often represent suburban residential and commercial areas that grew in population and importance over time but were not formally established as towns during the Danish colonial period.\nPolitical status.\nA 1993 referendum on status attracted only 31.4% turnout, and so its results (in favor of the status quo) were considered void. No further status referendums have been scheduled since.\nThe territory is classified by the United Nations as a non-self-governing territory. In 2016, the United Nations' Special Committee on Decolonization recommended to the UN's General Assembly that this larger body should \"actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of the United States Virgin Islands with their inalienable right to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination\".\nIn March 2023, a poll conducted by Suffolk University among USVI residents revealed 63% supported the territory becoming a U.S. state while 23% opposed. Respondents were also asked about becoming an independent country, which 58% rejected the idea to 19% who agreed.\nLaw enforcement.\nLaw enforcement services are provided by the United States Virgin Islands Police Department (USVIPD).\nMilitary.\nDefense is the responsibility of the United States. There are some military facilities and personnel on the islands, supported by the U.S. government:\nAlthough a public airport, Henry E. Rohlsen Airport has serviced aircraft from the United States Air Force, as well as the United States Army.\nEconomy.\nTourism is the Islands' biggest industry; with 2.5\u20133 million annual visitors, the sector is responsible for about 60% of the GDP. Other major sectors are the public sector, some limited agriculture, and small scale manufacturing, most notably rum production.\nA 2012 economic report from the U.S. Census Bureau indicated a total of 2,414 business establishments generating $6.8 billion in sales, employing 32,465 people and paying $1.1 billion in payroll per year. Between 2007 and 2012, sales declined by $12.6 billion, or 64.9 percent. (In 2007, total sales were $19.5 billion and the number employed was 35,300.)\nAccording to a report on the first half of 2016 by the VI Bureau of Economic Research, the unemployment rate was 11.5 percent. In May 2016 the islands' Bureau of Economic Research indicated that there were 37,613 non-agricultural wage and salary jobs in the islands. This report states that the \"leisure and hospitality sector\" employed an average of 7,333 people. The retail trade sector, which also serves many tourists, averaged another 5,913 jobs. Other categories which also include some tourism jobs include arts and entertainment (792 jobs), accommodation and food (6,541 jobs), accommodation (3,755 jobs), and food services and drink (2,766 jobs). A large percentage of the 37,613 non-farm workers are employed in dealing with tourists. Serving the local population is also part of the role of these sectors.\nIn a May 2016 report, some 11,000 people were categorized as being involved in some aspect of agriculture in the first half of 2016, but this category makes up a small part of the total economy. At that time, there were approximately 607 manufacturing jobs and 1,487 natural resource and construction jobs. The single largest employer was the government. In mid-February 2017, the USVI was facing a financial crisis due to a very high debt level of $2 billion and a structural budget deficit of $110 million. Since January 2017, the U.S. Virgin Islands government has been unable to raise financing from the bond market at favorable interest rates, and as of June 2019 have not issued any new bonds since then.\nPersonal income.\nThe median income for a household in the territory was $40,408, and the median income for a family was $52,000 according to the 2020 census. Males had a median income of $41,747 versus $37,052 for females. The per capita income for the territory was $26,897. The average private sector salary was $34,088 and the average public sector salary was $52,572. About 28.7% of families and 32.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 41.7% of those less than 18 years old and 29.8% of those 65 or more years old. Nearly 70% of adults had at least a high school diploma and 19.2% had a bachelor's degree or higher.\nFinancial challenges.\nAnalysts reviewing the economy often point to the closure of the HOVENSA oil refinery, the islands' largest private sector employer, in early 2012 as having a major negative impact on the territory's economy. In late 2013, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Research and Statistics Group pointed out that manufacturing employment dropped by 50% in May 2012 and by another 4% by November 2012, and that the GDP fell by 13%, \"mainly due to an 80% drop-off in exports (mostly refined petroleum)\". On the other hand, tourism and some other service industries were growing. As well, the 2010 census indicated that a relatively high share of the adult population is in the labor force: 66%, versus 65% on the mainland and well above 50% in Puerto Rico.\nA May 2016 report by Bloomberg expressed concern about the islands' tax-supported debt load. By January 23, 2017, this had increased to $2 billion. That translated to a per capita debt of $19,000, which was higher than the per capita debt in Puerto Rico which was undergoing a severe financial crisis at the time. A Debtwire analyst writing in \"Forbes\" indicated that nothing short of a miracle would prevent a financial collapse. Another area of concern was the structural budget deficit which was at $110 million in mid February 2017. The government instituted a new law in March 2017 with new or increased taxes on rum, beer, tobacco products and sugary drinks, as well as internet purchases and timeshare unit owners.\nTourism.\nTourism, trade, and other service-oriented industries are the primary economic activities, accounting for nearly 60% of the GDP. Approximately 2.5 million tourists per year visit, most arriving on cruise ships. Such visitors do not spend large amounts of money ($146.70 each on average) but as a group, they contributed $339.8 million to the economy in 2012. Euromonitor indicates that over 50% of the workforce is employed in some tourism-related work.\nAdditionally, the islands frequently are a starting point for private yacht charters to the neighboring British Virgin Islands.\nOther sectors.\nThe manufacturing sector consists of mainly rum distilling. The agricultural sector is small, with most food being imported. International business and services in the financial sector are a small but growing component of the economy. Most energy is also generated from imported oil, leading to electricity costs four to five times higher than the U.S. mainland. The Virgin Islands were the highest oil consumers per capita in the world in 2007. The Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority also uses imported energy to operate its desalination facilities to provide fresh water.\nGovernment.\nThe \"CIA World Factbook\" lists the value of federal programs and grants\u00a0\u2014 $241.4 million in 2013, 19.7% of the territory's total revenues\u00a0\u2014 and that \"the economy remains relatively diversified. Along with the tourist industry, it appears that rum exports, trade, and services will be major income sources in future years\".\nTax and trade.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands are an independent customs territory from the mainland United States and operate largely as a free port. U.S. citizens thus do not have to clear customs when arriving in the U.S. Virgin Islands, but do when traveling to the mainland. Local residents are not subject to US federal income taxes on U.S. Virgin Islands source income; they pay taxes to the territory equal to what their federal taxes would be if they lived in a state.\nIn 2014, the territory is considered as a tax haven. In 2018, the EU added it on the European Union tax haven blacklist.\nTransport and communications.\nThe Henry E. Rohlsen International Airport serves St. Croix and the Cyril E. King Airport serves St. Thomas and St. John.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands is the only U.S. jurisdiction that drives on the left. This was inherited from what was then-current practice on the islands at the time of the 1917 transfer of the territory to the United States from Denmark. However, because most cars in the territory are imported from the mainland United States, the cars in the territory are left-hand drive. However, not all U.S. vehicle regulations are in force, and there are vehicles on the road that cannot be sold in the mainland U.S. Additionally, headlights use the U.S. pattern which casts light to the right, tending to blind oncoming drivers. Traffic signals are located on the opposite side of the road than they are in the U.S. mainland, and many standard road signs have been altered to fit the left-side driving.\nPublic transportation.\nThe VITRAN (Virgin Island Public Transit) system is a comprehensive public transportation system serving the U.S. Virgin Islands. It provides accessible public transportation across the major islands of St. Croix, St. John and St. Thomas. The system encompasses various modes of transportation, including buses, paratransit services and ferries connecting major towns, tourist destinations, transportation hubs, and islands.\nMail Service.\nMail service is handled by the United States Postal Service, using the two-character state code \"VI\" for domestic mail delivery.\nZIP codes are in the 008xx range.\nAs of \u00a02010[ [update]], specifically assigned codes include 00801\u201300805 (St Thomas),\n00820\u201300824 (Christiansted),\n00830\u201300831 (St. John),\n00840\u201300841 (Frederiksted),\nand 00850\u201300851 (Kingshill).\nThe islands are part of the North American Numbering Plan, using area code 340, and island residents and visitors are able to call most toll-free U.S. numbers.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands are located in the Atlantic Standard Time zone and do not participate in daylight saving time. When the mainland United States is on standard time, the U.S. Virgin Islands are one hour ahead of Eastern Standard Time. When the mainland United States is on daylight saving time, Eastern Daylight Time is the same as Atlantic Standard Time.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2020, the census put the population of the U.S. Virgin Islands at 87,146, a decline of 18,989 (-18.1%) from 2010.\nIn 2020, there were 39,642 households, out of which 24.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 27.8% were married couples living together, 20.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 45.1% were non-families. 40.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.14 and the average family size was 2.98.\nIn the territory, the population in 2020 was distributed with 19.6% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 27.1% from 25 to 44, 24.9% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and up, there were 87.7 males. The annual population growth is \u22120.12%.\nThe literacy rate for the adult population was 94.9% in 2010.\nEthnic groups.\nThe racial makeup of the U.S. Virgin Islands as of the 2020 United States census:\nMany residents can trace their ancestry to other Caribbean islands, especially Puerto Rico and the Lesser Antilles. The territory is largely Afro-Caribbean in origin.\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the predominant language. As of 2010, Spanish is spoken by 17.2% of the population age five and older, French or French Creole is spoken by 8.6%, and other languages are spoken by 2.5%.\nVirgin Islands Creole English, an English-based creole locally known as \"dialect\", is spoken in informal situations. The form of Virgin Islands Creole spoken on St. Croix, known as \"Crucian\", is slightly different from that spoken on St. Thomas and St. John. Because the U.S. Virgin Islands are home to thousands of immigrants from across the Caribbean, Spanish and various French creole languages are also widely spoken. Spanish is mostly spoken by Puerto Ricans in St. Croix; Puerto Rican migration was prevalent in the 1930s, '40s and '50s, when many Puerto Ricans relocated to St. Croix for work after the collapse of the sugar industry. In addition, the U.S. Navy purchase of two-thirds of the nearby Puerto Rican island of Vieques during World War II resulted in the displacement of thousands of \"Viequenses\", many of whom relocated to St. Croix because of its similar size and geography. Puerto Ricans in St. Croix, most of whom have lived on the island for more than a generation, have kept their culture alive while integrating it into the native Crucian culture and society. For example, in informal situations, many Puerto Ricans in St. Croix speak a unique Spanglish-like combination of Puerto Rican Spanish and the local Crucian dialect of creole English.\nEnglish has been the predominant language since 1917, when the islands were transferred from Denmark to the United States. Under Danish rule, the official language was Danish, but it was solely the language of administration and spoken by Danes, a tiny minority of the overall population that primarily occupied administrative roles in colonial Danish West Indian society. Place names and surnames of Denmark\u2013Norway origin are still common. Although the U.S. Virgin Islands was a Danish possession during most of its colonial history, Danish never was a spoken language among the populace, black or non-Danish white, as the majority of plantation and slave owners were of Dutch, English, Scottish, Irish, or Spanish descent.\nEven during Danish ownership, Dutch, another Germanic language like Danish, was more common, at least during some of those 245 years, specifically on St. Thomas and St. John, where the majority of the European settlers were Dutch. In St. Croix, English was the dominant language. St. Croix was owned by the French until 1733 when the island was sold to the Danish West Indian and Guinea Company. By 1741, there were five times as many English on the island as Danes. English Creole emerged on St. Croix more so than the Dutch Creole, which was more popular on St. Thomas and St. John. Negerhollands, a Dutch-based creole language, was formerly spoken on St. John, St. Croix, and St. Thomas. The creole emerged on plantations in the late 17th century or early 18th century; but its prevalence began to decline in the early-mid 19th century as the usage of English and Virgin Islands Creole English increased. The last speaker of Negerhollands died in 1987, and the language is now considered extinct. Other languages spoken in the Danish West Indies included Irish, Scots, Spanish, and French, as well as Virgin Islands English Creole.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristianity is the dominant religion in the U.S. Virgin Islands. According to Pew Research Center, 94.8% of the population was Christian in 2010. The largest Christian denominations in the 2010 census were Baptist, Catholic, and Episcopal.\nOwing to both their Danish past and American present, Protestantism on the islands has long been widespread. It was first introduced when Lutheranism was brought to the islands in the Danish colonization. The Danish crown also allowed other religious traditions on the islands including Anglicanism, Catholicism, the Moravian Church and other Protestant groups. Historically, St. Thomas and St. Croix are known for missionary efforts undertaken by the Moravian missionaries. They were allowed on the islands by the Danish royal court, but came under scrutiny when they denounced slavery. A number of neo-Protestant traditions including Pentecostalism, various evangelical Protestants and the Seventh-day Adventists arrived later with the switch of allegiance from Denmark to the United States.\nThere is also a strong Catholic presence. Rastafari is also prevalent. St. Thomas is home to one of the oldest Jewish communities in the Western Hemisphere, as Sephardi Jews began to settle the island in the 18th century as traders and merchants. The St. Thomas Synagogue in Charlotte Amalie is the second-oldest synagogue on American soil, and oldest in terms of continuous usage. Hinduism and Islam are practiced by the Indo-Caribbean and Indian (mostly Sindhi Indian) population. There is one Hindu temple in La Grande Princesse, St. Croix, and another in Frenchman's Bay, St. Thomas. There is also a Buddhist temple located on the island of St. Thomas.\nHealth.\nIn 2010, the territory's average life expectancy was 79.61 years. It was 76.57 years for men and 82.83 for women.\nEducation.\nThe United States Virgin Islands Department of Education serves as the territory's education agency, and has two school districts: St. Thomas-St. John School District and St. Croix School District.\nThe University of the Virgin Islands provides higher education leading to associate's, bachelor's, master's and PhD degrees, with campuses on St. Thomas and St. Croix.\nCulture.\nThe culture of the Virgin Islands reflects the various people that have inhabited the present-day U.S. Virgin Islands and British Virgin Islands, which despite their political separation have kept close cultural ties. The culture derives chiefly from West African, European and American traditions, in addition to the influences from the immigrants from the Arab world, India and other Caribbean islands. The islands were strongly influenced by the British, Dutch, French and Danish during the long periods the islands were under these powers.\nMedia.\nThe islands have a number of AM and FM radio stations (mostly on St. Thomas and St. Croix) broadcasting music, religious, and news programming. (See List of radio stations in US Territories.) Full- and low-power television stations are split between St. Thomas and St. Croix. (See List of television stations in the U.S. Virgin Islands.) Newspapers include:\nLibraries.\nSoon after becoming a US territory in 1917, the first public library was formally accepted as a gift from the Junior Red Cross. The St. Thomas Library opened in December 1920. The library occupied rented quarters and frequently moved. The Carnegie Corporation of New York provided grant funding from 1929 through 1933 to the US Virgin Islands for the development of library services by sending librarians, funding for books, and training for the supervising librarian.\nAn early and enduring pioneer for libraries in the Virgin Islands was Enid M. Baa. Ms. Baa was one of the four first high school graduates in St. Thomas and participated in the establishment of the first high school library. Soon after her graduation, Ms. Baa was selected by the Carnegie Foundation and Governor Pearson for a scholarship as a special student to the Graduate Library School at Hampton Institute. After graduating from the program in 1933, Ms. Baa returned to the Virgin Islands to be appointed by Governor Pearson as Supervising Librarian for the Virgin Islands. She was the first woman to hold a cabinet-level office in the Virgin Islands government. In 1943, Ms. Baa returned to the US to complete her studies at Columbia University and worked in the library field in the US. Among the positions she held include Head of Serial Cataloging Section at the United Nations Library and Specialist in Cataloging of Spanish or Portuguese materials at the New York Public Library. In 1954, Ms. Baa was appointed Director of Libraries and Museums under Governor Archibald Alexander. She received the John Jay Whitney Foundation Fellowship in 1955 on the basis of her contribution to the preservation of the Sephardic Jewish Records of the Virgin Islands and the re-indexing of these records in a card file. The family records of US senator Judah P. Benjamin, artist Camille Pissarro, medical pioneer Jacob Da Costa, and others can be found in the documents.\nThe US Virgin Islands Public Library System currently consists of five libraries. Three in St. Croix: Athalie McFarlane Peterson Public Library in Frederiksted, and the Regional Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped and the Florence Augusta Williams Public Library, both in Christiansted. One in St. John, Elaine Ione Sprauve Public Library and Museum of Cultural Arts in Cruz Bay. While St. Thomas has two: Charles Wesley Turnbull Regional Public Library in Estate Tutu and Enid M. Baa Public Library and Archives in Charlotte Amalie, the Enid M. Baa Library is currently closed to the public and used for administrative purposes. The US Virgin Island Public Library System is administered by the USVI Department of Planning and Natural Resources' Division of Libraries, Archives, and Museums.\nThe US Virgin Islands Public Library System provides free reader services to adults, children, young adults, and seniors. Collections include: adult fiction and non-fiction; children's fiction and non-fiction; reference materials, magazines, daily newspapers, and DVDs. The library system also houses original and microfilm collections of Virgin Islands Archives, records, newspapers and other materials. The Virgin Islands Automated Library System provides a database and computerized support network for books, reading materials and patron records for the library and archives collections. The viNGN Public Computer Centers provide patrons with free access to high-speed connections to access the Internet and the World Wide Web.\nPublic holidays.\nVirgin Islands government employees are also given administrative leave for St. Croix carnival events in January and St. Thomas carnival events in April/May.\nSports.\nBasketball is one of the popular sports in the U.S. Virgin Islands. There is currently one player in the NBA from the U.S. Virgin Islands, 2019 NBA draft pick Nicolas Claxton, who plays for the Brooklyn Nets. NBA Hall-of-Famer and five-time champion Tim Duncan of the San Antonio Spurs is also a native of the U.S. Virgin Islands. Consensus 2022 NCAA women's player of the year and USA national team member Aliyah Boston (University of South Carolina) was born and raised in St. Thomas.\nIn cricket, U.S. Virgin Islanders are eligible to compete internationally as part of the West Indies. The most recent U.S. Virgin Islander to be named to the West Indies squad is Hayden Walsh Jr., who was born in St. Croix. In regional Caribbean competitions, U.S. Virgin Islanders compete in List A and first-class cricket as part of the Leeward Islands cricket team. Currently, the U.S. Virgin Islands are not represented in Caribbean Twenty20 leagues.\nThere are also a men's and women's national soccer teams.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32137", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32137", "title": "Geography of the United States Virgin Islands", "text": " \nThe United States Virgin Islands are a group of several dozen islands and cays located in the Caribbean, about southeast of Florida, north of Venezuela, east of Puerto Rico, and immediately west and south of the British Virgin Islands.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands lie near the boundary of the North American Plate and the Caribbean Plate, roughly south of the Puerto Rico Trench and near the Anegada Passage, a key shipping lane. Together with the British Virgin Islands, Vieques, and Culebra, they make up the Virgin Islands archipelago.\nThe hilly, volcanic islands of Saint Thomas () and Saint John () border the North Atlantic Ocean to the north and the Caribbean Sea to the south. The larger island of Saint Croix () lies to the south across the Virgin Islands Trough and is entirely in the Caribbean Sea.\nCharlotte Amalie, Saint Thomas is one of the best natural, deepwater harbors in the Caribbean. The Islands have many well-known beaches, including Magens Bay (Saint Thomas) and Trunk Bay (Saint John), and coral reefs, including the Virgin Islands Coral Reef National Monument and the Buck Island Reef National Monument. More than half of Saint John and nearly all of Hassel Island are owned by the U.S. National Park Service.\nStatistics.\nGeographic coordinates (capital Charlotte Amalie): \nIslands:\nSaint Croix, Saint Thomas, Saint John, Water Island, many other islands\nArea:\n\"total:\" 738 sq mi (1,910\u00a0km\u00b2)\n\"land:\" 134 sq mi (346\u00a0km\u00b2)\n\"water:\" 604 sq mi (1,564\u00a0km\u00b2)\n\"Comparative area\": twice the size of the District of Columbia\nMaritime claims:\n\"exclusive economic zone:\" \n\"territorial sea:\" \nLand use:\n\"arable land:\" 5.71%\n\"permanent crops:\" 2.86%\n\"other:\" 91.43% (2005)\nIrrigated land:\n1\u00a0km2\nNatural hazards:frequent and severe droughts and floods; occasional earthquakes; rare tsunamis\nEnvironment\u2014current issues:\nlack of natural freshwater resources\nTerrain.\nThe islands' terrain is mostly hilly to rugged and mountainous with little level land. Crown Mountain, on Saint Thomas, is the highest point in the U.S. Virgin Islands at 1,555\u00a0ft (474 m). Sea level is the lowest point. It has a coastline of . The territory is known for its beaches and plentiful sunshine.\nClimate.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands enjoy a tropical climate, moderated by easterly trade winds and with relatively low humidity. Temperatures vary little throughout the year.\nIn the capital, Charlotte Amalie, typical daily maximum temperatures are around in the summer and in the winter. Typical daily minimum temperatures are around in the summer and in the winter. Water temperatures are around in the summer and in the winter. Rainfall averages about per year. Rainfall can be quite variable, but the wettest months on average are September to November and the driest months on average are February and March.\nThe islands are subject to tropical storms and hurricanes, with the hurricane season running from June to November. In recent history, substantial damage was caused by Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria in 2017, Hurricane Hugo in 1989 and Hurricane Marilyn in 1995. The islands were also struck by Hurricane Bertha in 1996, Hurricane Georges in 1998, Hurricane Lenny in 1999, Tropical Storm Jeanne in 2004, Hurricane Omar in 2008, Hurricane Earl in 2010, Tropical Storm Otto in 2010, and Tropical Storm Tomas in 2010, but damage was less severe in those storms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32138", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32138", "title": "Demographics of the United States Virgin Islands", "text": " \nThis is a demography of the population of the United States Virgin Islands including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nAccording to the 2020 U.S. census, the population of the U.S. Virgin Islands was 87,146, a decrease from 106,405 in 2010. In 2020, the median age was 45.9 years, compared to 39.2 years in 2010.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (Census 01.IV.2010) (including armed forces stationed in the area): \nVital statistics.\nThe infant mortality rate as of 2010 is 7.4 deaths/1,000 live births: 8.14 deaths/1,000 live births for males and 6.63 deaths/1,000 live births for females. At birth, life expectancy is 79.61 years (76.57 for males, 82.83 for females or girls).\nPlace of birth.\nAs of the 2020 census: 47.0% of the population were born in the U.S. Virgin Islands; 15.5% were born in the United States; 2.6% were born in other U.S. Island area or Puerto Rico; and 34.8% were born elsewhere. Of those born elsewhere: 90.7% were born in the Caribbean; 3.4% were born in Asia; 2.4% were born in Europe; 2.0% were born in Central America; and 1.4% were born elsewhere.\nReligion.\nIn terms of religion:\nLanguage.\nAs of 2020, the following are the language statistics for the U.S. Virgin Islands (for the population 5 years and over in households):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32139", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32139", "title": "Politics of the United States Virgin Islands", "text": " \nPolitics of the United States Virgin Islands takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic dependency, whereby the governor is the head of the territory's government, and of a multi-party system. United States Virgin Islands are an unincorporated and organized territory of the United States, administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the United States Department of the Interior. Executive power is exercised by the local government of the Virgin Islands. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nVirgin Islands residents are U.S. citizens but the territory has no electoral votes to cast for the president or vice president of the U.S. The territory participates in the nominating processes (caucuses). Citizens cannot elect voting members of Congress. However, in the U.S. House of Representatives, they are represented by a delegate, who can vote in congressional committees but not in the House itself. Such delegates can speak on the U.S. House floor, introduce bills and offer amendments but cannot vote during business as the Committee of the Whole or on final passage of legislation. The USVI has been allowed to have non-voting representation since 1972. \nFederal representation.\nVirgin Islands residents can vote fully in all elections if they become a resident of one of the 50 U.S. states. If residents of one of the 50 states become residents of the Virgin Islands, they can no longer vote for President or for voting members of Congress.\nThe voting rights of Virgin Islanders have been the subject of litigation. A federal lawsuit was filed in 2011 in the District Court of the Virgin Islands and was subsequently appealed to the Washington, D.C., Circuit Court of Appeals, to provide Virgin Islanders with the fundamental right to be represented in Congress and vote for U.S. President. A similar lawsuit was filed in 2020.\nLaw.\nThe Revised Organic Act of the Virgin Islands of 1954 is the current Organic Act defining the government of the United States Virgin Islands, which were acquired by the United States through the Treaty of the Danish West Indies of 1916. It replaced the Organic Act of the Virgin Islands of 1936 and earlier temporary provisions.\nThe Virgin Islands Elective Governor Act made the governor an elected office. Further amendments in 1984 removed the right to indictment for certain crimes and the jurisdiction of the admiralty courts.\nThere have been several attempts at a constitution. The most recent attempt was the Fifth Constitutional Convention of the U.S. Virgin Islands which passed a proposed constitution in May 2009 but was rejected by Congress in June 2010.\nExecutive branch.\nThe governor and the lieutenant governor are elected on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Virgin Islands's territorial legislature is the 15-member Legislature of the Virgin Islands. The body is unicameral and comprises seven senators from the district of Saint Croix, seven senators from the district of Saint Thomas and Saint John, and one senator at-large (who must be a resident of Saint John). They are elected for a two-year term to the territorial legislature. There is no limit as to the number of terms they can serve.\nJudicial branch.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands has a District Court, a Supreme Court and a Superior Court.\nJudges on the District Court are appointed by the president for ten year terms, subject to Senate confirmation. They may serve more than one term. This is a federal court, established in 1936, with jurisdiction over the US Virgin Islands, with diversity jurisdiction and bankruptcy jurisdiction. Appeals of this court's decisions are heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. One courthouse is located in Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas, and one is in Christiansted, St. Croix.\nJudges of the USVI Supreme Court and Superior Court are appointed by the governor and confirmed by the legislative body.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe US Virgin Islands have no local governments, the Census Bureau divides them into three county equivalents: Saint Croix, Saint John, and Saint Thomas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32140", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32140", "title": "Economy of the United States Virgin Islands", "text": "The economy of the United States Virgin Islands is primarily dependent upon tourism, trade, and other services, accounting for nearly 60% of the Virgin Island's GDP and about half of total civilian employment. Close to two million tourists per year visit the islands. The government is the single largest employer. The agriculture sector is small, with most food being imported. The manufacturing sector consists of rum distilling, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and watch assembly. Rum production is significant. Shipments during a six-month period of fiscal year 2016 totaled 8,136.6 million proof gallons.\nIn mid February 2017, the USVI was facing a financial crisis due to a very high debt level of $2 billion and a structural budget deficit of $110 million. The government introduced a \"sin tax\" bill that would introduce or increase taxes on rum, beer, tobacco products and sugary drinks, as well as internet purchases and timeshare unit owners. Governor Kenneth Mapp issued an order that restricted the use of government-owned vehicles, put a freeze on non-essential hiring, suspended wage negotiations, and froze non-essential travel paid for by the GVI. He also suspended negotiated wage increases, including those ordered by the U.S. Appeals Court.\nThis US territory uses US currency and its fiscal year is 1 October - 30 September.\nHistory.\nDuring the slave days of what was then the Danish West Indies, the islands cultivated cash crops to earn money. On July 3, 1848, after a rebellion the previous day, the governor Peter von Scholten granted the slaves emancipation, which was against the wishes of Danish Crown. Although some plantation owners refused to accept the abolition, some 5,000 blacks were freed while another 17,000 remained enslaved. In that era, slaves labored mainly on sugar plantations. Other crops included cotton and indigo. Over the following years, strict labor laws were implemented several times, leading planters to abandon their estates, causing a significant drop in population and the overall economy. In the late 1800, numerous natural disasters added to worsen the situation.\nAfter the US purchased the islands from Denmark in 1917, the situation began to improve, though very slowly. By 1970, the economy had been boosted due to tourism and manufacturing. Tourism started to increase more significantly in the 1990s. New hotels, restaurants, and shops began to be built; this led to more jobs and an influx of immigrants which increased the population.\nThe HOVENSA oil refinery stopped exporting petroleum products in 2014. In the final\nyear of full refinery operations, the value of exported petroleum products was $12.7 billion (2011 fiscal year).\nThe islands also receive cover-over revenues, which generated approximately $100 million for the Virgin Islands in 2008. Federal excise taxes collected on rum and other distilled spirits are rebated, or covered over, to the government of the Virgin Islands. In 2013, federal programs and grants of $241.4 million contributed 19.7% of the territory's total revenues.\nMajor banks have branches on St. Thomas, St. John and St. Croix. These include Citibank, Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, The Bank of Nova Scotia, First Bank and Virgin Islands Community Bank.\nMajor airlines travel to and from St. Thomas and St. Croix.\nTourism.\nThe tourism industry is the main industry, generating a substantial portion of the GDP and much of the islands' employment. Nearly 3 million tourists per year visit (2013 data), most arriving on cruise ships. Some 93 percent of tourists are from other areas of the US.\nAn industry (World Travel &amp; Tourism Council) publication indicates that money spent by foreign visitors totaled $1,318.7 million. According to this report, Travel &amp; Tourism generated 5,000 jobs directly in 2014, being 10.8% of total employment and 11.3 percent of the GDP. (This includes employment by hotels, travel agents, airlines and other passenger transportation services. It also includes the activities of the restaurant and leisure industries directly supported by tourists.) The total contribution of Travel &amp; Tourism to GDP (including wider effects from investment) was 12,000 jobs in 2014 (27.0% of total employment and 29.9 percent of the total GDP).\nThese figures on employment are lower than the estimated by some other agencies' for the tourism industry based on their own research. (However, agencies differ as to the types of jobs they classify as being in tourism.) For example, Euromonitor indicates that over 50 percent of the workforce is employed in some tourism-related work.\nThe latest data (May 2016) from the islands' Bureau of Economic Research indicates that there were 37,613 non-agricultural wage and salary jobs in the islands. This report states that the \"leisure and hospitality sector\" employed an average of 7,333 people. However, the retail trade sector, which also serves many tourists, averaged another 5,913 jobs. Other categories which also include some tourism jobs include Arts and Entertainment (792 jobs), Accommodation &amp; Food (6,541 jobs), Accommodation (3755 jobs), Food Services &amp; Drink (2,766 jobs). When those are totaled, it is clear that a large percentage of the 37,613 non-farm workers are employed in dealing with tourists; of course, serving the local population is also part of the role of these sectors.\nJob market.\nAccording to the CIA's research, the service sector - tourism, trade, and other services - were the primary economic activities, accounting for most of the Virgin Island's GDP and about 80 percent of the employment in 2003. (More recent data is not available from this source.) The primary industries in 2013 were tourism, watch assembly, rum distilling, construction, pharmaceuticals and electronics. The local workforce totaled 50,580. The last watch assembly facilities, however, closed in 2015.\nThe report from the VI Bureau of Economic Research calculates that the labor force totaled 48,278 in the first half of 2016, with 42,752 persons classified as civilians. The unemployment rate was 11.5%. Some 29 percent were employed by the public sector, making it the largest employer.\nThe May 2016 report does not discuss the massive debt and provides this outlook: \"The economy will continue on its present course of mild improvements with the major contributions coming from tourism, manufacture and construction In addition, several initiatives are being undertaken by Government ... will assist in the recovery. However, a strong recovery of private sector demand, including consumer and investment spending, is required to give momentum to the recovery that brings the economy back to its pre-recession growth.\"\nManufacturing and other sectors.\nManufacturing industries developed significantly in the 1970s, especially on St. Croix island. Most industries depend of tax concessions and the financial advantages they derive from being a U.S. territory. An alumina factory processed bauxite until December 2009. The Hovensa oil refinery produced , and closed down in February 2012. Analysts reviewing the economy often point to the closure of the Hovensa oil refinery which had been the islands\u2019 largest private sector employer. This certainly did affect the local economy, leaving 2,200 people jobless. In the final year of full refinery operations, the value of exported petroleum products was $12.7 billion. The islands' exports dropped after the 2012 closing of the refinery, from $3.339 billion to $2.627 billion. However, imports dropped as well, from $3.056 billion to $2.694 billion.\nIn late 2013, the Reserve Bank of New York's Research and Statistics Group pointed out that manufacturing employment dropped by 50 percent in May 2012, and by another 4 percent by November 2012, and that the GDP fell by 13 percent, \"mainly due to an 80 percent drop-off in exports (mostly refined petroleum)\". On the other hand, tourism and some other service industries were growing in 2013.\nThe CIA's World Factbook stated that in 2013, \"the economy remains relatively diversified. Along with a vibrant tourism industry, rum exports, trade, and services will be major income sources in future years\". A New York-based research group made the following comment in late 2013: \"Looking ahead, we note that the tropical weather and picturesque beaches will continue to draw tourists, and natural resources bode well for rum production. However, the group also added that \"it may also be worthwhile to look at the physical infrastructure and human capital built up over the years, with an eye toward using it for other types of productive economic activity\".\nThe latest (May 2016) report indicated that there were an average 607 manufacturing jobs. By comparison, there were 1,487 natural resource and construction jobs and nearly 11,000 people worked in some aspect of agriculture in the first half of fiscal year 2016.\nInternet and cell service.\nWith the help of funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, the Virgin Islands Next Generation Network (a government-owned subsidiary) began bringing broadband internet access to the territory, in an effort to stimulate the technology sector and business generally. Today, broadband service is readily available via wireless and cable. Cellular phone service is also\nwidely available on all four islands from several providers.\nFinancial challenges.\nA May 2016 report by Bloomberg expressed concern about the islands debt load. \"In terms of the debt load, on a per-capita basis, on an income basis, it's high,\u201d said Marcy Block, a Fitch analyst. The government believes it will be able to repay the loans; in part that is \"because of the way the bonds are structured. Many securities are backed by specific revenue streams, like excise taxes tied to rum production by Diageo Plc and Cruzan International Inc., that go straight from the U.S. Treasury to an escrow agent. Even bonds backed by gross receipt taxes, which offering documents say are \u201csecured by its full faith and credit and taxing power,\u201d also give the trustee a lien on the levies.\"\nSome news media were reporting a financial crisis by January or February 2017. The USVI's overall tax-supported debt was $2 billion on January 23, which is very high considering the moderate population. That translated to a per capita debt of $19,000, which was worse than the per capita debt in Puerto Rico which was undergoing a severe financial crisis at the time. A Debtwire analyst writing in Forbes indicated that nothing short of a miracle would prevent a financial collapse.\nBy February 15, 2017, the GVI was short $110 million in its current budget (structural deficit). Governor Kenneth Mapp issued an executive order that limited the use of government-owned vehicles, puts a freeze on non-essential hiring, suspended wage negotiations, and froze non-essential travel paid for by the GVI. Some jobs are exempt from the hiring freeze: positions of civil servants whose salaries are paid through federal funds, human service workers, teachers, and those working in agencies under federal consent decrees like police and corrections officers. A report from Government House indicated that these steps were necessary \"given that cash revenues flowing into the treasury are insufficient to meet current expenses\".\nOn February 16, Dept. of Finance Commissioner and Public Finance Authority Executive Director, Valdamier Collens said the government had only two days of cash on hand, instead of the typical 15 or 16 days in recent months. The government introduced a bill labelled as a \"sin tax\", with a plan to introduce or to increase taxes. Commodities affected would include rum, tobacco products, beer and sugary drinks, as well as timeshare unit owners and internet purchases. \"If we are able to pass measures that investors will view as we are addressing our structural deficit, that would bode well to the investors, but they're not going to jump out tomorrow and say, \u2018Oh, come back to the market\u2019,\" Collens said.\nA coalition consisting of the Chambers of Commerce in the St Croix and St Thomas districts, the USVI Hotel and Tourism Association and American Resort Development Association issued a joint statement on February 14, 2017 asking Governor Kenneth Mapp to withdraw the sin tax bill. The group believes that the additional tax would be a \"crushing blow\" to business. It recommended an alternative: work \"with the private sector to develop the ideas already presented to help alleviate the financial crisis\". Mapp's response to the coalition included his understanding of the group's recommended strategies:\n\"For example, the chambers are asking that we slash the salaries of all government workers by 30 percent, that we increase property taxes on residential and commercial property and that we impose an income tax surcharge on the salaries of all workers in the Territory,\" he said. \"These draconian recommendations of the Chambers of Commerce to avoid the imposition of a 25 cents tax on a bottle of beer or a 50 cents tax on a bottle of rum. It's now time to put our people ... first.\"\nStatistics.\nThe CIA's research concluded that the islands hosted nearly 3 million tourists per year (2014 estimate), mostly from visiting cruise ships. However, the more recent May 2016 estimate for the number of arrivals by the VI Bureau of Economic Research totals 1,208,295 by cruise ship and 403,876 people by air. Not all of the latter would have been tourists, of course.\nThe government's budget in 2013 consisted of $1.223 billion in revenues and $1.551 billion in expenditures. Federal programs and grants of $241.4 million contributed 19.7% of the territory's total revenues in 2013.\nThe following data was compiled from the reports published by the CIA and the VI Bureau of Economic Research. All of the information pre-dated the financial crisis of early 2017 which may have had an effect on several economic categories.\n45.9% of GDP (2014)\n13% (2014)\n11.5% (first half of 2016)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32141", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32141", "title": "Telecommunications in the United States Virgin Islands", "text": " \nCommunications in the United States Virgin Islands\nThe following statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nTelephone.\nTelephones - main lines in use: 74,200 (2008) The traditional wire line provider in the United States Virgin Islands is Viya. Viya is a subsidiary of ATN International\nTelephones - mobile cellular: 80,300 (2005)\nThe islands are served by Liberty Communications, Viya, Claro Puerto Rico, and T-Mobile US.\nTelephone system:\n\"general assessment:\" modern system with total digital switching, uses fiber-optic cable and microwave radio relay\n\"domestic:\" full range of services available\n\"international:\" submarine cable connections to US, the Caribbean, Central and South America;; satellite earth stations - NA\nCountry code / area code +1-340\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations:\n24 radio stations broadcasting (2009)\nRadios:\n107,000 (2003)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations:\nabout a dozen television broadcast stations including 1 public TV station; multi-channel cable and satellite TV services are available (2009)\nTelevisions:\n68,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nThe U.S. Virgin Islands' country code top-level domain is .vi.\nInternet hosts: 8,933 (2010)\nInternet users: 30,000 (2008)\nLocally owned and operated Internet Service Provider: SM@RTNET www.smartnet.vi\nProviding Internet service via fixed wireless and Fiber Optics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32142", "revid": "47905414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32142", "title": "Transportation in the United States Virgin Islands", "text": " \nThe United States Virgin Islands (USVI) is the only place under United States jurisdiction where the rule of the road is to drive on the left. However, virtually all passenger vehicles are left hand drive due to imports of U.S. vehicles.\nLand.\nCars drive on the left hand side of the road, but nearly all the automobiles on the island have left-side steering columns. Due to the terrain, roads are often narrow, steep, and take with sharp turns. They tend to be poorly surfaced. \nRoadways.\nThe USVI have of roadways, about of public roads and of private roads. Most public roads are two-lane and are paved with asphalt or concrete. There are few shoulders. Guts (culverts) and retaining walls help prevent flooding and landslides. Private roads are often unpaved or semi-paved.\nPublic transportation and taxis.\nVirgin Islands Transit (VITRAN) public buses run between the main towns and areas of local interest (not tourist destinations). Privately owned \"dollar ride\" or \"dollar run\" taxi buses stop at or near many bus stops. They follow a predefined route, but do not follow a regular schedule. It is often possible to get off anywhere along their route. These buses charge a flat rate for the trip, either $1 or $2.\nNearly all taxis are shared taxis, either enclosed vans or open-air \"safaris\", that go to destinations that are most convenient for tourists (e.g., hotels, beaches, docks, airports, sightseeing tours). They are not metered and are required by law to charge a flat fare that varies by destination. However, private taxis can be booked online to avoid delays or shared space.\nAir.\nMany flights connect the islands to the U.S. mainland. Flights also operate between Saint Thomas and Saint Croix, and from both of them to other islands in the Caribbean.\nAirports.\nTwo international airports serve the islands:\nThere are no airports on Saint John or Water Island.\nSeaplane bases.\nThere are also two seaplane bases:\nSea.\nCruise ships.\nAbout two million people visit the U.S. Virgin Islands by cruise ship each year.\nOn Saint Thomas, large cruise ships dock at the West Indian Company Dock (WICO), Havensight and the Austin \"Babe\" Monsanto Marine Facility in Crown Bay (Subbase). Cruise ships can also anchor in the Charlotte Amalie Harbor and tender to Waterfront; mini-cruise ships can dock at the Waterfront.\nOn Saint Croix, cruise ships arrive at the Ann E. Abramson Marine Facility in Frederiksted. Mini-cruise ships can also dock at Gallows Bay near Christiansted.\nOn Saint John, mini-cruise ships arrive in Cruz Bay.\nFerries.\nThe two main ferry terminals on Saint Thomas are The Edward Wilmoth Blyden IV Marine Terminal in Charlotte Amalie and the Urman Victor Fredericks Marine Terminal in Red Hook. \nThe ferry terminal for Saint Croix is at The Gallows Bay Dock.\nOn Saint John, passenger ferries enter at The Loredon Lawrence Boynes Sr. Dock while The Theovald Eric Moorehead Dock and Terminal at Enighed Pond.\nWater Island has a small dock at Phillips Landing. \nThere are many and frequent inter-island ferries. Cruz Bay, Saint John can be reached from Charlotte Amalie and Red Hook on Saint Thomas. Car barges also run between Cruz Bay and Red Hook. Water Island can be reached from Crown Bay, Saint Thomas. There is a once daily ferry between Charlotte Amalie and Gallows Bay, Saint Croix. International ferries also run between Saint Thomas, Saint John, and the neighboring British Virgin Islands.\nCargo.\nOn Saint Thomas, cargo vessels are served by the Crown Bay Cargo Port.\nOn Saint Croix, cargo vessels are served by The Gallows Bay Dock near Christiansted and the Wilfred \"Bomba\" Allick Port and Transshipment Center (Containerport) in Krause Lagoon.\nOn Saint John, cargo vessels are served by the Victor William Sewer Marine Facility (The Creek) and the Theovald Eric Moorehead Dock and Terminal.\nOther.\nThere are numerous marinas and anchorages in the USVI. Vessels entering the islands must proceed directly to a port of entry for clearance before passengers and crew go ashore.\nAdditional ports, marinas, and anchorage sites include:\nCustoms.\nAlthough a U.S. territory, the USVI are maintained as a \"free port\" in a separate customs zone. Travelers to the continental United States and Puerto Rico need to pre-clear U.S. customs and present a passport or proof of U.S. citizenship or nationality. The immigration status of non-U.S. citizens may be checked during this process as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32143", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32143", "title": "Military of the U.S. Virgin Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "32145", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32145", "title": "Universal precautions", "text": "Medical standard for contact avoidance\nUniversal precautions refers to the practice, in medicine, of avoiding contact with patients' bodily fluids, by means of the wearing of nonporous articles such as medical gloves, goggles, and face shields. The infection control techniques were essentially good hygiene habits, such as hand washing and the use of gloves and other barriers, the correct handling of hypodermic needles, scalpels, and aseptic techniques.\nFollowing the AIDS outbreak in the 1980s, the US CDC formally introduced them in 1985\u201388. Every patient was treated as if infected, and therefore precautions were taken to minimize risk.\nIn 1987, the practice of universal precautions was adjusted by a set of rules known as body substance isolation. In 1996, both practices were replaced by the latest approach known as standard precautions. Use of personal protective equipment is now recommended in all health care settings.\nHistorical significance.\nUniversal precautions are an infection control practice. Under universal precautions all patients were considered to be possible carriers of blood-borne pathogens. The guideline recommended wearing gloves when collecting or handling blood and body fluids contaminated with blood, wearing face shields when there was danger of blood splashing on mucous membranes, and disposing of all needles and sharp objects in puncture-resistant containers.\nUniversal precautions were introduced in the US by CDC in the wake of the AIDS epidemic between 1985 and 1988.\nIn 1987, the practice of universal precautions was adjusted by a set of rules known as body substance isolation. In 1996, both practices were replaced by the latest approach known as standard precautions.\nUse.\nUniversal precautions were designed for doctors, nurses, patients, and healthcare workers who came into contact with patients and their bodily fluids. This included staff and others who might not come into direct contact with patients.\nUniversal precautions were typically practiced in any environment where workers were exposed to bodily fluids, such as blood, semen, vaginal secretions, synovial fluid, amniotic fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, feces and urine.\nBodily fluids which did not require such precautions included nasal secretions, vomitus, perspiration, sputum and saliva.\nEquipment.\nSince pathogens fall into two broad categories, bloodborne (carried in the body fluids) and airborne, personal protective equipment included, but was not limited to barrier gowns, gloves, masks, eyewear like goggles or glasses and face shields.\nAdditional precautions.\nAdditional precautions are used in addition to universal precautions for patients who are known or suspected to have an infection that requires extra measures, depending on the suspected route of transmission. Additional precautions are not needed for blood-borne infections unless there are complicating factors or to avoid leukocyte-related complications of blood transfusion.\nConditions demanding additional precautions are prion diseases (e.g., Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease), diseases with air-borne transmission (e.g., tuberculosis), diseases with droplet transmission (e.g., mumps, rubella, influenza, pertussis) and transmission by direct or indirect contact with dried skin (e.g., colonisation with MRSA) or contaminated surfaces or any combination of the above.\nAdverse effects.\nAs of 2010 research around stigma and discrimination in health-related settings has implicated universal precautions as a means by which health care workers discriminate against patients. Particularly the employment of universal precautions when working with people with HIV and/or hepatitis C has been demonstrated to be inconsistent and implicated with feelings of stigmatization reported by those populations. Health-cased social research in 2004 revealed that by not applying universal precautions universally, as is the purpose, health professionals are instead making judgements based on an individual's health status. It is speculated that this differential approach to care stems from stigma towards HIV and hepatitis C, rooted largely in fears and misconceptions around transmission and assumptions about patient lifestyle and risk.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32146", "revid": "50532100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32146", "title": "Uniform Resource Identifier", "text": "String used to identify a name of a web or internet resource\nA Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), formerly Universal Resource Identifier, is a unique sequence of characters that identifies an abstract or physical resource, such as resources on a webpage, email address, phone number, books, real-world objects such as people and places, and concepts.\nURIs which provide a means of locating and retrieving information resources on a network (either on the Internet or on another private network, such as a computer file system or an Intranet) are Uniform Resource Locators (URLs). Therefore, URLs are a subset of URIs, i.e. every URL is a URI (and not necessarily the other way around). Other URIs provide only a unique name, without a means of locating or retrieving the resource or information about it; these are Uniform Resource Names (URNs). The web technologies that use URIs are not limited to web browsers.\nHistory.\nConception.\nURIs and URLs have a shared history. In 1990, Tim Berners-Lee's proposals for hypertext implicitly introduced the idea of a URL as a short string representing a resource that is the target of a hyperlink. At the time, people referred to it as a \"hypertext name\" or \"document name\".\nOver the next three and a half years, as the World Wide Web's core technologies of HTML, HTTP, and web browsers developed, a need to distinguish a string that provided an address for a resource from a string that merely named a resource emerged. Although not yet formally defined, the term \"Uniform Resource Locator\" came to represent the former, and the more contentious \"Uniform Resource Name\" came to represent the latter. In July 1992 Berners-Lee's report on the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) \"UDI (Universal Document Identifiers) BOF\" mentions URLs (as Uniform Resource Locators), URNs (originally, as Unique Resource Numbers), and the need to charter a new working group. In November 1992 the IETF \"URI Working Group\" met for the first time.\nDuring the debate over defining URLs and URNs, it became evident that the concepts embodied by the two terms were merely aspects of the fundamental, overarching, notion of resource \"identification\". In June 1994, the IETF published , Berners-Lee's first \"Request for Comments\" that acknowledged the existence of URLs and URNs. Most importantly, it defined a formal syntax for \"Universal Resource Identifiers\" (i.e. URL-like strings whose precise syntaxes and semantics depended on their schemes). It also attempted to summarize the syntaxes of URL schemes in use at the time. It acknowledged \u2013 \"but did not standardize\"\u2014the existence of relative URLs and fragment identifiers.\nRefinement.\nIn December 1994, formally defined relative and absolute URLs, refined the general URL syntax, defined how to resolve relative URLs to absolute form, and better enumerated the URL schemes then in use. The agreed definition and syntax of URNs had to wait until the publication of IETF in May 1997.\nThe publication of IETF in August 1998 saw the URI syntax become a separate specification and most of the parts of RFCs 1630 and 1738 relating to URIs and URLs in general were revised and expanded by the IETF. The new RFC changed the meaning of \"U\" in \"URI\" from \"Universal\" to \"Uniform.\"\nIn December 1999, provided a minor update to RFC 2396, allowing URIs to accommodate IPv6 addresses. A number of shortcomings discovered in the two specifications led to a community effort, coordinated by RFC 2396 co-author Roy Fielding, that culminated in the publication of IETF in January 2005. While obsoleting the prior standard, it did not render the details of existing URL schemes obsolete; RFC 1738 continues to govern such schemes except where otherwise superseded. IETF for example, refines the codice_1 scheme. Simultaneously, the IETF published the content of RFC 3986 as the full standard STD 66, reflecting the establishment of the URI generic syntax as an official Internet protocol.\nIn 2001, the World Wide Web Consortium's (W3C) Technical Architecture Group (TAG) published a guide to best practices and canonical URIs for publishing multiple versions of a given resource. For example, content might differ by language or by size to adjust for capacity or settings of the device used to access that content.\nIn August 2002, IETF pointed out that the term \"URL\" had, despite widespread public use, faded into near obsolescence, and serves only as a reminder that some URIs act as addresses by having schemes implying network accessibility, regardless of any such actual use. As URI-based standards such as Resource Description Framework make evident, resource identification need not suggest the retrieval of resource representations over the Internet, nor need they imply network-based resources at all.\nThe Semantic Web uses the HTTP URI scheme to identify both documents and concepts for practical uses, a distinction which has caused confusion as to how to distinguish the two. The \"TAG\" published an e-mail in 2005 with a solution of the problem, which became known as the \"httpRange-14 resolution\". The W3C subsequently published an Interest Group Note titled \"Cool URIs for the Semantic Web\", which explained the use of content negotiation and the HTTP 303 response code for redirections in more detail.\nDesign.\nURLs and URNs.\nA Uniform Resource Name (URN) is a URI that identifies a resource by name in a particular namespace. A URN may be used to talk about a resource without implying its location or how to access it. For example, in the International Standard Book Number (ISBN) system, \"ISBN 0-486-27557-4\" identifies a specific edition of the William Shakespeare play \"Romeo and Juliet\". The URN for that edition would be \"urn:isbn:0-486-27557-4\". However, it gives no information as to where to find a copy of that book.\nA Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is a URI that specifies the means of acting upon or obtaining the representation of a resource, i.e. specifying both its primary access mechanism and network location. For example, the URL codice_2 refers to a resource identified as codice_3, whose representation is obtainable via the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (\"http:\") from a network host whose domain name is codice_4. (In this case, HTTP usually implies it to be in the form of HTML and related code. In practice, that is not necessarily the case, as HTTP allows specifying arbitrary formats in its header.)\nA URN is analogous to a person's name, while a URL is analogous to their street address. In other words, a URN identifies an item and a URL provides a method for finding it.\nTechnical publications, especially standards produced by the IETF and by the W3C, normally reflect a view outlined in a W3C Recommendation of 30 July 2001, which acknowledges the precedence of the term URI rather than endorsing any formal subdivision into URL and URN. {\nAs such, a URL is simply a URI that happens to point to a resource over a network. However, in non-technical contexts and in software for the World Wide Web, the term \"URL\" remains widely used. Additionally, the term \"web address\" (which has no formal definition) often occurs in non-technical publications as a synonym for a URI that uses the \"http\" or \"https\" schemes. Such assumptions can lead to confusion, for example, in the case of XML namespaces that have a visual similarity to resolvable URIs.\nSpecifications produced by the WHATWG prefer \"URL\" over \"URI\", and so newer HTML5 APIs use \"URL\" over \"URI\". {\nWhile most URI schemes were originally designed to be used with a particular protocol, and often have the same name, they are semantically different from protocols. For example, the scheme \"http\" is generally used for interacting with web resources using HTTP, but the scheme \"file\" has no protocol.\nSyntax.\nA URI has a scheme that refers to a specification for assigning identifiers within that scheme. As such, the URI syntax is a federated and extensible naming system wherein each scheme's specification may further restrict the syntax and semantics of identifiers using that scheme. The URI generic syntax is a superset of the syntax of all URI schemes. It was first defined in , published in August 1998, and finalized in , published in January 2005.\nA URI is composed from an allowed set of ASCII characters consisting of reserved characters (gen-delims: codice_5, codice_6, codice_7, codice_8, codice_9, codice_10, and codice_11; sub-delims: codice_12, codice_13, codice_14, codice_15, codice_16, codice_17, codice_18, codice_19, codice_20, codice_21, and codice_22), unreserved characters (uppercase and lowercase letters, decimal digits, codice_23, codice_24, codice_25, and codice_26), and the character codice_27. Syntax components and subcomponents are separated by \"delimiters\" from the reserved characters (only from generic reserved characters for components) and define \"identifying data\" represented as unreserved characters, reserved characters that do not act as delimiters in the component and subcomponent respectively, and percent-encodings when the corresponding character is outside the allowed set or is being used as a delimiter of, or within, the component. A percent-encoding of an identifying data octet is a sequence of three characters, consisting of the character codice_27 followed by the two hexadecimal digits representing that octet's numeric value.\n&lt;section begin=\"syntax\"/&gt;The URI generic syntax consists of five \"components\" organized hierarchically in order of decreasing significance from left to right:\nA component is \"undefined\" if it has an associated delimiter and the delimiter does not appear in the URI; the scheme and path components are always defined. A component is \"empty\" if it has no characters; the scheme component is always non-empty.\nThe authority component consists of \"subcomponents\":\nThis is represented in a syntax diagram as:\nThe URI comprises:\n By convention, in http and https URIs, the last part of a \"path\" is named &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;pathinfo and it is optional. It is composed by zero or more path segments that do not refer to an existing physical resource name (e.g. a file, an internal module program or an executable program) but to a logical part (e.g. a command or a qualifier part) that has to be passed separately to the first part of the path that identifies an executable module or program managed by a web server; this is often used to select dynamic content (a document, etc.) or to tailor it as requested (see also: CGI and PATH_INFO, etc.).\n Example:\n URI: \n where: is the first part of the \"path\" (an executable module or program) and is the second part of the \"path\" named \"pathinfo\", which is passed to the executable module or program named to select the requested document.\n An http or https URI containing a \"pathinfo\" part without a query part may also be referred to as a 'clean URL,' whose last part may be a 'slug.'\nThe scheme- or implementation-specific reserved character codice_19 may be used in the scheme, userinfo, host, path, query, and fragment, and the scheme- or implementation-specific reserved characters codice_12, codice_13, codice_14, codice_15, codice_16, codice_17, codice_18, codice_20, codice_21, and codice_22 may be used in the userinfo, host, path, query, and fragment. Additionally, the generic reserved character codice_5 may be used in the userinfo, path, query and fragment, the generic reserved characters codice_11 and codice_6 may be used in the path, query and fragment, and the generic reserved character codice_7 may be used in the query and fragment.\nExample URIs.\nThe following figure displays example URIs and their component parts.\nDOIs (digital object identifiers) fit within the Handle System and fit within the URI system, as facilitated by appropriate syntax.\nURI references.\nA \"URI reference\" is either a URI or a \"relative reference\" when it does not begin with a scheme component followed by a colon (codice_5). A path segment that contains a colon character (e.g., codice_70) cannot be used as the first path segment of a relative reference if its path component does not begin with a slash (codice_6), as it would be mistaken for a scheme component. Such a path segment must be preceded by a dot path segment (e.g., codice_72).\nWeb document markup languages frequently use URI references to point to other resources, such as external documents or specific portions of the same logical document:\nResolution.\n\"Resolving\" a URI reference against a \"base URI\" results in a \"target URI\". This implies that the base URI exists and is an \"absolute URI\" (a URI with no fragment component). The base URI can be obtained, in order of precedence, from:\nWithin a representation with a well defined base URI of\na relative reference is resolved to its target URI as follows:\nURL munging.\nURL munging is a technique by which a command is appended to a URL, usually at the end, after a \"?\" token. It is commonly used in WebDAV as a mechanism of adding functionality to HTTP. In a versioning system, for example, to add a \"checkout\" command to a URL, it is written as codice_82. It has the advantage of both being easy for CGI parsers and also acts as an intermediary between HTTP and underlying resource, in this case.\nRelation to XML namespaces.\nIn XML, a namespace is an abstract domain to which a collection of element and attribute names can be assigned. The namespace name is a character string which must adhere to the generic URI syntax. However, the name is generally not considered to be a URI, because the URI specification bases the decision not only on lexical components, but also on their intended use. A namespace name does not necessarily imply any of the semantics of URI schemes; for example, a namespace name beginning with \"http:\" may have no connotation to the use of the HTTP.\nOriginally, the namespace name could match the syntax of any non-empty URI reference, but the use of relative URI references was deprecated by the W3C. A separate W3C specification for namespaces in XML 1.1 permits Internationalized Resource Identifier (IRI) references to serve as the basis for namespace names in addition to URI references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32147", "revid": "329764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32147", "title": "Union of International Associations", "text": "International organization\nThe Union of International Associations (UIA) is a non-profit non-governmental research institute and documentation center based in Brussels, Belgium, and operating under United Nations mandate. It was founded in 1907 under the name Central Office of International Associations by Henri La Fontaine, the 1913 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, and Paul Otlet, a founding father of what is now called information science.\nThe UIA is an independent research institute and a repository for current and historical information on the work of global civil society. It serves two main purposes: to document and promote public awareness of the work of international organizations (both INGOs and IGOs), international meetings, and world problems. The UIA also supports and facilitates the work of international associations through training and networking opportunities.\nIt has consultative status with ECOSOC and UNESCO.\nHistory.\nThe two founders started work setting up the Central Office of International Organisations and then conducting a survey of international organisations with headquarters in Belgium. Then with the help of the sociologist Cyril van Overbergh they extend this research to organisations based elsewhere. After collaborating with Alfred Fried on the production of \"Annuaire de la Vie Internationale\" they produced their own edition without him.\nPublication.\nIn 1923, UIA published \"Code des voeux internationaux, codification g\u00e9n\u00e9rale des voeux et r\u00e9solutions des organismes internationaux\", with a preface by Henri La Fontaine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32148", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32148", "title": "Unipolar depression", "text": ""}
{"id": "32149", "revid": "50656507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32149", "title": "Unconsciousness", "text": "Loss of awareness of self and environment\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nUnconsciousness is a state in which a living individual exhibits a complete, or near-complete, inability to maintain an awareness of self and environment or to respond to any human or environmental stimulus. Unconsciousness may occur as the result of traumatic brain injury, brain hypoxia (inadequate oxygen, possibly due to a brain infarction or cardiac arrest), severe intoxication with drugs that depress the activity of the central nervous system (e.g., alcohol and other hypnotic or sedative drugs), severe fatigue, pain, anaesthesia, and other causes.\nLoss of consciousness should not be confused with the notion of the psychoanalytic unconscious, cognitive processes that take place outside awareness (e.g., implicit cognition), and with altered states of consciousness such as sleep, delirium, hypnosis, and other altered states in which the person responds to stimuli, including trance and psychedelic experiences.\nCauses.\nThis is not a complete list.\nLaw and medicine.\nIn jurisprudence, unconsciousness may entitle the criminal defendant to the defense of automatism, i.e. a state without control of one's own actions, an excusing condition that allows a defendant to argue that they should not be held criminally liable for their actions or omissions. In most countries, courts must consider whether unconsciousness in a situation can be accepted as a defense; it can vary from case to case. Hence epileptic seizures, neurological dysfunctions, and sleepwalking may be considered acceptable excusing conditions because the loss of control is not foreseeable, but falling asleep (especially while driving or during any other safety-critical activity) may not, because natural sleep rarely overcomes an ordinary person without warning.\nIn many countries, it is presumed that someone who is less than fully conscious cannot give consent to anything. This can be relevant in cases of sexual assault, euthanasia, or patients giving informed consent with regard to starting or stopping a medical treatment."}
{"id": "32150", "revid": "24812038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32150", "title": "Quarter (United States coin)", "text": "Current denomination of United States currency\nThe quarter, formally known as the quarter dollar, is a coin in the United States valued at 25 cents, representing one-quarter of a dollar. Adorning its obverse is the profile of George Washington, while its reverse design has undergone frequent changes since 1998. Since its initial production in 1796, the quarter dollar has held a significant place in American numismatics, with consistent production since 1831.\nIt has a diameter of 0.955 inch (24.26\u00a0mm) and a thickness of 0.069 inch (1.75\u00a0mm). Its current version is composed of two layers of cupronickel (75% copper, 25% nickel) clad on a core of pure copper. With the cupronickel layers comprising 1/3 of total weight, the coin's overall composition is therefore 8.33% nickel, 91.67% copper. Its weight is 0.1823 troy oz. or 0.2000 avoirdupois oz. (5.670 grams).\nDesigns before 1932.\nThe choice of a quarter-dollar as a denomination, as opposed to the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20445 or the 20-cent piece that is more common elsewhere, originated with the practice of dividing Spanish milled dollars into eight wedge-shaped segments, which gave rise to the name \"piece of eight\" for that coin. \"Two bits\" (that is, two eighths of a piece of eight) is a common nickname for a quarter.\nFrom 1796 the quarter was minted with 0.2377 oz. (6.739 g) of 89.24% fine silver (.2121 oz. [6.014 g] fine silver), revised to 90% fine silver from 1838 to 1964. It weighed 0.2357 oz. (6.682 g) from 1838, 0.2194 oz. (6.22 g) from 1853, and 0.2204 oz. (6.25 g) from 1873 to 1964. Six designs, five regular and one commemorative, have been issued until 1930:\nWashington quarter.\nThe original version of the Washington quarter issued from 1932 to 1998 was designed by sculptor John Flanagan. The obverse depicted George Washington facing left, with \"Liberty\" above the head, the date below, and \"In God We Trust\" in the left field. The reverse depicted an eagle with wings outspread perched on a bundle of arrows framed below by two olive branches.\nIt was minted in 0.2204 oz. (6.25 g) of 90% fine silver until 1964, when rising silver prices forced the change into the present-day cupronickel-clad-copper composition, which was also called the \"Johnson Sandwich\" after then-president Lyndon B. Johnson.\nAs of 2011, it cost 11.14 cents to produce each coin.\nRegular issue Washington quarters:\nCommemorative and bullion issue Washington quarters:\nUS states and territories quarters, 1999\u20132009.\nIn 1999, the 50 State quarters program of circulating commemorative quarters began. These have a modified Washington obverse and a different reverse for each state, ending the former Washington quarter's production completely. On January 23, 2007, the House of Representatives passed extending the state quarter program one year to 2009, to include the District of Columbia and the five inhabited U.S. territories: Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. The bill passed through the Senate, and was signed into legislation by President George W. Bush as part of Pub. L.\u00a0, on December 27, 2007. The typeface used in the state quarter series varies a bit from one state to another, but is generally derived from Albertus.\nAmerica the Beautiful quarters, 2010\u20132021.\nOn June 4, 2008, the America's Beautiful National Parks Quarter Dollar Coin Act of 2008, , was introduced to the House of Representatives. On December 23, 2008, President Bush signed the bill into law as Pub. L.\u00a0. The America the Beautiful quarters program began in 2010 and ended in 2021, lasting 11 years and depicting a natural or historic site for each state and territory.\n2021: Return of the original obverse, new legislation.\nFollowing the conclusion of the America the Beautiful quarter series in 2021, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin had the option of ordering a second round of 56 quarters, but did not do so by the end of 2018 as required in the 2008 legislation.\nThe quarter's design for 2021 therefore reverted to Flanagan's original obverse design, paired with a new reverse rendition of Washington crossing the Delaware River on the night of December 25, 1776. In October 2019, the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee (CCAC) met to consider designs, with the final choice made by Mnuchin. On December 25, 2020, the Mint announced the successful design, by Benjamin Sowards as sculpted by Michael Gaudioso. This quarter was released into circulation on April 5, 2021, and was minted until the end of 2021.\nThe Circulating Collectible Coin Redesign Act of 2020 (Pub. L.\u00a0) established three new series of quarters for the next decade. From 2022 to 2025, the Mint may produce up to five coins each year featuring prominent American women, with a new obverse design of Washington. In 2026, there will be up to five designs representing the United States Semiquincentennial. From 2027 to 2030, the Mint may produce up to five coins each year featuring youth sports. The obverse will also be redesigned in 2027, and even after 2030 is still to depict Washington.\nAmerican Women Quarters.\nThe American Women Quarters Program will issue up to five new reverse designs each year from 2022 to 2025 featuring the accomplishments and contributions made in various fields by women to American history and development. The obverse features Laura Gardin Fraser's portrait of George Washington originally intended for the first Washington quarter in 1932.\nCollecting silver Washington quarters.\nThe \"silver series\" of Washington quarters spans from 1932 to 1964; during many years in the series it will appear that certain mints did not mint Washington quarters for that year. No known examples of quarters were made in 1933, San Francisco abstained in 1934 and 1949, and stopped after 1955, until it resumed in 1968 by way of making proofs. Denver did not make quarters in 1938. Proof examples from 1936 to 1942 and 1950 to 1967 were struck at the Philadelphia Mint; in 1968, proof production was shifted to the San Francisco Mint. The current rarities for the Washington quarter \"silver series\" are:\nBranch mintmarks are D = Denver, S = San Francisco. Coins without mintmarks were all made at the main Mint in Philadelphia. This listing is for business strikes, not proofs:\nThe 1940-D, 1936-D and the 1935-D coins, as well as many others in the series, are considerably more valuable than other quarters. This is not due to their mintages, but rather because they are harder to find in high grades (a situation referred to as \"condition rarity\"). Many of these coins are worth only melt value in low grades. Other coins in the above list are expensive because of their extremely low mintages, such as the 1932 Denver and San Francisco issues. The overstruck mintmark issues are also scarce and expensive, especially in the higher grades; even so they may not have the same popularity as overdates found in pre-Washington quarter series.\nThe 1934 Philadelphia strike appears in two versions: one with a light motto [for \"In God We Trust\"], which is the same as that used on the 1932 strikings, and the other a heavy motto seen after the dies were reworked. Except in the highest grades, the difference in value between the two is minor.\nThe mint mark on the coin is located on the reverse beneath the wreath on which the eagle is perched, and will either carry the mint mark \"D\" for the Denver Mint, \"S\" for the San Francisco Mint, or be blank if minted at the Philadelphia Mint.\nCollecting clad Washington quarters.\nThe copper-nickel clad Washington quarter was first issued in 1965 and as part of the switch, the Denver mintmark was added in 1968, which did not reappear on any US coin denomination until 1968. For the first three years of clad production, in lieu of proof sets, specimen sets were specially sold as \"Special Mint Sets\" minted at the San Francisco mint in 1965, 1966, and 1967 (Deep Cameo versions of these coins are highly valued because of their rarity).\nCurrently, there are few examples in the clad series that are valued as highly as the silver series but there are certain extraordinary dates or variations. The deep cameo versions of proofs from 1965 to 1971 and 1981 Type 2 are highly valued because of their scarcity, high grade examples of quarters from certain years of the 1980s (such as 1981\u20131987) because of scarcity in high grades due to high circulation and in 1982 and 1983 no mint sets were produced making it harder to find mint state examples, and any coin from 1981 to 1994 graded in MS67 is worth upwards of $1000.\nThe mint mark on the coin is currently located on the obverse at the bottom right hemisphere under the supposed date. In 1965\u20131967 cupro-nickel coins bore no mint mark; quarters minted in 1968\u20131979 were stamped with a \"D\" for the Denver mint, an \"S\" for the San Francisco mint (proof coins only), or blank for Philadelphia. Starting in 1980, the Philadelphia mint was allowed to add its mint mark to all coins except the one-cent piece. Twenty-five-cent pieces minted from 1980 onwards are stamped with \"P\" for the Philadelphia mint, \"D\" for the Denver mint, or \"S\" for San Francisco mint.\nUntil 2012 the \"S\" mint mark was used only on proof coins, but beginning with the El Yunque (Puerto Rico) design in the America the Beautiful quarters program, the US Mint began selling (at a premium) uncirculated 40-coin rolls and 100-coin bags of quarters with the San Francisco mint mark. These coins were not included in the 2012 or later uncirculated sets or the three-coin ATB quarter sets (which consisted of an uncirculated \"P\" and \"D\" and proof \"S\" specimen) and no \"S\" mint-marked quarters are being released into circulation, so that mintages will be determined solely by direct demand for the \"S\" mint-marked coins.\nIn 2019, the West Point Mint released two million of each of the five designs that year with a \"W\" mint mark for general circulation, in a move intended to spur coin collecting. This was continued in 2020, which turned out to be the final year of the \"W\" mint marked quarters as no quarters with the mint mark have been produced since.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32152", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32152", "title": "Ural Mountains", "text": "Mountain range in Russia\nThe Ural Mountains ( ), or simply the Urals, are a mountain range in Eurasia that runs north\u2013south mostly through Russia, from the coast of the Arctic Ocean to the river Ural and northwestern Kazakhstan. The mountain range forms part of the conventional boundary between the continents of Europe and Asia, marking the separation between European Russia and Siberia. Vaygach Island and the islands of Novaya Zemlya form continuations of the chain to the north into the Arctic Ocean. The average altitudes of the Urals are around , the highest point being Mount Narodnaya, which reaches a height of .\nThe mountains lie within the Ural geographical region and significantly overlap with the Ural Federal District and the Ural economic region. Their resources include metal ores, coal, precious and semi-precious stones. Since the 18th century, the mountains have contributed significantly to the mineral sector of the Russian economy. The region is one of the largest centers of metallurgy and heavy industry production in Russia.\nEtymology.\nAs attested by Sigismund von Herberstein, in the 16th century, Russians called the Ural range by a variety of names derived from the Russian words for rock (stone) and belt. The modern Russian name for the Urals (, \"Ural\"), first appearing in the 16th \u2013 17th centuries during the Russian conquest of Siberia, was initially applied to its southern parts and gained currency as the name of the entire range during the 18th century. It might have been borrowed from either Turkic \"stone belt\" (Bashkir, where the same name is used for the range), or Ob-Ugric. From the 13th century in Bashkortostan, there has been a legend about a hero named Ural who sacrificed his life for the sake of his people who then poured a stone pile over his grave, which later turned into the Ural Mountains. Possibilities include Bashkir \"\u04af\u0440\" \"elevation; upland\" and Mansi \"\u0443\u0440 \u0430\u043b\u0430\" \"mountain peak, top of the mountain\", V.N. Tatischev believes that this oronym is set to \"belt\" and associates it with the Turkic verb oralu- \"gird\". I.G. Dobrodomov suggests a transition from Aral to Ural explained on the basis of ancient Bulgar\u2013Chuvash dialects. Geographer E.V. Hawks believes that the name goes back to the Bashkir folklore Ural-Batyr. The Evenk geographical term \"era\" \"mountain\" has also been theorized. (cf also Ewenk\u012b \u00fcr\u01dd-l (pl.) \"mountains\") Finno-Ugrist scholars consider Ural deriving from the Ostyak word \"urr\" meaning \"chain of mountains\". Turkologists, on the other hand, have achieved majority support for their assertion that 'ural' in Tatar means a belt, and recall that an earlier name for the range was 'stone belt'.\nIndigenous peoples of the Urals have various namings for the mountain range: Komi \"Iz\", Mansi \"Nyor\", Khanty \"Kev\", Nenets \"Ngarka pe\".\nHistory.\nAs merchants from the Middle East traded with the Bashkirs and other people living on the western slopes of the Ural as far north as Great Perm, since the 10th century, medieval mideastern geographers had been aware of the existence of the mountain range in its entirety, stretching as far as the Arctic Ocean in the north. The first Russian mention of the mountains to the east of the East European Plain is provided by the \"Primary Chronicle\", where it describes the Novgorodian expedition to the upper reaches of the Pechora in the year 1096. During the next few centuries, the Novgorodians engaged in fur trading with the local population and collected tribute from Yugra and Great Perm, slowly expanding southwards. The city-state of Novgorod established two trade routes to the Ob River, both starting from the town of Ustyug. The rivers, Chusovaya and Belaya, were first mentioned in the chronicles of 1396 and 1468, respectively. In 1430, the town of Solikamsk (Kama Salt) was founded on the Kama at the foothills of the Ural, where salt was produced in open pans. Ivan III, the grand prince of Moscow, captured Perm, Pechora and Yugra from the declining Novgorod Republic in 1472. With the excursions of 1483 and 1499\u20131500 across the Ural, Moscow managed to subjugate Yugra completely. The Russians received tribute, but contact with the tribes ceased after they left.\nNevertheless, around the early 16th century, Polish geographer, Maciej of Miech\u00f3w, in his influential \"Tractatus de duabus Sarmatiis\" (1517) argued that there were no mountains in Eastern Europe at all, challenging the point of view of some authors of Classical antiquity, which were popular during the Renaissance. Only after Sigismund von Herberstein in his \"Notes on Muscovite Affairs\" (1549) had reported, following Russian sources, that there are mountains behind the Pechora and identified them with the Riphean Mountains and Hyperboreans of ancient authors, did the existence of the Ural, or at least of its northern part, become firmly established in the Western geography. The Middle and Southern Ural were still largely unavailable and unknown to the Russian or Western European geographers.\nIn the 1550s, after the Tsardom of Russia had defeated the Khanate of Kazan and proceeded to gradually annex the lands of the Bashkirs, the Russians finally reached the southern part of the mountain chain. In 1574, they founded Ufa. The upper reaches of the Kama and Chusovaya in the Middle Ural, still unexplored, as well as parts of Transuralia still held by the hostile Siberian Khanate, were granted to the Stroganovs by several decrees of the tsar in 1558\u20131574. The Stroganovs land provided the staging ground for Yermak's incursion into Siberia. Yermak crossed the Ural from the Chusovaya to the Tagil around 1581. In 1597, Babinov's road was built across the Ural from Solikamsk to the valley of the Tura, where the town of Verkhoturye (Upper Tura) was founded in 1598. Customs was established in Verkhoturye shortly thereafter and the road was made the only legal connection between European Russia and Siberia for a long time. In 1648, the town of Kungur was founded at the western foothills of the Middle Ural. During the 17th century, the first deposits of iron and copper ores, mica, gemstones and other minerals were discovered in the Ural.\nIron and copper smelting works emerged. In particular, the Gumyoshevsky mine was established in 1702 at an ancient copper deposit known since Bronze Age \u2014 so-called \"legendary\" Copper Mountain which also produced malachite. Mining intensified particularly quickly during the reign of Peter I of Russia. In 1720\u20131722, he commissioned Vasily Tatishchev to oversee and develop the mining and smelting works in the Ural. Tatishchev proposed a new copper smelting factory in Yegoshikha, which would eventually become the core of the city of Perm and a new iron smelting factory on the Iset, which would become the largest in the world at the time of construction and give birth to the city of Yekaterinburg. Both factories were actually founded by Tatishchev's successor, Georg Wilhelm de Gennin, in 1723. Tatishchev returned to the Ural on the order of Empress Anna to succeed de Gennin in 1734\u20131737. Transportation of the output of the smelting works to the markets of European Russia necessitated the construction of the Siberian Route from Yekaterinburg across the Ural to Kungur and Yegoshikha (Perm) and further to Moscow, which was completed in 1763 and rendered Babinov's road obsolete. In 1745, gold was discovered in the Ural at Beryozovskoye and later at other deposits. It has been mined since 1747.\nThe first ample geographic survey of the Ural Mountains was completed in the early 18th century by the Russian historian and geographer Vasily Tatishchev under the orders of Peter I. Earlier, in the 17th century, rich ore deposits were discovered in the mountains and their systematic extraction began in the early 18th century, eventually turning the region into the largest mineral base of Russia.\nOne of the first scientific descriptions of the mountains was published in 1770\u201371. Over the next century, the region was studied by scientists from a number of countries, including Russia (geologist Alexander Karpinsky, botanist Porfiry Krylov and zoologist Leonid Sabaneyev), the United Kingdom (geologist Sir Roderick Murchison), France (paleontologist \u00c9douard de Verneuil), and Germany (naturalist Alexander von Humboldt, geologist Alexander Keyserling). In 1845, Murchison, who had according to \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" \"compiled the first geologic map of the Ural in 1841\", published \"The Geology of Russia in Europe and the Ural Mountains\" with de Verneuil and Keyserling.\nThe first railway across the Urals had been built by 1878 and linked Perm to Yekaterinburg via Chusovoy, Kushva and Nizhny Tagil. In 1890, a railway linked Ufa and Chelyabinsk via Zlatoust. In 1896, this section became a part of the Trans-Siberian Railway. In 1909, yet another railway connecting Perm and Yekaterinburg passed through Kungur by the way of the Siberian Route. It has eventually replaced the Ufa \u2013 Chelyabinsk section as the main trunk of the Trans-Siberian railway.\nThe highest peak of the Ural, Mount Narodnaya, (elevation ) was identified in 1927.\nDuring the Soviet industrialization in the 1930s, the city of Magnitogorsk was founded in the South-Eastern Ural as a center of iron smelting and steelmaking. During the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941\u20131942, the mountains became a key element in Nazi planning for the territories which they expected to conquer in the USSR. Faced with the threat of having a significant part of the Soviet territories occupied by the enemy, the government evacuated many of the industrial enterprises of European Russia and Ukraine to the eastern foothills of the Ural, considered a safe place out of reach of the German bombers and troops. Three giant tank factories were established at the Uralmash in Sverdlovsk (as Yekaterinburg used to be known), Uralvagonzavod in Nizhny Tagil, and Chelyabinsk Tractor Plant in Chelyabinsk. After the war, in 1947\u20131948, Chum \u2013 Labytnangi railway, built with the forced labor of Gulag inmates, crossed the Polar Ural.\nMayak, southeast of Yekaterinburg, was a center of the Soviet nuclear industry and site of the Kyshtym disaster.\nGeography and topography.\nThe Ural Mountains extend about from the Kara Sea to the Kazakh Steppe along the border of Kazakhstan. Vaygach Island and the island of Novaya Zemlya form a further continuation of the chain on the north. Geographically this range marks the northern part of the border between Europe and Asia. Its highest peak is Mount Narodnaya, approximately in elevation. Transverse faults divide the mountain chain into seven major units, each of which has its own typical pattern of mountain ridges. From north to south, these are the Pay-Khoy, Zapolyarnyy, Pripolyarnyy, Polyarnyy, Severnyy, Sredniy, Yuzhnny Ural and Mugodzhary. The average altitudes of the Urals are around , the highest point being Narodnaya peak in the Pripolyarnyy Ural which reaches a height of .\nBy topography and other natural features, the Urals are divided, from north to south, into the Polar (or Arctic), Nether-Polar (or Sub-Arctic), Northern, Central and Southern parts.\nPolar Ural.\nThe Polar Urals extend for about from Mount Konstantinov Kamen in the north to the river Khulga in the south; they have an area of about and a strongly dissected relief. The maximum height is at Mount Payer and the average height is .\nThe mountains of the Polar Ural have exposed rock with sharp ridges, though flattened or rounded tops are also found.\nNether-polar Ural.\nThe Nether-Polar Ural are higher, and up to wider than the Polar Urals. They include the highest peaks of the range: Mount Narodnaya (), Mount Karpinsky () and Manaraga (). They extend for more than south to the Shchugor. The many ridges are sawtooth shaped and dissected by river valleys. Both Polar and Nether-Polar Urals are typically Alpine; they bear traces of Pleistocene glaciation, along with permafrost and extensive modern glaciation, including 143 extant glaciers.\nNorthern Ural.\nThe Northern Ural consist of a series of parallel ridges up to in height and longitudinal hollows. They are elongated from north to south and stretch for about from the river Usa. Most of the tops are flattened, but those of the highest mountains, such as Telposiz, and Konzhakovsky Stone, have a dissected topography. Intensive weathering has produced vast areas of eroded stone on the mountain slopes and summits of the northern areas.\nCentral Ural.\nThe Central Ural is the lowest part of the Ural, with smooth mountain tops, the highest mountain being (Basegi); they extend south from the river Ufa.\nSouthern Ural.\nThe relief of the Southern Ural is more complex, with numerous valleys and parallel ridges directed south-west and meridionally. The range includes the Ilmensky Mountains separated from the main ridges by the Miass. The maximum height is (Mount Yamantau) and the width reaches . Other notable peaks lie along the Iremel mountain ridge (Bolshoy Iremel and Maly Iremel) and Nurgush. The Southern Urals extend some up to the sharp westward bend of the river Ural and terminate in the Guberlin Mountains and finally in the wide Mughalzhar Hills.\nGeology.\nThe Urals are among the world's oldest extant mountain ranges. Some have estimated the age to be 250 to 300\u00a0million years. Despite this, the elevation of the mountains is unusually high. They formed during the Uralian orogeny due to the collision of the eastern edge of the supercontinent Laurasia with the young and rheologically weak continent of Kazakhstania, which now underlies much of Kazakhstan and West Siberia west of the Irtysh, and intervening island arcs. The collision lasted nearly 90\u00a0million years in the late Carboniferous \u2013 early Triassic. Unlike the other major orogens of the Paleozoic (Appalachians, Caledonides, Variscides), the Urals have not undergone post-orogenic extensional collapse and are unusually well preserved for their age, being underlaid by a pronounced crustal root. East and south of the Urals much of the orogen is buried beneath later Mesozoic and Cenozoic sediments. The adjacent Pay-Khoy Ridge to the north and Novaya Zemlya are not a part of the Uralian orogen and formed later.\nMany deformed and metamorphosed rocks, mostly of Paleozoic age, surface within the Urals. The sedimentary and volcanic layers are folded and faulted. The sediments to the west of the Ural Mountains are formed of limestone, dolomite and sandstone left from ancient shallow seas. The eastern side is dominated by basalts.\nThe western slope of the Ural Mountains has predominantly karst topography, especially in the Sylva basin, which is a tributary of the Chusovaya. It is composed of severely eroded sedimentary rocks (sandstones and limestones) that are about 350\u00a0million years old. There are many caves, sinkholes and underground streams. The karst topography is much less developed on the eastern slopes. The eastern slopes are relatively flat, with some hills and rocky outcrops and contain alternating volcanic and sedimentary layers dated to the middle Paleozoic Era. Most high mountains consist of weather-resistant rocks such as quartzite, schist and gabbro that are between 395 and 570\u00a0million years old. The river valleys are underlain by limestone.\nThe Ural Mountains contain about 48 species of economically valuable ores and minerals. Eastern regions are rich in chalcopyrite, nickel oxide (e. g. Serov nickel deposit), gold, platinum, chromite and magnetite ores, as well as in coal (Chelyabinsk Oblast), bauxite, talc, fireclay and abrasives. The Western Urals contain deposits of coal, oil, natural gas (Ishimbay and Krasnokamsk areas) and potassium salts. Both slopes are rich in bituminous coal and lignite, and the largest deposit of bituminous coal is in the north (Pechora field). The specialty of the Urals is precious and semi-precious stones, such as emerald, amethyst, aquamarine, jasper, rhodonite, malachite and diamond. Some of the deposits, such as the magnetite ores at Magnitogorsk, are already nearly depleted.\nRivers and lakes.\nMany rivers originate in the Ural Mountains. The western slopes south of the border between the Komi Republic and Perm Krai and the eastern slopes south of approximately 54\u00b030'N drain into the Caspian Sea via the Kama and Ural basins. The tributaries of the Kama include the Vishera, Chusovaya, and Belaya and originate on both the eastern and western slopes. The rest of the Urals drain into the Arctic Ocean, mainly via the Pechora basin in the west, which includes the Ilych, Shchugor, and the Usa, and via the Ob basin in the east, which includes the Tobol, Tavda, Iset, Tura and Severnaya Sosva. The rivers are frozen for more than half the year. Generally, the western rivers have higher flow volume than the eastern ones, especially in the Northern and Nether-Polar regions. Rivers are slower in the Southern Urals. This is because of low precipitation and the relatively warm climate resulting in less snow and more evaporation.\nThe mountains contain a number of deep lakes. The eastern slopes of the Southern and Central Urals have most of these, among the largest of which are the Uvildy, Itkul, Turgoyak, and Tavatuy lakes. The lakes found on the western slopes are less numerous and also smaller. Lake Bolshoye Shchuchye, the deepest lake in the Polar Urals, is deep. Other lakes, too, are found in the glacial valleys of this region. Spas and sanatoriums have been built to take advantage of the medicinal muds found in some of the mountain lakes.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the Urals is continental. The mountain ridges, elongated from north to south, effectively absorb sunlight thereby increasing the temperature. The areas west of the Ural Mountains are warmer in winter than the eastern regions because the former are warmed by Atlantic winds whereas the eastern slopes are chilled by Siberian air masses. The average January temperatures increase in the western areas from in the Polar to in the Southern Urals and the corresponding temperatures in July are . The western areas also receive more rainfall than the eastern ones by per year. This is because the mountains trap clouds from the Atlantic Ocean. The highest precipitation, approximately , is in the Northern Urals with up to snow. The eastern areas receive from in the north to in the south. Maximum precipitation occurs in the summer: the winter is dry because of the Siberian High.\nFlora.\nThe landscapes of the Urals vary with both latitude and longitude and are dominated by forests and steppes. The southern area of the Mughalzhar Hills is a semidesert. Steppes lie mostly in the southern and especially south-eastern Urals. Meadow steppes have developed on the lower parts of mountain slopes and are covered with zigzag and mountain clovers, \"Serratula gmelinii\", dropwort, meadow-grass and \"Bromus inermis\", reaching the height of . Much of the land is cultivated. To the south, the meadow steppes become more sparse, dry and low. The steep gravelly slopes of the mountains and hills of the eastern slopes of the Southern Urals are mostly covered with rocky steppes. River valleys contain willow, poplar and caragana shrubs.\nForest landscapes of the Urals are diverse, especially in the southern part. The western areas are dominated by dark coniferous taiga forests which change to mixed and deciduous forests in the south. The eastern mountain slopes have light coniferous taiga forests. The Northern Urals are dominated by conifers, namely Siberian fir, Siberian pine, Scots pine, Siberian spruce, Norway spruce and Siberian larch, as well as by silver and downy birches. The forests are much sparser in the Polar Urals. Whereas in other parts of the Ural Mountains they grow up to an altitude of , in the Polar Urals the tree line is at . The low polar forests are mixed with swamps, lichens, bogs and shrubs. Dwarf birch, mosses and berries (blueberry, cloudberry, black crowberry, etc.) are abundant. The forests of the Southern Urals are the most diverse in composition: here, together with coniferous forests are also abundant broadleaf tree species such as English oak, Norway maple and elm. The Virgin Komi Forests in the northern Urals are recognized as a World Heritage site.\nFauna.\nThe forests of Urals are inhabited by animals typical of Eurosiberia, such as elk, brown bear, fox, wolf, wolverine, lynx, squirrel, Siberian chipmunk, flying squirrel, reindeer and sable (north only). The fauna of Polar Urals also includes species like Arctic Fox and lemmings. Because of the easy accessibility of the mountains there are no specifically mountainous species. In the Central Urals, one can see a rare mixture of sable and pine marten named kidus. In the Southern Urals, badger and black polecat are common. Reptiles and amphibians live mostly in the Southern and Central Ural and are represented by the common viper, lizards and grass snakes.\nBird species of Northern, Middle and South Urals are represented by Western Capercaillie, black grouse, hazel grouse, spotted nutcracker, Siberian Jay, Common and Oriental cuckoos. Unlike mammals, the highest peaks and plateaus of Northern and Southern Urals are inhabited by some mountainous or tundra avian species, like Golden Plover, Dotterel, Ptarmigan and Willow Grouse, in Polar Urals also by Rough-legged Buzzard and Snowy Owl.\nThe steppes of the Southern Urals are dominated by hares and rodents such as hamsters, susliks, and jerboa. There are many birds of prey such as lesser kestrel and buzzards.\nEcology.\nThe continuous and intensive economic development of the last centuries has affected the fauna, and wildlife is much diminished around all industrial centers. During World War II, hundreds of factories were evacuated from Western Russia before the German occupation, flooding the Urals with industry. The conservation measures include establishing national wildlife parks. There are nine strict nature reserves in the Urals: the Ilmen, the oldest one, mineralogical reserve founded in 1920 in Chelyabinsk Oblast, Pechora-Ilych in the Komi Republic, Bashkir and its former branch Shulgan-Tash in Bashkortostan, Visim in Sverdlovsk Oblast, Southern Ural in Bashkortostan, Basegi in Perm Krai, Vishera in Perm Krai and Denezhkin Kamen in Sverdlovsk Oblast.\nThe area has also been severely damaged by the plutonium-producing facility Mayak, opened in Chelyabinsk-40 (later called Chelyabinsk-65, Ozyorsk), in the Southern Ural, after World War II. Its plants went into operation in 1948 and, for the first ten years, dumped unfiltered radioactive waste into the river Techa and Lake Karachay. In 1990, efforts were underway to contain the radiation in one of the lakes, which was estimated at the time to expose visitors to 500 millirem per day. As of 2006, 500\u00a0mrem in the natural environment was the upper limit of exposure considered safe for a member of the general public in an entire year (though workplace exposure over a year could exceed that by a factor of 10). Over of land were contaminated in 1957 from a storage tank explosion, only one of several serious accidents that further polluted the region. The 1957 accident expelled 20\u00a0million curies of radioactive material, 90% of which settled into the land immediately around the facility. Although some reactors of Mayak were shut down in 1987 and 1990, the facility keeps producing plutonium.\nCultural significance.\nThe Urals have been viewed by Russians as a \"treasure box\" of mineral resources, which were the basis for its extensive industrial development. In addition to iron and copper, the Urals were a source of gold, malachite, alexandrite, and other gems such as those used by the court jeweller Faberg\u00e9. As Russians in other regions gather mushrooms or berries, Uralians gather mineral specimens and gems. Dmitry Mamin-Sibiryak (1852\u20131912) and Pavel Bazhov (1879\u20131950), as well as Aleksey Ivanov and Olga Slavnikova, post-Soviet writers, have written of the region.\nThe region served as a military stronghold during Peter the Great's Great Northern War with Sweden, during Stalin's rule when the Magnitogorsk Metallurgical Complex was built and Russian industry relocated to the Urals during the Nazi advance at the beginning of World War II, and as the center of the Soviet nuclear industry during the Cold War. Extreme levels of air, water, and radiological contamination and pollution by industrial wastes resulted. Population exodus followed, and economic depression at the time of the collapse of the Soviet Union, but in post-Soviet times additional mineral exploration, particularly in the northern Urals, has been productive and the region has attracted industrial investment.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32154", "revid": "1749459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32154", "title": "Ulysess Grant", "text": ""}
{"id": "32157", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32157", "title": "Upwords", "text": "Board game\nUpwords is a board game. It was originally manufactured and marketed by the Milton Bradley Company, then a division of Hasbro. It has been marketed under its own name and also as \"Scrabble Upwords\" in the United States and Canada, and \"Topwords\", \"Crucimaster\", \"Betutorony\", \"Palabras Arriba\" and \"Stapelwoord\" in other countries. It is currently available as a board game and a digital gaming app.\n\"Upwords\" is a letter tile word game similar to \"Scrabble\", with players building words using letter tiles on a gridded game board. Unlike \"Scrabble\", in \"Upwords\" letters can be stacked on top of existing words to create new words. Scoring is determined by the number of letter tiles, including tiles in a stack, in a new word.\nHistory.\n\"Upwords\" was originally played on an 8\u00d78 square board, with 64 letter tiles. Hasbro Europe later expanded the gameboard to a 10\u00d710 matrix and 100 tiles, to accommodate the longer words frequently used in other languages such as German and Dutch. The 10\u00d710 matrix is currently employed in worldwide versions of the game, with the \"classic\" 8\u00d78 version also available.\nGameplay.\nTo determine play sequence, each player draws a tile; the player with the letter nearest to A will be the first to play. The tiles are returned to the draw pile.\nEach player draws seven tiles to start the game. The first player forms a word with one or more of their tiles, and must place it so that the tiles cover at least one of the four central squares (e5, e6, f5, or f6). The player then draws more tiles to replace those played. Play continues clockwise.\nSubsequent players may put tiles on the board adjacent to and/or on top of the tiles already played, as long as all words formed are found in the dictionary being used and the rules below are followed. All words must read horizontally from left to right, or vertically from top to bottom.\nAll tiles played on a turn must form part of one continuous straight line of tiles across or down.\nFor example, if the word CATER is on the board, a player could put a B and E in front of CATER and then put an L on top of the C and a D on top of the R to build BELATED. \nRestrictions on words are as follows:\nRestrictions on stacking tiles are as follows:\nA player may choose to pass at any time, or discard one tile and draw a replacement instead of playing. Once the draw pile is exhausted, the game ends when any player runs out of tiles, or every player passes in a single round. In some versions of the game it doesn't end when a player runs out of tiles, only when all pass or all the tiles are played.\nScoring.\nAny word with no stacked letters scores two points per tile, while a word containing stacked letters scores one point for every tile it contains. In the CATER/BELATED example above, CATER would score 10 points, while BELATED would score nine. Two bonus points are awarded for using the \"Qu\" tile in a one-level word, and 20 for using all seven tiles in one turn. If changing two words at once, both words must be legal.\nPlayers lose five points for every unused tile they hold at the end of the game.\nLetter distribution.\nThe letter distribution of the 8\u00d78 version of Upwords is as follows:\n64 tiles:\n1 of each: F, J, K, Qu, V, W, X, Z\n2 of each: B, C, G, H, R, Y\n3 of each: D, L, M, N, P, S, U\n4 of each: I, O, T\n5 of each: A\n6 of each: E\nThe letter distribution of the 10\u00d710 version is as follows:\n100 tiles:\n1 of each: J, Qu, V, X, Z\n2 of each: K, W, Y\n3 of each: B, F, G, H, P\n4 of each: C\n5 of each: D, L, M, N, R, T, U\n6 of each: S\n7 of each: A, I, O\n8 of each: E\nElectronic versions.\nIn the early 1990s, Hasbro licensed electronic marketing rights to Microsoft, briefly making the game available electronically. Microsoft no longer has rights to \"Upwords\".\nAn app was released under license for iOS devices in 2013, with an Android version following in 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32159", "revid": "28886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32159", "title": "Ultraviolet radiation", "text": ""}
{"id": "32160", "revid": "9702053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32160", "title": "University for Peace", "text": "University and international organization\nThe University for Peace (UPEACE) is an international university and intergovernmental organization established as a treaty organisation by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in 1980. The university offers postgraduate, doctoral, and executive programmes related to the study of peace and conflict, environment and development, and international law.\nThe headquarters of the University for Peace are located in a natural area near Ciudad Col\u00f3n, Costa Rica. However, the university also has a presence in other countries, notably Somalia and the Netherlands.\nThe charter of the University for Peace, adopted by the UNGA in resolution 35/55 in 1980, defines the mission of the university as follows: \"to provide humanity with an international institution of higher education for peace with the aim of promoting among all human beings the spirit of understanding, tolerance and peaceful coexistence, to stimulate cooperation among peoples and to help lessen obstacles and threats to world peace and progress, in keeping with the noble aspirations proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations.\"The organization has observer status in the UNGA and maintains a permanent office at the UN headquarters in New York.\nHistory and relationship with United Nations.\nThe University for Peace was set in motion by a treaty endorsed by resolution 34/111 of 14 December 1979 of the United Nations General Assembly. This resolution also established an international commission which, in collaboration with the government of Costa Rica, was requested to prepare the proposed university's organization and structure -- setting in motion the creation of the University for Peace. Thereafter, by Resolution 35/55 of 5 December 1980, the UN General Assembly endorsed the treaty establishing the University for Peace by adopting the International Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace along with the Charter of the University for Peace.d \nIn 1999, Secretary-General Kofi Annan took further steps to revitalize the University for Peace by changing its focus from that of a local and regional institution to a more globally-focussed perspective. Accompanying this change in focus was a change of the university's working language, from Spanish to English, and launch of its African program.\nThe University for Peace is part of the academic wing of the UN system, and has observer status at the UN General Assembly, while maintaining its independence in academic, financial and management matters. The UN Secretary-General is the honorary president of UPEACE. As the university is mandated by the General Assembly, the UN Secretary-General reports periodically on the activities of the University for Peace.\nThe main body of governance of the university is the Council of the University for Peace. It is composed of 17 members, ten of which are appointed by the Secretary-General of the UN and the Director-General of UNESCO, two nominated by the government of Costa Rica, and others being high-level staff of the University for Peace, the United Nations University, and the United Nations.\nHeadquarters and main campus.\nThe main campus of the university, the Rodrigo Carazo Campus, is 30 km south-west of San Jos\u00e9, Costa Rica. Most master's and doctoral programmes are administered from this location. The university has a mix of both resident and visiting faculty members. \nThe closest town to the mountain on which the university is perched is Ciudad Col\u00f3n, which is where most of the students, staff, and faculty members of the university reside.\nEarth Charter Initiative.\nThe main campus of the University for Peace hosts the International Secretariat of the Earth Charter Initiative, whose stated mission is \"to promote the transition to sustainable ways of living and a global society founded on a shared ethical framework that includes respect and care for the community of life, ecological integrity, universal human rights, respect for diversity, economic justice, democracy, and a culture of peace.\" This mission is carried out using the Earth Charter as the principal guiding framework. \nIn 2012, the Earth Charter Initiative and the University for Peace were jointly awarded the UNESCO Chair on Education for Sustainable Development and the Earth Charter. The work related to this UNESCO chair is carried out at the 'Earth Charter Center for Education for Sustainable Development', which opened at the UPEACE main campus in 2014.\nPeace Park and nature reserve.\nThe campus is surrounded by a natural reserve (Peace Park) composed of a secondary forest and the last remnant of primary forest (200 ha) in the Central Valley of Costa Rica. It shelters mammals such as monkeys and deer, reptiles, and over 300 species of birds, as well as approximately 100 varieties of trees. The university's installations and protected area make up 303 ha. The park contains several hiking trails and monuments to peacebuilders.\nInternational activities.\nIn addition to the activities at the Costa Rica campus, the University for Peace has several international offices and partners.\nAfrica.\nThe University for Peace established its Africa program in 2002. The programme aims to stimulate and strengthen the capacities in Africa to teach, train and conduct research in areas of peace and conflict studies. As part of the programme, the university has established capacity-building agreements with 27 institutions in Africa, mainly universities.\nThe first five years of the program focused on the development of curricula and teaching materials and the delivery of a range of short courses, workshops, conferences and seminars in various parts of Africa. Within this period, the program attracted close to one thousand participants from academia, policy-makers and civil society organizations.\nSince 2007, the Africa programme has worked with a number of partner universities to develop master's degree programs to be based at African universities. The principal aim of this endeavour is to further strengthen the African capacity and build a wide expertise for a better understanding of conflicts in Africa, their prevention and the creation of the environment favourable to lasting peace and development in the region.\nIn partnership with the Institute for Peace, Security and Development, UPEACE offers master's and PhD programmes related to the university's academic profile in Somalia. In 2022, 166 students graduated from the Somalia programme. The incumbent president of the Somalia, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, defended his Ph.D. thesis at the University for Peace. The university announced its intention to start a Ph.D. scholarship programme named after Hassan.\nEurope.\nIn January 2012, UPEACE opened a centre in The Hague, Netherlands, which is housed at the Academy Building of the Peace Palace. It promotes the activities of the university in Europe and works on education and research in peace studies, cooperating with academic and policy-oriented institutions in The Hague region. \nThe Geneva Office of the University for Peace was established in 2001. The focus of the Geneva office is to contribute to the development of programmatic activities of the university in Africa and the Middle East, engaging with the academic community in Geneva, and facilitation of institutional relations within Europe and with the United Nations system.\nAsia.\nUntil 2023, the University for Peace jointly organised the Asian Peacebuilders Scholarship Programme (APS) with the Nippon Foundation and Ateneo de Manila University. APS graduates obtained a Master of Arts degree from the University for Peace and a Master's degree in Transdisciplinary Social Development from Ateneo de Manila University.\nAcademics.\nThe University for Peace offers graduate, doctoral, and executive programmes in the areas of peace, environment and international law. The educational and research activities are organised in four departments: international law, peace and conflict studies, environment and development, and regional studies. The latter department offers education in Spanish rather than English. In addition to its own programmes, the university offers joint programmes with American University, IHE Delft Institute for Water Education, Pace University, UNITAR, Ateneo de Manila University and several other organisations. \nDoctoral program.\nThe University for Peace has a doctoral programme in peace and conflict studies since 2012. The programme offers a research track and a professional track. \nAccreditation.\nThe university has been a member organisation of the Costa Rican accreditation organisation SINAES since 2008. SINAES has evaluated and accredited the larger graduate programmes at the university, while its other programmes are in the process of accreditation.\nAdditionally, degrees awarded by the university are recognized under international law, as the Charter of the University for Peace gives the authority to \"grant master's degrees and doctorates\". As the resolution to establish the University for Peace was taken by consensus in the General Assembly, the authorisation to award degrees is in theory legally valid in all countries.\nUniversity for Peace degrees are verified by the International Association of Universities/UNESCO.\nHuman rights outreach.\nThe University for Peace has also established the UPEACE Human Rights Centre which was created within the contours of the broader mission of the university. The work of the UPEACE Human Rights Centre seeks to promote understanding, respect and enjoyment of universal human rights. The centre carries out this objective through human rights education, training, research, capacity building, and awareness-raising activities.\nThe University for Peace hosts the Office of Free Legal Assistance for Journalists in Costa Rica. In 2023, the office presented a critical report about the access to information and media during the 2022 elections.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32161", "revid": "19769249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32161", "title": "Urinary tract infection", "text": "Infection that affects part of the urinary tract\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA urinary tract infection (UTI) is an infection that affects a part of the urinary tract. Lower urinary tract infections may involve the bladder (cystitis) or urethra (urethritis) while upper urinary tract infections affect the kidney (pyelonephritis). Symptoms from a lower urinary tract infection include suprapubic pain, painful urination, frequency and urgency of urination despite having an empty bladder. Symptoms of a kidney infection, on the other hand, are more systemic and include fever or flank pain usually in addition to the symptoms of a lower UTI. Rarely, the urine may appear bloody. Symptoms may be vague or non-specific at the extremities of age (i.e. in patients who are very young or old).\nThe most common cause of infection is \"E. coli\", though other bacteria or fungi may sometimes be the cause. Risk factors include female anatomy, sexual intercourse, diabetes, obesity, catheterisation, and family history. Although sexual intercourse is a risk factor, UTIs are not classified as sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Pyelonephritis usually occurs due to an ascending bladder infection but may also result from a blood-borne bacterial infection. Diagnosis in young healthy women can be based on symptoms alone. In those with vague symptoms, diagnosis can be difficult because bacteria may be present without there being an infection. In complicated cases or if treatment fails, a urine culture may be useful.\nIn uncomplicated cases, UTIs are treated with a short course of antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Resistance to many of the antibiotics used to treat this condition is increasing. In complicated cases, a longer course or intravenous antibiotics may be needed. If symptoms do not improve in two or three days, further diagnostic testing may be needed. Phenazopyridine may help with symptoms. In those who have bacteria or white blood cells in their urine but have no symptoms, antibiotics are generally not needed, unless they are pregnant. In those with frequent infections, a short course of antibiotics may be taken as soon as symptoms begin or long-term antibiotics may be used as a preventive measure.\nAbout 150million people develop a urinary tract infection in a given year. They are more common in women than men, but similar between anatomies while carrying indwelling catheters. In women, they are the most common form of bacterial infection. Up to 10% of women have a urinary tract infection in a given year, and half of women have at least one infection at some point in their lifetime. They occur most frequently between the ages of 16 and 35years. Recurrences are common. Urinary tract infections have been described since ancient times with the first documented description in the Ebers Papyrus dated to c. 1550 BC.\nSigns and symptoms.\nLower urinary tract infection is also referred to as a bladder infection. The most common symptoms are burning with urination and having to urinate frequently (or an urge to urinate) in the absence of vaginal discharge and significant pain. These symptoms may vary from mild to severe and in healthy women last an average of sixdays. Some pain above the pubic bone or in the lower back may be present. People experiencing an upper urinary tract infection, or pyelonephritis, may experience flank pain, fever, or nausea and vomiting in addition to the classic symptoms of a lower urinary tract infection. Rarely, the urine may appear bloody or contain visible pus in the urine.\nUTIs have been associated with onset or worsening of delirium, dementia, and neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression and psychosis. However, there is insufficient evidence to determine whether UTI causes confusion. The reasons for this are unknown, but may involve a UTI-mediated systemic inflammatory response which affects the brain. Cytokines such as interleukin-6 produced as part of the inflammatory response may produce neuroinflammation, in turn affecting dopaminergic and/or glutamatergic neurotransmission as well as brain glucose metabolism.\nChildren.\nIn young children, the only symptom of a urinary tract infection (UTI) may be a fever. Because of the lack of more obvious symptoms, when females under the age of two or uncircumcised males less than a year exhibit a fever, a culture of the urine is recommended by many medical associations. Infants may feed poorly, vomit, sleep more, or show signs of jaundice. In older children, new onset urinary incontinence (loss of bladder control) may occur. About 1 in 400 infants of one to three months of age with a UTI also have bacterial meningitis.\nElderly.\nUrinary tract symptoms are frequently lacking in the elderly. The presentations may be vague and include incontinence, a change in mental status, or fatigue as the only symptoms, while some present to a health care provider with sepsis, an infection of the blood, as the first symptoms. Diagnosis can be complicated by the fact that many elderly people have preexisting incontinence or dementia.\nIt is reasonable to obtain a urine culture in those with signs of systemic infection that may be unable to report urinary symptoms, such as when advanced dementia is present. Systemic signs of infection include a fever or increase in temperature of more than from usual, chills, and an increased white blood cell count.\nCause.\nUropathogenic \"E. coli\" from the gut is the cause of 80\u201385% of community-acquired urinary tract infections, with \"Staphylococcus saprophyticus\" being the cause in 5\u201310%. Rarely they may be due to viral or fungal infections. Healthcare-associated urinary tract infections (mostly related to urinary catheterization) involve a much broader range of pathogens including: \"E. coli\" (27%), \"Klebsiella\" (11%), \"Pseudomonas\" (11%), the fungal pathogen \"Candida albicans\" (9%), and \"Enterococcus\" (7%) among others. During recent years of intensive care, \"Enterococcus\" spp. have several times been found as the primary cause of urinary tract infection, suggested related to broad treatment with cephalosporin antibiotics against which they are tolerant. Urinary tract infections due to \"Staphylococcus aureus\" typically occur secondary to blood-borne infections. \"Chlamydia trachomatis\" and \"Mycoplasma genitalium\" can infect the urethra but not the bladder. These infections are usually classified as a urethritis rather than urinary tract infection.\nIntercourse.\nIn young sexually active women, sexual activity is the cause of 75\u201390% of bladder infections, with the risk of infection related to the frequency of sex. The term \"honeymoon cystitis\" has been applied to this phenomenon of frequent UTIs during early marriage. In post-menopausal women, sexual activity does not affect the risk of developing a UTI. Spermicide use, independent of sexual frequency, increases the risk of UTIs. Diaphragm use is also associated. Condom use without spermicide or use of birth control pills does not increase the risk of uncomplicated urinary tract infection.\nSex.\nWomen are more prone to UTIs than men because, in females, the urethra is much shorter and closer to the anus. As a woman's estrogen levels decrease with menopause, her risk of urinary tract infections increases due to the loss of protective vaginal flora. Additionally, vaginal atrophy that can sometimes occur after menopause is associated with recurrent urinary tract infections.\nChronic prostatitis in the forms of chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome and chronic bacterial prostatitis (not acute bacterial prostatitis or asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis) may cause recurrent urinary tract infections in males. Risk of infections increases as males age. While bacteria is commonly present in the urine of older males this does not appear to affect the risk of urinary tract infections.\nUrinary catheters.\nUrinary catheterization increases the risk for urinary tract infections. The risk of bacteriuria (bacteria in the urine) is between three and six percent per day and prophylactic antibiotics are not effective in decreasing symptomatic infections. The risk of an associated infection occurs linearly for enteric bacteria, and can be decreased by catheterizing only when necessary, using aseptic technique for insertion, and maintaining unobstructed closed drainage of the catheter.\nMale scuba divers using condom catheters and female divers using external catching devices for their dry suits are also susceptible to urinary tract infections.\nOthers.\nA predisposition for bladder infections may run in families. This is believed to be related to genetics. Other risk factors include diabetes, being uncircumcised, and having a large prostate. In children UTIs are associated with vesicoureteral reflux (an abnormal movement of urine from the bladder into ureters or kidneys) and constipation.\nPersons with spinal cord injury are at increased risk for urinary tract infection in part because of chronic use of catheter, and in part because of voiding dysfunction. It is the most common cause of infection in this population, as well as the most common cause of hospitalization.\nPathogenesis.\nThe bacteria that cause urinary tract infections typically enter the bladder via the urethra. However, infection may also occur via the blood or lymph. It is believed that the bacteria are usually transmitted to the urethra from the bowel, with females at greater risk due to their anatomy. After gaining entry to the bladder, \"E. Coli\" are able to attach to the bladder wall and form a biofilm that resists the body's immune response.\n\"Escherichia coli\" is the single most common microorganism, followed by \"Klebsiella\" and \"Proteus\" spp., to cause urinary tract infection. \"Klebsiella\" and \"Proteus\" spp., are frequently associated with stone disease. The presence of Gram positive bacteria such as \"Enterococcus\" and \"Staphylococcus\" is increased.\nThe increased resistance of urinary pathogens to quinolone antibiotics has been reported worldwide and might be the consequence of overuse and misuse of quinolones.\nDiagnosis.\nIn straightforward cases, a diagnosis may be made and treatment given based on symptoms alone without further laboratory confirmation. In complicated or questionable cases, it may be useful to confirm the diagnosis via urinalysis, looking for the presence of urinary nitrites, white blood cells (leukocytes), or leukocyte esterase. Another test, urine microscopy, looks for the presence of red blood cells, white blood cells, or bacteria. Urine culture is deemed positive if it shows a bacterial colony count of greater than or equal to 103 colony-forming units per mL of a typical urinary tract organism. Antibiotic sensitivity can also be tested with these cultures, making them useful in the selection of antibiotic treatment. However, women with negative cultures may still improve with antibiotic treatment. As symptoms can be vague and without reliable tests for urinary tract infections, diagnosis can be difficult in the elderly.\nBased on pH.\nNormal urine pH is slightly acidic, with usual values of 6.0 to 7.5, but the normal range is 4.5 to 8.0. A urine pH of 8.5 or 9.0 is indicative of a urea-splitting organism, such as Proteus, Klebsiella, or Ureaplasma urealyticum; therefore, an asymptomatic patient with a high pH means UTI regardless of the other urine test results. Alkaline pH also can signify struvite kidney stones, which are also known as \"infection stones\".\nClassification.\nA urinary tract infection may involve only the lower urinary tract, in which case it is known as a bladder infection. Alternatively, it may involve the upper urinary tract, in which case it is known as pyelonephritis. If the urine contains significant bacteria but there are no symptoms, the condition is known as asymptomatic bacteriuria. If a urinary tract infection involves the upper tract, and the person has diabetes mellitus, is pregnant, is male, or immunocompromised, it is considered complicated. Otherwise if a woman is healthy and premenopausal it is considered uncomplicated. In children when a urinary tract infection is associated with a fever, it is deemed to be an upper urinary tract infection.\nChildren.\nTo make the diagnosis of a urinary tract infection in children, a positive urinary culture is required. Contamination poses a frequent challenge depending on the method of collection used, thus a cutoff of 105CFU/mL is used for a \"clean-catch\" mid stream sample, 104CFU/mL is used for catheter-obtained specimens, and 102CFU/mL is used for suprapubic aspirations (a sample drawn directly from the bladder with a needle). The use of \"urine bags\" to collect samples is discouraged by the World Health Organization due to the high rate of contamination when cultured, and catheterization is preferred in those not toilet trained. Some, such as the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends renal ultrasound and voiding cystourethrogram (watching a person's urethra and urinary bladder with real time x-rays while they urinate) in all children less than two years old who have had a urinary tract infection. However, because there is a lack of effective treatment if problems are found, others such as the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence only recommends routine imaging in those less than six months old or who have unusual findings.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nIn women with cervicitis (inflammation of the cervix) or vaginitis (inflammation of the vagina) and in young men with UTI symptoms, a \"Chlamydia trachomatis\" or \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" infection may be the cause. These infections are typically classified as a urethritis rather than a urinary tract infection. Vaginitis may also be due to a yeast infection. Interstitial cystitis (chronic pain in the bladder) may be considered for people who experience multiple episodes of UTI symptoms but urine cultures remain negative and not improved with antibiotics. Prostatitis (inflammation of the prostate) may also be considered in the differential diagnosis.\nHemorrhagic cystitis, characterized by blood in the urine, can occur secondary to a number of causes including: infections, radiation therapy, underlying cancer, medications and toxins. Medications that commonly cause this problem include the chemotherapeutic agent cyclophosphamide with rates of 2\u201340%. Eosinophilic cystitis is a rare condition where eosinophiles are present in the bladder wall. Signs and symptoms are similar to a bladder infection. Its cause is not entirely clear; however, it may be linked to food allergies, infections, and medications among others.\nPrevention.\nA number of measures have not been confirmed to affect UTI frequency including: urinating immediately after intercourse, the type of underwear used, personal hygiene methods used after urinating or defecating, or whether a person typically bathes or showers. There is similarly a lack of evidence surrounding the effect of holding one's urine, tampon use, and douching. In those with frequent urinary tract infections who use spermicide or a diaphragm as a method of contraception, they are advised to use alternative methods. In those with benign prostatic hyperplasia urinating in a sitting position appears to improve bladder emptying which might decrease urinary tract infections in this group.\nUsing urinary catheters as little and as short of time as possible and appropriate care of the catheter when used prevents catheter-associated urinary tract infections. They should be inserted using sterile technique in hospital however non-sterile technique may be appropriate in those who self catheterize. The urinary catheter set up should also be kept sealed. Evidence does not support a significant decrease in risk when silver-alloy catheters are used.\nMedications.\nFor those with recurrent infections, taking a short course of antibiotics when each infection occurs is associated with the lowest antibiotic use. A prolonged course of daily antibiotics is also effective. Medications frequently used include nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Some recommend against prolonged use due to concerns of antibiotic resistance. Methenamine is another agent used for this purpose as in the bladder where the acidity is low it produces formaldehyde to which resistance does not develop. A UK study showed that methenamine is as effective daily low-dose antibiotics at preventing UTIs among women who experience recurrent UTIs. As methenamine is an antiseptic, it may avoid the issue of antibiotic resistance.\nIn cases where infections are related to intercourse, taking antibiotics afterwards may be useful. In post-menopausal women, topical vaginal estrogen has been found to reduce recurrence. As opposed to topical creams, the use of vaginal estrogen from pessaries has not been as useful as low dose antibiotics. Antibiotics following short term urinary catheterization decreases the subsequent risk of a bladder infection. A number of UTI vaccines are in development as of 2018.\nChildren.\nThe evidence that preventive antibiotics decrease urinary tract infections in children is poor. However recurrent UTIs are a rare cause of further kidney problems if there are no underlying abnormalities of the kidneys, resulting in less than a third of a percent (0.33%) of chronic kidney disease in adults. \nMale circumcision.\nCircumcision of boys has been observed to exhibit a strong protective effect against UTIs, with some research suggesting as much as a 90% reduction in symptomatic UTI incidence among male infants, if they are circumcised. The protective effect is even stronger in boys born with urogenital abnormalities.\nDietary supplements.\nWhen used as an adjuvant to antibiotics and other standard treatments, cranberry supplements decrease the number of UTIs in people who get them frequently. A 2023 review concluded that cranberry products can reduce the risk of UTIs in certain groups (women with reoccurring UTIs, children, and people having had clinical interventions), but not in pregnant women, the elderly or people with urination disorders. Some evidence suggests that cranberry juice is more effective at UTI control than dehydrated tablets or capsules. Cranberry has not been effective in attempts to replace antibiotics for the treatment of active infections. Cranberry supplements are also high in sugar content, which may worsen the risks associated with UTIs in patients with diabetes mellitus.\nD-mannose is often marketed as a dietary supplement that prevents UTIs; however, there is little evidence supporting its use. A randomised controlled trial compared daily d-mannose with a placebo (fructose) among women with recurrent urinary tract infections over 6 months. D-mannose offered no benefit over placebo in reducing UTIs. \nAs of 2015, probiotics require further study to determine if they are beneficial for UTI.\nTreatment.\nThe mainstay of treatment is antibiotics. Phenazopyridine is occasionally prescribed during the first few days in addition to antibiotics to help with the burning and urgency sometimes felt during a bladder infection. However, it is not routinely recommended due to safety concerns with its use, specifically an elevated risk of methemoglobinemia (higher than normal level of methemoglobin in the blood). Paracetamol may be used for fevers. There is no good evidence for the use of cranberry products for treating current infections.\nFosfomycin can be used as an effective treatment for both UTIs and complicated UTIs including acute pyelonephritis. The standard regimen for complicated UTIs is an oral 3g dose administered once every 48 or 72 hours for a total of 3 doses or a 6 grams every 8 hours for 7 days to 14 days when fosfomycin is given in IV form.\nGepotidacin was approved for medical use in the United States in March 2025. It is the first new antibiotic approved in the US for UTIs in nearly 30 years.\nUncomplicated.\nUncomplicated infections can be diagnosed and treated based on symptoms alone. Antibiotics taken by mouth such as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, nitrofurantoin, or fosfomycin are typically first line. Cephalosporins, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, or a fluoroquinolone may also be used. However, antibiotic resistance to fluoroquinolones among the bacteria that cause urinary infections has been increasing. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends against the use of fluoroquinolones, including a Boxed Warning, when other options are available due to higher risks of serious side effects, such as tendinitis, tendon rupture and worsening of myasthenia gravis. These medications substantially shorten the time to recovery with all being equally effective. A three-day treatment with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, or a fluoroquinolone is usually sufficient, whereas nitrofurantoin requires 5\u20137days. Fosfomycin may be used as a single dose but is not as effective.\nFluoroquinolones are not recommended as a first treatment. The Infectious Diseases Society of America states this due to the concern of generating resistance to this class of medication. Amoxicillin-clavulanate appears less effective than other options. Despite this precaution, some resistance has developed to all of these medications related to their widespread use. Trimethoprim alone is deemed to be equivalent to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in some countries. For simple UTIs, children often respond to a three-day course of antibiotics. Women with recurrent simple UTIs are over 90% accurate in identifying new infections. They may benefit from self-treatment upon occurrence of symptoms with medical follow-up only if the initial treatment fails.\nThe combination sulopenem etzadroxil/probenecid (Orlynvah) was approved for medical use in the United States in October 2024.\nComplicated.\nComplicated UTIs are more difficult to treat and usually requires more aggressive evaluation, treatment, and follow-up. It may require identifying and addressing the underlying complication. Increasing antibiotic resistance is causing concern about the future of treating those with complicated and recurrent UTI.\nAsymptomatic bacteriuria.\nThose who have bacteria in the urine but no symptoms should not generally be treated with antibiotics. This includes those who are old, those with spinal cord injuries, and those who have urinary catheters. Pregnancy is an exception and it is recommended that women take sevendays of antibiotics. If not treated it causes up to 30% of mothers to develop pyelonephritis and increases risk of low birth weight and preterm birth. Some also support treatment of those with diabetes mellitus and treatment before urinary tract procedures which will likely cause bleeding.\nPregnant women.\nUrinary tract infections, even asymptomatic presence of bacteria in the urine, are more concerning in pregnancy due to the increased risk of kidney infections. During pregnancy, high progesterone levels elevate the risk of decreased muscle tone of the ureters and bladder, which leads to a greater likelihood of reflux, where urine flows back up the ureters and towards the kidneys. While pregnant women do not have an increased risk of asymptomatic bacteriuria, if bacteriuria is present they do have a 25\u201340% risk of a kidney infection. Thus if urine testing shows signs of an infection\u2014even in the absence of symptoms\u2014treatment is recommended. Cephalexin or nitrofurantoin are typically used because they are generally considered safe in pregnancy. A kidney infection during pregnancy may result in preterm birth or pre-eclampsia (a state of high blood pressure and kidney dysfunction during pregnancy that can lead to seizures). Some women have UTIs that keep coming back in pregnancy. There is insufficient research on how to best treat these recurrent infections.\nPyelonephritis.\nPyelonephritis is treated more aggressively than a simple bladder infection using either a longer course of oral antibiotics or intravenous antibiotics. Seven days of the oral fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin is typically used in areas where the resistance rate is less than 10%. If the local antibiotic resistance rates are greater than 10%, a dose of intravenous ceftriaxone is often prescribed. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or amoxicillin/clavulanate orally for 14 days is another reasonable option. In those who exhibit more severe symptoms, admission to a hospital for ongoing antibiotics may be needed. Complications such as ureteral obstruction from a kidney stone may be considered if symptoms do not improve following two or three days of treatment.\nPrognosis.\nWith treatment, symptoms generally improve within 36hours. Up to 42% of uncomplicated infections may resolve on their own within a few days or weeks.\n15\u201325% of adults and children have chronic symptomatic UTIs including recurrent infections, persistent infections (infection with the same pathogen), a re-infection (new pathogen), or a relapsed infection (the same pathogen causes a new infection after it was completely gone). Recurrent urinary tract infections are defined as at least two infections (episodes) in a six-month time period or three infections in twelve months, can occur in adults and in children.\nCystitis refers to a urinary tract infection that involves the lower urinary tract (bladder). An upper urinary tract infection which involves the kidney is called pyelonephritis. About 10\u201320% of pyelonephritis will go on and develop scarring of the affected kidney. Then, 10\u201320% of those develop scarring will have increased risk of hypertension in later life.\nEpidemiology.\nUrinary tract infections are the most frequent bacterial infection in women. They occur most frequently between the ages of 16 and 35years, with 10% of women getting an infection yearly and more than 40\u201360% having an infection at some point in their lives. Recurrences are common, with nearly half of people getting a second infection within a year. Urinary tract infections occur four times more frequently in females than males. Pyelonephritis occurs between 20 and 30 times less frequently. They are the most common cause of hospital-acquired infections accounting for approximately 40%. Rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine increase with age from two to seven percent in women of child-bearing age to as high as 50% in elderly women in care homes. Rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine among men over 75 are between 7\u201310%. 2\u201310% of pregnant women have asymptomatic bacteria in the urine and higher rates are reported in women who live in some underdeveloped countries.\nUrinary tract infections may affect 10% of people during childhood. Among children, urinary tract infections are most common in uncircumcised males less than three months of age, followed by females less than one year. Estimates of frequency among children, however, vary widely. In a group of children with a fever, ranging in age between birth and two years, 2\u201320% were diagnosed with a UTI.\nVeterinary medicine.\nDomestic cats are less susceptible to bacterial urinary tract infections than domestic dogs.\nHistory.\nUrinary tract infections have been described since ancient times with the first documented description in the Ebers Papyrus dated to c. 1550 BC. It was described by the Egyptians as \"sending forth heat from the bladder\". Effective treatment did not occur until the development and availability of antibiotics in the 1930s, before which time herbs, bloodletting and rest were recommended.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32163", "revid": "50149415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32163", "title": "USS Greeneville", "text": "US Navy submarine\nUSS \"Greeneville\" is a nuclear-powered attack submarine (SSN) named after Greeneville, Tennessee. The contract to build the boat was awarded to Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company in Newport News, Virginia, on 14 December 1988, and her keel was laid down on 28 February 1992. She was launched on 17 September 1994, sponsored by Tipper Gore, and commissioned on 16 February 1996.\n\"The Greeneville\" had a deadly collision with a Japanese fishing vessel, \"Ehime Maru\", off the coast of Oahu in February 2001.\nNamesake.\nShe was named after Greeneville, Tennessee, home of President Andrew Johnson, after local residents, government officials, and businesses such as Greeneville Metal Manufacturing (which builds submarine components) began a campaign for a submarine to be named after their town.\nBoat's history.\n\"Ehime Maru\" incident.\nOn 9 February 2001, while conducting a main ballast tank blow off the coast of Oahu and hosting several civilians, the \"Greeneville\" struck the 191-foot (58 m) Japanese fishery high school training ship \"Ehime Maru\" (\u3048\u3072\u3081\u4e38). This caused the fishing boat to sink in less than ten minutes, leading to the death of nine people: three crew members, four students, and two teachers. The commander of the \"Greeneville\", Commander Scott Waddle, accepted full responsibility for the incident. However, after he faced a court of inquiry, it was decided a full court-martial would be unnecessary, opting for a non-judicial punishment and administrative disciplinary action to the captain and some crew members. Commander Waddle's request to retire was approved for 1 October 2001 with an honorable discharge.\nSaipan incident.\nOn 27 August 2001, the \"Greeneville\" ran aground while entering port in Saipan on a routine Western Pacific deployment. The boat's underside, rudder, and propulsion train suffered minor damage. Repairs required dry docking and a significant delay in the remainder of her deployment. The boat's commanding officer, Commander David Bogdan, was relieved of command, and the navigator and assistant navigator were also removed from their duties. In addition, the navigator and the sub's executive officer, Lieutenant Commander Gerald Pfeifer, were found guilty of \"hazarding a vessel\" during an admiral's mast, conducted by Rear Admiral Joseph Enright, Commander, Submarine Group Seven.\nUSS \"Ogden\" collision.\nOn 27 January 2002, less than a year after colliding with \"Ehime Maru\" and five months after running aground, the \"Greeneville\" collided with during a personnel transfer off the coast of Oman, opening a 5 by 18 inch (130 by 460 mm) hole in one of \"Ogden\"'s fuel tanks and spilling several thousand gallons of fuel. After the collision, both vessels left the area under their own power.\nPost-2002 service.\nFollowing the investigation regarding the collision with \"Ogden\", Commander Lindsay R. Hankins was permitted to remain in command of the \"Greeneville\". Despite the fact the \"Ogden\"'s commanding officer was fired, Hankins went on a command tour with XO LCDR Mark D. Pyle. Capt. Hankins went on to be awarded the Vice Admiral James Bond Stockdale Award for Inspirational Leadership. LCDR Pyle also went on to receive the John Paul Jones award, which recognizes outstanding leadership.\nOn 9 July 2004, when Commander Lorin Selby relieved Hankins as commanding officer of the \"Greeneville\", Captain Cecil Haney, Commodore, Submarine Squadron One, stated that \"The performance of USS \"Greeneville\" during Captain Hankins' tour has been nothing but remarkable. It has been marked by top grades in both tactical and engineering readiness. Lee Hankins was handpicked by our leadership for the job as CO of the \"Greeneville\". They got it right.\" Hankins was selected for promotion to Captain in 2005 and served as Commodore of Submarine Squadron One (COMSUBRON 1) based in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Captain Hankins later served as the Chief of Staff for the Commander, Submarine Forces Pacific.\nBetween 25 and 27 March 2006, a series of anti-submarine warfare exercises were held in Hawaiian waters that included the \"Greeneville\"; Carrier Strike Group Nine; the nuclear-powered attack submarines , , , and , as well as land-based P-3 Orion aircraft from patrol squadrons VP-4, VP-9, and VP-47.\nIn October 2007, the \"Greeneville\" left her home port of Pearl Harbor to conduct a Depot Modernization Period at Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery, ME. She returned to Pearl Harbor, HI in July 2009. In early 2011, the \"Greeneville\" returned from a Western Pacific deployment under the command of CDR Carullo.\nAwards.\nAwarded the 2016 \"Battle E\" award from Submarine Squadron One after a successful western Pacific deployment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32164", "revid": "33145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32164", "title": "Unitarianism", "text": "Nontrinitarian sect of Christianity\nUnitarianism is a nontrinitarian sect of Christianity. Unitarians affirm the unitary nature of God as the singular and unique creator of the universe, believe that Jesus Christ was inspired by God in his moral teachings and that he is the savior of mankind, but he is not equal to God himself. Accordingly, Unitarians reject the Ecumenical Councils and ecumenical creeds, and sit outside traditional, mainstream Christianity.\nUnitarianism was established in order to restore \"primitive Christianity before later corruptions set in\". Likewise, Unitarian Christians generally reject the doctrine of original sin. The churchmanship of Unitarianism may include liberal denominations or Unitarian Christian denominations that are more conservative, with the latter being known as biblical Unitarians.\nThe birth of the Unitarian faith is proximate to the Radical Reformation, beginning almost simultaneously among the Protestant Polish Brethren in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and in the Principality of Transylvania in the mid-16th century; the first Unitarian Christian denomination known to have emerged during that time was the Unitarian Church of Transylvania, founded by the Unitarian preacher and theologian Ferenc D\u00e1vid (c.\u20091520\u00a0\u2013 1579). Among its adherents were a significant number of Italians who took refuge in Bohemia, Moravia, Poland, and Transylvania in order to escape from the religious persecution perpetrated against them by the Roman Catholic and Magisterial Protestant churches. In the 17th century, significant repression in Poland led many Unitarians to flee or be killed for their faith. From the 16th to 18th centuries, Unitarians in Britain often faced significant political persecution, including John Biddle and Theophilus Lindsey. In England, the first Unitarian Church was established in 1774 on Essex Street, London, where today's British Unitarian headquarters is still located.\nAs is typical of dissenters and nonconformists, Unitarianism does not constitute one single Christian denomination; rather, it refers to a collection of both existing and extinct Christian groups (whether historically related to each other or not) that share a common theological concept of the unitary nature of God. Unitarian Christian communities and churches have developed in Central Europe (mostly Romania and Hungary), Ireland, India, Jamaica, Japan, Canada, Nigeria, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In British America, different schools of Unitarian theology first spread in the New England Colonies and subsequently in the Mid-Atlantic States. The first official acceptance of the Unitarian faith on the part of a congregation in North America was by King's Chapel in Boston, from where James Freeman began teaching Unitarian doctrine in 1784 and was appointed rector. Later in 1785, he created a revised Unitarian \"Book of Common Prayer\" based on Lindsey's work.\nTerminology.\nUnitarianism is a proper noun and follows the same English usage as other Christian theologies that have developed within a religious group or denomination (such as Calvinism, Anabaptism, Adventism, Lutheranism, Wesleyanism, etc.). The term existed shortly before it became the name of a distinct religious tradition, thus occasionally it is used as a common noun to describe any understanding of Jesus Christ that denies the doctrine of the Trinity or affirms the belief that God is only one person. In that case, it would be a Nontrinitarian belief system not necessarily associated with the Unitarian movement. For example, the Unitarian movement has never accepted the Godhood of Jesus, and therefore does not include those \"nontrinitarian\" belief systems that do, such as Oneness Pentecostalism, United Pentecostal Church International, the True Jesus Church, and the writings of Michael Servetus (all of which maintain that Jesus is God as a single person). Recently, some religious groups have adopted the 19th-century term \"biblical unitarianism\" to distinguish their theologies from Unitarianism.\nUnitarianism is a Christian theology and practice that precedes and is distinct from Unitarian Universalism. In the 1890s the American Unitarian Association began to allow non-Christian and non-theistic churches and individuals to be part of their fellowship. As a result, people who held no Unitarian belief began to be called \"Unitarians\" because they were members of churches that belonged to the American Unitarian Association. After several decades, the non-theistic members outnumbered the theological Unitarians.\nHistory.\nUnitarianism, both as a theology and as a denominational family of churches, was defined and developed in Poland, Transylvania, England, Wales, India, Japan, Jamaica, the United States, and beyond in the 16th century through the present. Although common beliefs existed among Unitarians in each of these regions, they initially grew independently from each other. Only later did they influence one another and accumulate more similarities.\nThe \"Ecclesia minor\" or \"Minor Reformed Church of Poland\", better known today as the Polish Brethren, was born as the result of a controversy that started on January 22, 1556, when Piotr of Goni\u0105dz (Peter Gonesius), a Polish student, spoke out against the doctrine of the Trinity during the general synod of the Reformed (Calvinist) churches of Poland held in the village of Secemin. After nine years of debate, in 1565, the anti-Trinitarians were excluded from the existing synod of the Polish Reformed Church (henceforth the \"Ecclesia maior\") and they began to hold their own synods as the \"Ecclesia minor\". Though frequently called \"Arians\" by those on the outside, the views of Fausto Sozzini (Faustus Socinus) became the standard in the church, and these doctrines were quite removed from Arianism. So important was Socinus to the formulation of their beliefs that those outside Poland usually referred to them as Socinians. The Polish Brethren were disbanded in 1658 by the Sejm (Polish Parliament). They were ordered to convert to Roman Catholicism or leave Poland. Most of them went to Transylvania or Holland, where they embraced the name \"Unitarian\". Between 1665 and 1668 a grandson of Socinus, Andrzej Wiszowaty Sr., published \"Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum quos Unitarios vocant\" (\"Library of the Polish Brethren who are called Unitarians\" 4 vols. 1665\u20131669).\nThe Unitarian Church of Transylvania was first recognized by the Edict of Torda, issued by the Transylvanian Diet under Prince John II Sigismund Z\u00e1polya (January 1568), and was first led by Ferenc D\u00e1vid (a former Calvinist bishop, who had begun preaching the new doctrine in 1566). The term \"Unitarian\" first appeared as \"unitaria religio\" in a document of the Diet of L\u00e9cfalva, Transylvania, on 25 October 1600, though it was not widely used in Transylvania until 1638, when the formal \"recepta Unitaria Religio\" was published.\nThe word \"Unitarian\" had been circulating in private letters in England, in reference to imported copies of such publications as the \"Library of the Polish Brethren who are called Unitarians\" (1665). Henry Hedworth was the first to use the word \"Unitarian\" in print in English (1673), and the word first appears in a title in Stephen Nye's \"A Brief History of the Unitarians, called also Socinians\" (1687). The movement gained popularity in England in the wake of the Enlightenment and began to become a formal denomination in 1774 when Theophilus Lindsey organised meetings with Joseph Priestley, founding the first avowedly Unitarian congregation in the country. This occurred at Essex Street Church in London. Official toleration came in 1813.\nThe first official acceptance of the Unitarian faith on the part of a congregation in America was by King's Chapel in Boston, which settled James Freeman (1759\u20131835) in 1782, and revised the Prayer Book into a mild Unitarian liturgy in 1785. In 1800, Joseph Stevens Buckminster became minister of the Brattle Street Church in Boston, where his brilliant sermons, literary activities, and academic attention to the German \"New Criticism\" helped shape the subsequent growth of Unitarianism in New England. Unitarian Henry Ware (1764\u20131845) was appointed as the Hollis professor of divinity at Harvard College, in 1805. Harvard Divinity School then shifted from its conservative roots to teach Unitarian theology (see Harvard and Unitarianism). Buckminster's close associate William Ellery Channing (1780\u20131842) was settled over the Federal Street Church in Boston, 1803, and in a few years he became the leader of the Unitarian movement. A theological battle with the Congregational Churches resulted in the formation of the American Unitarian Association at Boston in 1825. Certainly, the unitarian theology was being \"adopted\" by the Congregationalists from the 1820s onwards. This movement is also evident in England at this time.\nThe first school founded by the Unitarians in the United States was the Clinton Liberal Institute, in Clinton, Oneida County, New York, founded in 1831.\nBeliefs.\nChristology.\nUnitarians charge that the doctrine of the Trinity, unlike Unitarianism, fails to adhere to strict monotheism. Unitarians maintain that Jesus was a great man and a prophet of God\u2014perhaps even a supernatural being\u2014but not God himself. They believe Jesus did not claim to be God and that his teachings did not suggest the existence of a triune God.\nUnitarian Christology can be divided according to whether or not Jesus is believed to have had a pre-human existence. Both forms maintain that God is one being and one person and that Jesus is the (or a) Son of God, but generally not God himself.\nIn the early 19th century, Unitarian Robert Wallace identified three particular classes of Unitarian doctrines in history:\nUnitarianism is considered a factor in the decline of classical deism because believers increasingly preferred to identify themselves as Unitarians rather than deists.\n\"Socinian\" Christology.\nThe Christology commonly called \"Socinian\"\u2014after Fausto Sozzini, one of the founders of Unitarian theology\u2014refers to the belief that Jesus began his life when he was born as a human. In other words, the teaching that Jesus pre-existed his human body is rejected. There are various views ranging from the belief that Jesus was simply a human (psilanthropism) who, because of his greatness, was adopted by God as his Son (adoptionism) to the belief that Jesus literally became the son of God when he was conceived by the Holy Spirit.\nThis Christology existed in some form or another before Sozzini. Theodotus of Byzantium, Artemon and Paul of Samosata denied the pre-existence of the Christ. These ideas were continued by Marcellus of Ancyra and his pupil Photinus in the 4th century AD. In the Radical Reformation and Anabaptist movements of the 16th century, this idea resurfaced with Sozzini's uncle, Lelio Sozzini. Having influenced the Polish Brethren to a formal declaration of this belief in the Racovian Catechism, Sozzini involuntarily ended up giving his name to this Christological position, which continued with English Unitarians, such as John Biddle, Thomas Belsham, Theophilus Lindsey, and James Martineau. In America, most of the early Unitarians were Arian in Christology (see below), but among those who held to a \"Socinian\" view was James Freeman.\nRegarding the virgin birth of Jesus, among those who denied the preexistence of the Christ, some held to it, and others did not. Its denial is sometimes ascribed to the Ebionites; however, Origen (\"Contra Celsum\" volume 61) and Eusebius (\"HE\" iii.27) both indicate that some Ebionites did accept the virgin birth. On the other hand, Theodotus of Byzantium, Artemon, and Paul of Samosata all accepted the virgin birth. In the early days of Unitarianism, the stories of the virgin birth were accepted by most. There were a number of Unitarians who questioned the historicity of the Bible, including Symon Budny, Jacob Palaeologus, Thomas Belsham, and Richard Wright, and this made them question the virgin birth story. Beginning in England and America in the 1830s and manifesting itself primarily in transcendentalist Unitarianism, which emerged from the German liberal theology associated primarily with Friedrich Schleiermacher, the psilanthropist view increased in popularity. Its proponents took an intellectual and humanistic approach to religion. They embraced evolutionary concepts, asserted the \"inherent goodness of man\", and abandoned the doctrine of biblical infallibility, rejecting most of the miraculous events in the Christian Bible (including the virgin birth). Notable examples are James Martineau, Theodore Parker, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Frederic Henry Hedge. Famous American Unitarian William Ellery Channing was a believer in the virgin birth until later in his life, after he had begun his association with the Transcendentalists.\nArianism.\nArianism is often considered a form of Unitarianism.\nThe Christology of Arianism holds that Jesus, before his human life, existed as the Logos (Word), a being begotten or created by God, who dwelt with God in Heaven. There are many varieties of this form of Unitarianism, ranging from the belief that the Son was a divine spirit of the same substance (called subordinationism) or of a similar substance to that of God (called semi-Arianism) to the belief that he was an angel or other lesser spirit creature of a wholly different nature from God. Not all of these views necessarily were held by Arius, the namesake of Arianism. It is still nontrinitarian because, according to it, Jesus was and is a being always been beneath God in divinity, though higher than humans. Arian Christology was not the majority view among Unitarians in Poland, Transylvania, or England. It was only with the advent of American Unitarianism that it gained a foothold in the Unitarian movement.\nAmong early Christian theologians who believed in a pre-existent Jesus subordinate to God the Father were Lucian of Antioch, Eusebius of Caesarea, Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, Asterius the Sophist, Eunomius, and Ulfilas, as well as Felix, Bishop of Urgell. Proponents also associate it (more controversially) with Justin Martyr and Hippolytus of Rome. Antitrinitarian Michael Servetus did not deny the pre-existence of the Christ. In his \"Treatise Concerning the Divine Trinity\", Servetus taught that the Logos was the reflection of Jesus, that said reflection of the Logos was the Word with God \"and it was God Himself\". He further wrote that \"the Word was the very essence of God or the manifestation of God's essence, and there was in God no other substance or hypostasis than His Word, in a bright cloud where God then seemed to subsist. And in that very spot the face and personality of Christ shone bright.\" Isaac Newton held Arian beliefs as well. Other 19th-century Arian Unitarians included Andrews Norton and William Ellery Channing (in his earlier years).\nOther beliefs.\nAlthough there is no specific authority on Unitarian beliefs aside from their inclusion of the rejection of the Trinity, the following beliefs are generally accepted:\nIn 1938, \"The Christian Leader\" attributed \"\"the\" religion \"of\" Jesus, not \"a\" religion \"about\" Jesus\", to Unitarians, though the phrase was used earlier by Congregationalist Rollin Lynde Hartt in 1924.\nWorship.\nWorship within the Unitarian tradition accommodates a wide range of understandings of God, while the focus of the service may be simply the celebration of life itself. Each Unitarian congregation is at liberty to devise its own form of worship, though commonly, Unitarians will light their chalice (symbol of faith), have a story for all ages; and include sermons, prayers, hymns and songs. Some will allow attendees to publicly share their recent joys or concerns.\nModern Christian Unitarian organizations.\nThis section relates to Unitarian churches and organizations today which are still specifically Christian, whether within or outside Unitarian Universalism. Unitarian Universalism, conversely, refers to the embracing of non-Christian religions.\nInternational groups.\nSome Unitarian Christian groups are affiliated with the International Council of Unitarians and Universalists (ICUU), founded in 1995. The ICUU has \"full member\" groups in Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, EUU, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, India, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Romania, South Africa, Spain. Sri Lanka and the United States. Brazil is a Provisional Member.\nThe ICUU includes small \"Associate Groups\", including Congregazione Italiana Cristiano Unitariana, Turin (founded in 2004) and the B\u00e9t D\u00e1vid Unitarian Association, Oslo (founded 2005).\nTransylvania.\nThe largest Unitarian denomination worldwide today is also the oldest Unitarian denomination (since 1565, first use of the term \"Unitarian\" 1600): the Unitarian Church of Transylvania (in Romania, which is in union with the Unitarian Church in Hungary). The church in Transylvania still looks to the statement of faith, the \"Summa Universae Theologiae Christianae secundum Unitarios\" (1787), though today assent to this is not required. The modern Unitarian Church in Hungary (25,000 members) and the Transylvanian Unitarian Church (75,000 members) are affiliated with the International Council of Unitarians and Universalists (ICUU) and claim continuity with the historical Unitarian Christian tradition established by Ferenc D\u00e1vid in 1565 in Transylvania under John II Sigismund Z\u00e1polya. The Unitarian churches in Hungary and Transylvania are structured and organized along a church hierarchy that includes the election by the synod of a national bishop who serves as superintendent of the Church. Many Hungarian Unitarians embrace the principles of rationalist Unitarianism. Unitarian high schools exist only in Transylvania (Romania), including the John Sigismund Unitarian Academy in Cluj-Napoca, the Protestant Theological Institute of Cluj, and the Berde M\u00f3zes Unit\u00e1rius Gimn\u00e1zium in Cristuru Secuiesc; both teach Rationalist Unitarianism.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Unitarian Christian Association (UCA) was founded in the United Kingdom in 1991 by Rev. Lancelot Garrard (1904\u20131993) and others to promote specifically Christian ideas within the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches (GAUFCC), the national Unitarian body in the UK. Just as the UUCF and ICUU maintain formal links with the Unitarian Universalist Association in the US, so the UCA is an affiliate body of the GAUFCC in the UK.\nThe majority of Unitarian Christian publications are sponsored by an organization and published specifically for their membership. Generally, they do not serve as a tool for missionary work or encouraging conversions.\nIndia.\nIn India, three different schools of Unitarian thought influenced varying movements, including the Brahmo Samaj, the Unitarian Church of the Khasi Hills, and the Unitarian Christian Church of Chennai, in Madras, founded in 1795. As of 2011, \"Thirty-five congregations and eight fellowships comprising almost 10,000 Unitarians now form the Unitarian Union of North East India.\"\nUnited States.\nThe American Unitarian Conference (AUC) was formed in 2000 and stands between UUA and ICUU in attachment to the Christian element of modern Unitarianism. The American Unitarian Conference is open to non-Christian Unitarians, being particularly popular with non-Christian theists and deists. As of 2009, The AUC has three congregations in the United States.\nUnitarian Christian Ministries International was a Unitarian ministry incorporated in South Carolina until its dissolution in 2013 when it merged with the Unitarian Christian Emerging Church. The Unitarian Christian Emerging Church has recently undergone reorganization and today is known as the Unitarian Christian Church of America. In addition, the Unitarian Universalist Faith Alliance and Ministries follow a Progressive Christian format honoring Sacred Space and Creation Spirituality.\nThe Unitarian Christian Church of America (UCCA) was formed on 1 October 2016 through the merging of the Unitarian Christian Emerging Church and the Unitarian Christian Conference. The church's current ministry in on-line and through local fellowship gatherings. The current senior pastor and current president of the UCCA is the Reverend Dr. Shannon Rogers. The UCCA has both ordained and lay members.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nThe first Unitarian Church in Australia was built in 1854 in Melbourne and was followed soon afterwards by chapels in Sydney and Adelaide, and later regional centres including Ballarat. The modern church, no longer unitarian Christian, retains properties in Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne, and smaller congregations elsewhere in Australia and New Zealand.\nSouth Africa.\nThe Unitarian movement in South Africa was founded in 1867 by David Faure, member of a well-known Cape family. He encountered advanced liberal religious thought while completing his studies at the University of Leiden in the Netherlands for the ministry of the Dutch Reformed Church in Cape Town.\nIreland.\nThere are two active Unitarian churches in Ireland, one in Dublin and the other in Cork. Both are member churches of the Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.\nDenmark.\nUnitarianism was a latecomer to Denmark. Some of the inspiration came from Norway and England \u2013 family members of the founders, and the wife of Edward Grieg. 1900\u20131918 the society priest was Uffe Birkedal, who had previously been a Lutheran priest. He held the first worship 18 February 1900. A founding general assembly 18 May 1900 elected Mary Bess Westenholz as the first chairman of the Society. The Society newsletter was named \"Protestantisk Tidende\" 1904\u20131993, and then renamed \"Unitaren\", reflecting a gradually changing perception of being part of the Danish Lutheran Church, to one where this was no longer assumed ().\nBiblical Unitarians.\nBiblical Unitarianism identifies the Christian belief that the Bible teaches that God the Father is one singular being, and that Jesus Christ is a distinct being, his son, but not divine. A few denominations use this term to describe themselves, clarifying the distinction between them and those churches which, from the late 19th century, evolved into modern British Unitarianism and, primarily in the United States, Unitarian Universalism. In 16th-century Italy, Biblical Unitarianism was powered by the ideas of the Non-trinitarian theologians Lelio and Fausto Sozzini, founders of Socinianism; their doctrine was embraced and further developed by the Unitarian Church of Transylvania during the 16th and 17th centuries. Today, it's represented by the churches associated with the Christian Church in Italy.\nNotable Unitarians.\nNotable Unitarians include classical composers Edvard Grieg and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k; Ralph Waldo Emerson, Theodore Parker, Yveon Seon and Thomas Lamb Eliot in theology and ministry; Oliver Heaviside, Erasmus Darwin, Joseph Priestley, John Archibald Wheeler, Linus Pauling, Sir Isaac Newton and inventor Sir Francis Ronalds in science; George Boole in mathematics; Susan B. Anthony in civil government; Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Whitney Young of the National Urban League, and Florence Nightingale in humanitarianism and social justice; John Bowring, Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Elizabeth Gaskell in literature; Frank Lloyd Wright in the arts; Josiah Wedgwood, Richard Peacock and Samuel Carter MP in industry; Thomas Starr King in ministry and politics; and Charles William Eliot in education. Julia Ward Howe was a leader in the woman suffrage movement, the first ever woman to be elected to the Academy of Arts and Letters, and author of the \"Battle Hymn of the Republic\", volumes of poetry, and other writing. Although raised a Quaker, Ezra Cornell, founder of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, attended the Unitarian church and was one of the founders of Ithaca's First Unitarian Church. Eramus Darwin Shattuck, a signatory to the Oregon State Constitution, founded the first Unitarian church in Oregon in 1865.\nEleven Nobel Prizes have been awarded to Unitarians: Robert Millikan and John Bardeen (twice) in physics; Emily Green Balch, Albert Schweitzer and Linus Pauling for peace; George Wald and David H. Hubel in medicine; Linus Pauling in chemistry; and Herbert A. Simon in economics.\nFour presidents of the United States were Unitarians: John Adams, John Quincy Adams, Millard Fillmore, and William Howard Taft. Adlai Stevenson II, the Democratic presidential nominee in 1952 and 1956, was a Unitarian; he was the last Unitarian to be nominated by a major party for president as of 2024. Although a self-styled materialist, Thomas Jefferson was pro-Unitarian to the extent of suggesting that it would become the predominant religion in the United States.\nIn the United Kingdom, although Unitarianism was the religion of only a small minority of the population, its practitioners had an enormous impact on Victorian politics, not only in the larger cities \u2013 Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool \u2013 but in smaller communities such as Leicester, where there were so many Unitarian mayors that the Unitarian Chapel was known as the \"Mayors' Nest\". Numerous Unitarian families were highly significant in the social and political life of Britain from Victorian times to the middle of the 20th century. They included the Nettlefolds, Martineaus, Luptons, Kitsons, Chamberlains and Kenricks. In Birmingham, England, a Unitarian church \u2013 the Church of the Messiah \u2013 was opened in 1862. It became a cultural and intellectual centre of a whole society, a place where ideas about society were openly and critically discussed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32167", "revid": "32472382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32167", "title": "Ubiquitin", "text": "Regulatory protein found in most eukaryotic tissues\nUbiquitin is a small () regulatory protein found in most tissues of eukaryotic organisms, i.e., it is found \"ubiquitously\". It was discovered in 1975 by Gideon Goldstein and further characterized throughout the late 1970s and 1980s. Four genes in the human genome code for ubiquitin: UBB, UBC, UBA52 and RPS27A.\nThe addition of ubiquitin to a substrate protein is called ubiquitylation (or ubiquitination or ubiquitinylation). Ubiquitylation affects proteins in many ways: it can mark them for degradation via the 26S proteasome, alter their cellular location, affect their activity, and promote or prevent protein interactions. Ubiquitylation involves three main steps: activation, conjugation, and ligation, performed by ubiquitin-activating enzymes (E1s), ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s), and ubiquitin ligases (E3s), respectively. The result of this sequential cascade is to bind ubiquitin to lysine residues on the protein substrate via an isopeptide bond, cysteine residues through a thioester bond; serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues through an ester bond; or the amino group of the protein's N-terminus via a peptide bond.\nThe protein modifications can be either a single ubiquitin protein (monoubiquitylation) or a chain of ubiquitin (polyubiquitylation). Secondary ubiquitin molecules are always linked to one of the seven lysine residues or the N-terminal methionine of the previous ubiquitin molecule. These 'linking' residues are represented by a \"K\" or \"M\" (the one-letter amino acid notation of lysine and methionine, respectively) and a number, referring to its position in the ubiquitin molecule as in K48, K29 or M1. The first ubiquitin molecule is covalently bound through its C-terminal carboxylate group to a particular lysine, cysteine, serine, threonine or N-terminus of the target protein. Polyubiquitylation occurs when the C-terminus of another ubiquitin is linked to one of the seven lysine residues or the first methionine on the previously added ubiquitin molecule, creating a chain. This process repeats several times, leading to the addition of several ubiquitins. Only polyubiquitylation on defined lysines, mostly on K48 and K29, is related to degradation by the proteasome (referred to as the \"molecular kiss of death\"), while other polyubiquitylations (e.g. on K63, K11, K6 and M1) and monoubiquitylations may regulate processes such as endocytic trafficking, inflammation, translation and DNA repair.\nThe discovery that ubiquitin chains target proteins to the proteasome, which degrades and recycles proteins, was honored with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2004.\nIdentification.\nUbiquitin (originally, ubiquitous immunopoietic polypeptide) was first identified in 1975 as an protein expressed in all eukaryotic cells. The basic functions of ubiquitin and the components of the ubiquitylation pathway were elucidated in the early 1980s at the Technion by Aaron Ciechanover, Avram Hershko, and Irwin Rose for which the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded in 2004.\nThe ubiquitylation system was initially characterised as an ATP-dependent proteolytic system present in cellular extracts. A heat-stable polypeptide present in these extracts, ATP-dependent proteolysis factor 1 (APF-1), was found to become covalently attached to the model protein substrate lysozyme in an ATP- and Mg2+-dependent process. Multiple APF-1 molecules were linked to a single substrate molecule by an isopeptide linkage, and conjugates were found to be rapidly degraded with the release of free APF-1. Soon after APF-1-protein conjugation was characterised, APF-1 was identified as ubiquitin. The carboxyl group of the C-terminal glycine residue of ubiquitin (Gly76) was identified as the moiety conjugated to substrate lysine residues.\nThe protein.\nUbiquitin is a small protein that exists in all eukaryotic cells. It performs its myriad functions through conjugation to a large range of target proteins. A variety of different modifications can occur. The ubiquitin protein itself consists of 76 amino acids and has a molecular mass of about 8.6\u00a0kDa. Key features include its C-terminal tail and the 7 lysine residues. It is highly conserved throughout eukaryote evolution; human and yeast ubiquitin share 96% sequence identity.\nGenes.\nUbiquitin is encoded in mammals by four different genes. UBA52 and RPS27A genes code for a single copy of ubiquitin fused to the ribosomal proteins L40 and S27a, respectively. The UBB and UBC genes code for polyubiquitin precursor proteins.\nUbiquitylation.\nUbiquitylation (also known as ubiquitination or ubiquitinylation) is an enzymatic post-translational modification in which an ubiquitin protein is attached to a substrate protein. This process most commonly binds the last amino acid of ubiquitin (glycine 76) to a lysine residue on the substrate. An isopeptide bond is formed between the carboxyl group (COO\u2212) of the ubiquitin's glycine and the epsilon-amino group (\u03b5-NH3+) of the substrate's lysine. Trypsin cleavage of a ubiquitin-conjugated substrate leaves a di-glycine \"remnant\" that is used to identify the site of ubiquitylation. Ubiquitin can also be bound to other sites in a protein which are electron-rich nucleophiles, termed \"non-canonical ubiquitylation\". This was first observed with the amine group of a protein's N-terminus being used for ubiquitylation, rather than a lysine residue, in the protein MyoD and has been observed since in 22 other proteins in multiple species, including ubiquitin itself. There is also increasing evidence for nonlysine residues as ubiquitylation targets using non-amine groups, such as the sulfhydryl group on cysteine, and the hydroxyl group on threonine and serine. The end result of this process is the addition of one ubiquitin molecule (monoubiquitylation) or a chain of ubiquitin molecules (polyubiquitination) to the substrate protein.\nUbiquitination requires three types of enzyme: ubiquitin-activating enzymes, ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and ubiquitin ligases, known as E1s, E2s, and E3s, respectively. The process consists of three main steps:\nIn the ubiquitylation cascade, E1 can bind with many E2s, which can bind with hundreds of E3s in a hierarchical way. Having levels within the cascade allows tight regulation of the ubiquitylation machinery. Other ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) are also modified via the E1\u2013E2\u2013E3 cascade, although variations in these systems do exist.\nE4 enzymes, or ubiquitin-chain elongation factors, are capable of adding pre-formed polyubiquitin chains to substrate proteins. For example, multiple monoubiquitylation of the tumor suppressor p53 by Mdm2 can be followed by addition of a polyubiquitin chain using p300 and CBP.\nTypes.\nUbiquitylation affects cellular process by regulating the degradation of proteins (via the proteasome and lysosome), coordinating the cellular localization of proteins, activating and inactivating proteins, and modulating protein\u2013protein interactions. These effects are mediated by different types of substrate ubiquitylation, for example the addition of a single ubiquitin molecule (monoubiquitylation) or different types of ubiquitin chains (polyubiquitylation).\nMonoubiquitylation.\nMonoubiquitylation is the addition of one ubiquitin molecule to one substrate protein residue. Multi-monoubiquitylation is the addition of one ubiquitin molecule to multiple substrate residues. The monoubiquitylation of a protein can have different effects to the polyubiquitylation of the same protein. The addition of a single ubiquitin molecule is thought to be required prior to the formation of polyubiquitin chains. Monoubiquitylation affects cellular processes such as membrane trafficking, endocytosis and viral budding.\nPolyubiquitin chains.\nPolyubiquitylation is the formation of a ubiquitin chain on a single lysine residue on the substrate protein. Following addition of a single ubiquitin moiety to a protein substrate, further ubiquitin molecules can be added to the first, yielding a polyubiquitin chain. These chains are made by linking the glycine residue of a ubiquitin molecule to a lysine of ubiquitin bound to a substrate. Ubiquitin has seven lysine residues and an N-terminus that serves as points of ubiquitination; they are K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, K48, K63 and M1, respectively. Lysine 48-linked chains were the first identified and are the best-characterised type of ubiquitin chain. K63 chains have also been well-characterised, whereas the function of other lysine chains, mixed chains, branched chains, M1-linked linear chains, and heterologous chains (mixtures of ubiquitin and other ubiquitin-like proteins) remains more unclear.\nLysine 48-linked polyubiquitin chains target proteins for destruction, by a process known as proteolysis. Multi-ubiquitin chains at least four ubiquitin molecules long must be attached to a lysine residue on the condemned protein in order for it to be recognised by the 26S proteasome. This is a barrel-shape structure comprising a central proteolytic core made of four ring structures, flanked by two cylinders that selectively allow entry of ubiquitylated proteins. Once inside, the proteins are rapidly degraded into small peptides (usually 3\u201325 amino acid residues in length). Ubiquitin molecules are cleaved off the protein immediately prior to destruction and are recycled for further use. Although the majority of protein substrates are ubiquitylated, there are examples of non-ubiquitylated proteins targeted to the proteasome. The polyubiquitin chains are recognised by a subunit of the proteasome: S5a/Rpn10. This is achieved by a ubiquitin-interacting motif (UIM) found in a hydrophobic patch in the C-terminal region of the S5a/Rpn10 unit.\nLysine 63-linked chains are not associated with proteasomal degradation of the substrate protein. Instead, they allow the coordination of other processes such as endocytic trafficking, inflammation, translation, and DNA repair. In cells, lysine 63-linked chains are bound by the ESCRT-0 complex, which prevents their binding to the proteasome. This complex contains two proteins, Hrs and STAM1, that contain a UIM, which allows it to bind to lysine 63-linked chains.\nMethionine 1-linked (or linear) polyubiquitin chains are another type of non-degradative ubiquitin chains. In this case, ubiquitin is linked in a head-to-tail manner, meaning that the C-terminus of the last ubiquitin molecule binds directly to the N-terminus of the next one. Although initially believed to target proteins for proteasomal degradation, linear ubiquitin later proved to be indispensable for NF-kB signaling. Currently, there is only one known E3 ubiquitin ligase generating M1-linked polyubiquitin chains - linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC).\nLess is understood about atypical (non-lysine 48-linked) ubiquitin chains but research is starting to suggest roles for these chains. There is evidence that atypical chains linked by lysine 6, 11, 27, 29 and methionine 1 can induce proteasomal degradation.\nBranched ubiquitin chains containing multiple linkage types can be formed. The function of these chains is unknown.\nStructure.\nDifferently linked chains have specific effects on the protein to which they are attached, caused by differences in the conformations of the protein chains. K29-, K33-, K63- and M1-linked chains have a fairly linear conformation; they are known as open-conformation chains. K6-, K11-, and K48-linked chains form closed conformations. The ubiquitin molecules in open-conformation chains do not interact with each other, except for the covalent isopeptide bonds linking them together. In contrast, the closed conformation chains have interfaces with interacting residues. Altering the chain conformations exposes and conceals different parts of the ubiquitin protein, and the different linkages are recognized by proteins that are specific for the unique topologies that are intrinsic to the linkage. Proteins can specifically bind to ubiquitin via ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs). The distances between individual ubiquitin units in chains differ between lysine 63- and 48-linked chains. The UBDs exploit this by having small spacers between ubiquitin-interacting motifs that bind lysine 48-linked chains (compact ubiquitin chains) and larger spacers for lysine 63-linked chains. The machinery involved in recognising polyubiquitin chains can also differentiate between K63-linked chains and M1-linked chains, demonstrated by the fact that the latter can induce proteasomal degradation of the substrate.\nFunction.\nThe ubiquitylation system functions in a wide variety of cellular processes, including:\nMembrane proteins.\nMulti-monoubiquitylation can mark transmembrane proteins (for example, receptors) for removal from membranes (internalisation) and fulfil several signalling roles within the cell. When cell-surface transmembrane molecules are tagged with ubiquitin, the subcellular localization of the protein is altered, often targeting the protein for destruction in lysosomes. This serves as a negative feedback mechanism, because often the stimulation of receptors by ligands increases their rate of ubiquitylation and internalisation. Like monoubiquitylation, lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin chains also has a role in the trafficking some membrane proteins.\nGenomic maintenance.\nProliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is a protein involved in DNA synthesis. Under normal physiological conditions PCNA is sumoylated (a similar post-translational modification to ubiquitylation). When DNA is damaged by ultra-violet radiation or chemicals, the SUMO molecule that is attached to a lysine residue is replaced by ubiquitin. Monoubiquitylated PCNA recruits polymerases that can carry out DNA synthesis with damaged DNA; but this is very error-prone, possibly resulting in the synthesis of mutated DNA. Lysine 63-linked polyubiquitylation of PCNA allows it to perform a less error-prone mutation bypass known by the template switching pathway.\nUbiquitylation of histone H2AX is involved in DNA damage recognition of DNA double-strand breaks. Lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin chains are formed on H2AX histone by the E2/E3 ligase pair, Ubc13-Mms2/RNF168. This K63 chain appears to recruit RAP80, which contains a UIM, and RAP80 then helps localize BRCA1. This pathway will eventually recruit the necessary proteins for homologous recombination repair.\nTranscriptional regulation.\nHistones can be ubiquitinated, usually in the form of monoubiquitylation, although polyubiquitylated forms do occur. Histone ubiquitylation alters chromatin structure and allows the access of enzymes involved in transcription. Ubiquitin on histones also acts as a binding site for proteins that either activate or inhibit transcription and also can induce further post-translational modifications of the protein. These effects can all modulate the transcription of genes.\nDeubiquitination.\nDeubiquitinating enzymes (deubiquitinases; DUBs) oppose the role of ubiquitylation by removing ubiquitin from substrate proteins. They are cysteine proteases that cleave the amide bond between the two proteins. They are highly specific, as are the E3 ligases that attach the ubiquitin, with only a few substrates per enzyme. They can cleave both isopeptide (between ubiquitin and lysine) and peptide bonds (between ubiquitin and the N-terminus). \nIn addition to removing ubiquitin from substrate proteins, DUBs have many other roles within the cell. Ubiquitin is either expressed as multiple copies joined in a chain (polyubiquitin) or attached to ribosomal subunits. DUBs cleave these proteins to produce active ubiquitin. They also recycle ubiquitin that has been bound to small nucleophilic molecules during the ubiquitylation process. Monoubiquitin is formed by DUBs that cleave ubiquitin from free polyubiquitin chains that have been previously removed from proteins.\nUbiquitin-binding domains.\nUbiquitin-binding domains (UBDs) are modular protein domains that non-covalently bind to ubiquitin, these motifs control various cellular events. Detailed molecular structures are known for a number of UBDs, binding specificity determines their mechanism of action and regulation, and how it regulates cellular proteins and processes.\nDisease associations.\nPathogenesis.\nThe ubiquitin pathway has been implicated in the pathogenesis of a wide range of diseases and disorders, including:\nNeurodegeneration.\nUbiquitin is implicated in neurodegenerative diseases associated with proteostasis dysfunction, including Alzheimer's disease, motor neuron disease, Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease. Transcript variants encoding different isoforms of ubiquilin-1 are found in lesions associated with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Higher levels of ubiquilin in the brain have been shown to decrease malformation of amyloid precursor protein (APP), which plays a key role in triggering Alzheimer's disease. Conversely, lower levels of ubiquilin-1 in the brain have been associated with increased malformation of APP. A frameshift mutation in ubiquitin B can result in a truncated peptide missing the C-terminal glycine. This abnormal peptide, known as UBB+1, has been shown to accumulate selectively in Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies.\nInfection and immunity.\nUbiquitin and ubiquitin-like molecules extensively regulate immune signal transduction pathways at virtually all stages, including steady-state repression, activation during infection, and attenuation upon clearance. Without this regulation, immune activation against pathogens may be defective, resulting in chronic disease or death. Alternatively, the immune system may become hyperactivated and organs and tissues may be subjected to autoimmune damage.\nOn the other hand, viruses must block or redirect host cell processes including immunity to effectively replicate, yet many viruses relevant to disease have informationally limited genomes. Because of its very large number of roles in the cell, manipulating the ubiquitin system represents an efficient way for such viruses to block, subvert or redirect critical host cell processes to support their own replication.\nThe retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) protein is a primary immune system sensor for viral and other invasive RNA in human cells. The RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) immune signaling pathway is one of the most extensively studied in terms of the role of ubiquitin in immune regulation.\nDiagnostic use.\nImmunohistochemistry using antibodies to ubiquitin can identify abnormal accumulations of this protein inside cells, indicating a disease process. These protein accumulations are referred to as inclusion bodies (which is a general term for any microscopically visible collection of abnormal material in a cell). Examples include:\nLink to cancer.\nPost-translational modification of proteins is a generally used mechanism in eukaryotic cell signaling. Ubiquitylation, ubiquitin conjugation to proteins, is a crucial process for cell cycle progression and cell proliferation and development. Although ubiquitylation usually serves as a signal for protein degradation through the 26S proteasome, it could also serve for other fundamental cellular processes, in endocytosis, enzymatic activation and DNA repair. Moreover, since ubiquitylation functions to tightly regulate the cellular level of cyclins, its misregulation is expected to have severe impacts. First evidence of the importance of the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway in oncogenic processes was observed due to the high antitumor activity of proteasome inhibitors. Various studies have shown that defects or alterations in ubiquitylation processes are commonly associated with or present in human carcinoma. Malignancies could be developed through loss of function mutation directly at the tumor suppressor gene, increased activity of ubiquitylation, and/or indirect attenuation of ubiquitylation due to mutation in related proteins.\nDirect loss of function mutation of E3 ubiquitin ligase.\nRenal cell carcinoma.\nThe VHL (Von Hippel\u2013Lindau) gene encodes a component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase. VHL complex targets a member of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor family (HIF) for degradation by interacting with the oxygen-dependent destruction domain under normoxic conditions. HIF activates downstream targets such as the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), promoting angiogenesis. Mutations in VHL prevent degradation of HIF and thus lead to the formation of hypervascular lesions and renal tumors.\nBreast cancer.\nThe \"BRCA1\" gene is another tumor suppressor gene in humans which encodes the BRCA1 protein that is involved in response to DNA damage. The protein contains a RING motif with E3 Ubiquitin Ligase activity. BRCA1 could form dimer with other molecules, such as BARD1 and BAP1, for its ubiquitylation activity. Mutations that affect the ligase function are often found and associated with various cancers.\nCyclin E.\nAs processes in cell cycle progression are the most fundamental processes for cellular growth and differentiation, and are the most common to be altered in human carcinomas, it is expected for cell cycle-regulatory proteins to be under tight regulation. The level of cyclins, as the name suggests, is high only at certain a time point during the cell cycle. This is achieved by continuous control of cyclins or CDKs levels through ubiquitylation and degradation. When cyclin E is partnered with CDK2 and gets phosphorylated, an SCF-associated F-box protein Fbw7 recognizes the complex and thus targets it for degradation. Mutations in Fbw7 have been found in more than 30% of human tumors, characterizing it as a tumor suppressor protein.\nIncreased ubiquitination activity.\nCervical cancer.\nOncogenic types of the human papillomavirus (HPV) are known to hijack cellular ubiquitin-proteasome pathway for viral infection and replication. The E6 proteins of HPV will bind to the N-terminus of the cellular E6-AP E3 ubiquitin ligase, redirecting the complex to bind p53, a well-known tumor suppressor gene whose inactivation is found in many types of cancer. Thus, p53 undergoes ubiquitylation and proteasome-mediated degradation. Meanwhile, E7, another one of the early-expressed HPV genes, will bind to Rb, also a tumor suppressor gene, mediating its degradation. The loss of p53 and Rb in cells allows limitless cell proliferation to occur.\np53 regulation.\nGene amplification often occur in various tumor cases, including of \"MDM2\", a gene encodes for a RING E3 Ubiquitin ligase responsible for downregulation of p53 activity. MDM2 targets p53 for ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation thus keeping its level appropriate for normal cell condition. Overexpression of MDM2 causes loss of p53 activity and therefore allowing cells to have a limitless replicative potential.\np27.\nAnother gene that is a target of gene amplification is \"SKP2\". SKP2 is an F-box protein with a role in substrate recognition for ubiquitylation and degradation. SKP2 targets p27Kip-1, an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). CDKs2/4 partner with the cyclins E/D, respectively, forming a family of cell cycle regulators which control cell cycle progression through the G1 phase. Low level of p27Kip-1 protein is often found in various cancers and is due to overactivation of ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis through overexpression of SKP2.\nEfp.\nEfp, or estrogen-inducible RING-finger protein, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase whose overexpression has been shown to be the major cause of estrogen-independent breast cancer. Efp's substrate is 14-3-3 protein which negatively regulates cell cycle.\nEvasion of ubiquitination.\nColorectal cancer.\nThe gene associated with colorectal cancer is the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), which is a classic tumor suppressor gene. APC gene product targets beta-catenin for degradation via ubiquitylation at the N-terminus, thus regulating its cellular level. Most colorectal cancer cases are found with mutations in the APC gene. However, in cases where APC gene is not mutated, mutations are found in the N-terminus of beta-catenin which renders it ubiquitination-free and thus increased activity.\nGlioblastoma.\nAs the most aggressive cancer originated in the brain, mutations found in patients with glioblastoma are related to the deletion of a part of the extracellular domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). This deletion causes CBL E3 ligase unable to bind to the receptor for its recycling and degradation via a ubiquitin-lysosomal pathway. Thus, EGFR is constitutively active in the cell membrane and activates its downstream effectors that are involved in cell proliferation and migration.\nPhosphorylation-dependent ubiquitylation.\nThe interplay between ubiquitylation and phosphorylation has been an ongoing research interest since phosphorylation often serves as a marker where ubiquitylation leads to degradation. Moreover, ubiquitylation can also act to turn on/off the kinase activity of a protein. The critical role of phosphorylation is largely underscored in the activation and removal of autoinhibition in the Cbl protein. Cbl is an E3 ubiquitin ligase with a RING finger domain that interacts with its tyrosine kinase binding (TKB) domain, preventing interaction of the RING domain with an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. This intramolecular interaction is an autoinhibition regulation that prevents its role as a negative regulator of various growth factors and tyrosine kinase signaling and T-cell activation. Phosphorylation of Y363 relieves the autoinhibition and enhances binding to E2. Mutations that render the Cbl protein dysfunctional due to the loss of its ligase/tumor suppressor function and maintenance of its positive signaling/oncogenic function have been shown to cause the development of cancer.\nAs a drug target.\nScreening for ubiquitin ligase substrates.\nDeregulation of E3-substrate interactions is a key cause of many human disorders, therefore identifying E3 ligase substrates is crucial. In 2008, 'Global Protein Stability (GPS) Profiling' was developed to discover E3 ubiquitin ligase substrates. This high-throughput system made use of reporter proteins fused with thousands of potential substrates independently. By inhibition of the ligase activity (through the making of Cul1 dominant negative thus renders ubiquitination not to occur), increased reporter activity shows that the identified substrates are being accumulated. This approach added a large number of new substrates to the list of E3 ligase substrates.\nPossible therapeutic applications.\nBlocking of specific substrate recognition by the E3 ligases, e.g. bortezomib.\nChallenge.\nFinding a specific molecule that selectively inhibits the activity of a certain E3 ligase and/or the protein\u2013protein interactions implicated in the disease remains as one of the important and expanding research area. Moreover, as ubiquitination is a multi-step process with various players and intermediate forms, consideration of the much complex interactions between components needs to be taken heavily into account while designing the small molecule inhibitors.\nSimilar proteins.\nUbiquitin is the most-understood post-translation modifier, however, several family of ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) can modify cellular targets in a parallel but distinct route. Known UBLs include: small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO), ubiquitin cross-reactive protein (UCRP, also known as interferon-stimulated gene-15 ISG15), ubiquitin-related modifier-1 (URM1), neuronal-precursor-cell-expressed developmentally downregulated protein-8 (NEDD8, also called Rub1 in \"S. cerevisiae\"), human leukocyte antigen F-associated (FAT10), autophagy-8 (ATG8) and -12 (ATG12), Few ubiquitin-like protein (FUB1), MUB (membrane-anchored UBL), ubiquitin fold-modifier-1 (UFM1) and ubiquitin-like protein-5 (UBL5, which is but known as homologous to ubiquitin-1 [Hub1] in \"S. pombe\"). Although these proteins share only modest primary sequence identity with ubiquitin, they are closely related three-dimensionally. For example, SUMO shares only 18% sequence identity, but they contain the same structural fold. This fold is called \"ubiquitin fold\". FAT10 and UCRP contain two. This compact globular beta-grasp fold is found in ubiquitin, UBLs, and proteins that comprise a ubiquitin-like domain, e.g. the \"S. cerevisiae\" spindle pole body duplication protein, Dsk2, and NER protein, Rad23, both contain N-terminal ubiquitin domains.\nThese related molecules have novel functions and influence diverse biological processes. There is also cross-regulation between the various conjugation pathways, since some proteins can become modified by more than one UBL, and sometimes even at the same lysine residue. For instance, SUMO modification often acts antagonistically to that of ubiquitination and serves to stabilize protein substrates. Proteins conjugated to UBLs are typically not targeted for degradation by the proteasome but rather function in diverse regulatory activities. Attachment of UBLs might, alter substrate conformation, affect the affinity for ligands or other interacting molecules, alter substrate localization, and influence protein stability.\nUBLs are structurally similar to ubiquitin and are processed, activated, conjugated, and released from conjugates by enzymatic steps that are similar to the corresponding mechanisms for ubiquitin. UBLs are also translated with C-terminal extensions that are processed to expose the invariant C-terminal LRGG. These modifiers have their own specific E1 (activating), E2 (conjugating) and E3 (ligating) enzymes that conjugate the UBLs to intracellular targets. These conjugates can be reversed by UBL-specific isopeptidases that have similar mechanisms to that of the deubiquitinating enzymes.\nWithin some species, the recognition and destruction of sperm mitochondria through a mechanism involving ubiquitin is responsible for sperm mitochondria's disposal after fertilization occurs.\nProkaryotic origins.\nUbiquitin is believed to have descended from bacterial proteins similar to ThiS (https://) or MoaD (https://). These prokaryotic proteins, despite having little sequence identity (ThiS has 14% identity to ubiquitin), share the same protein fold. These proteins also share sulfur chemistry with ubiquitin. MoaD, which is involved in molybdopterin biosynthesis, interacts with MoeB, which acts like an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme for MoaD, strengthening the link between these prokaryotic proteins and the ubiquitin system. A similar system exists for ThiS, with its E1-like enzyme ThiF. It is also believed that the \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" protein Urm1, a ubiquitin-related modifier, is a \"molecular fossil\" that connects the evolutionary relation with the prokaryotic ubiquitin-like molecules and ubiquitin.\nArchaea have a functionally closer homolog of the ubiquitin modification system, where \"sampylation\" with SAMPs (small archaeal modifier proteins) is performed. The sampylation system only uses E1 to guide proteins to the proteosome. Proteoarchaeota, which are related to the ancestor of eukaryotes, possess all of the E1, E2, and E3 enzymes plus a regulated Rpn11 system. Unlike SAMP which are more similar to ThiS or MoaD, Proteoarchaeota ubiquitin are most similar to eukaryotic homologs.\nProkaryotic ubiquitin-like protein (Pup) and ubiquitin bacterial (UBact).\nProkaryotic ubiquitin-like protein (Pup) is a functional analog of ubiquitin which has been found in the gram-positive bacterial phylum Actinomycetota. It serves the same function (targeting proteins for degradations), although the enzymology of ubiquitylation and pupylation is different, and the two families share no homology. In contrast to the three-step reaction of ubiquitylation, pupylation requires two steps, therefore only two enzymes are involved in pupylation.\nIn 2017, homologs of Pup were reported in five phyla of gram-negative bacteria, in seven candidate bacterial phyla and in one archaeon The sequences of the Pup homologs are very different from the sequences of Pup in gram-positive bacteria and were termed Ubiquitin bacterial (UBact), although the distinction has yet not been proven to be phylogenetically supported by a separate evolutionary origin and is without experimental evidence.\nThe finding of the Pup/UBact-proteasome system in both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria suggests that either the Pup/UBact-proteasome system evolved in bacteria prior to the split into gram positive and negative clades over 3000 million years ago or, that these systems were acquired by different bacterial lineages through horizontal gene transfer(s) from a third, yet unknown, organism. In support of the second possibility, two \"UBact\" loci were found in the genome of an uncultured anaerobic methanotrophic Archaeon (ANME-1;locus https:// and locus https://).\nAntiphage defense in Bacteria.\nBacterial ubiquitination is an evolutionarily conserved protein modification pathway that plays a role in bacterial antiviral defense. It exhibits structural and functional parallels to eukaryotic ubiquitination systems and contributes to bacterial defense against Bacteriophage. Recent reviews highlight the conservation and similarity of bacterial and eukaryotic innate immunity mechanisms.\nIn one study, it was demonstrated that during phage infection, a bacterial system conjugates a Ubl protein to the phage's central tail fiber, a component essential for tail assembly and host recognition. This modification leads to the production of defective phage particles with impaired infectivity, thereby protecting the bacterial population from phage proliferation.\nAnother study revealed that a bacterial operon associated with phage defense encodes a complete ubiquitination pathway. Structural analyses of the bacterial E1\u2013E2\u2013Ubl complex showed significant similarities to canonical eukaryotic ubiquitination machinery, suggesting that the ubiquitination pathway may have originated in bacteria.\nIn all organisms, innate immune pathways sense infection and rapidly activate potent immune responses while avoiding inappropriate activation (autoimmunity). In humans, the innate immune receptor cyclic GMP\u2013AMP synthase (cGAS) detects viral infection to produce the nucleotide second messenger cyclic GMP\u2013AMP (cGAMP), which initiates stimulator of interferon genes (STING)-dependent antiviral signaling. Bacteria encode evolutionary predecessors of cGAS, called cGAS/DncV-like nucleotidyltransferases (CD-NTases), which detect bacteriophage infection and produce diverse nucleotide second messengers. \nThe regulation of bacterial CD-NTase activation remains an open question. Recent research has shown that CD-NTase-associated protein 2 (Cap2) primes bacterial CD-NTases for activation through a ubiquitin transferase-like mechanism. A cryo-electron microscopy structure of the Cap2\u2013CD-NTase complex reveals Cap2 as an all-in-one ubiquitin transferase-like protein, with distinct domains resembling eukaryotic E1 and E2 proteins. The structure captures a reactive-intermediate state with the CD-NTase C-terminus positioned in the Cap2 E1 active site and conjugated to AMP. Cap2 conjugates the CD-NTase C-terminus to a target molecule that primes the CD-NTase for increased cGAMP production. Additionally, a specific endopeptidase, Cap3, balances Cap2 activity by cleaving CD-NTase\u2013target conjugates. This research demonstrates that bacteria control immune signaling using an ancient, minimized ubiquitin transferase-like system, providing insights into the evolution of E1 and E2 machinery across domains of life.\nHuman proteins containing ubiquitin domain.\nThese include ubiquitin-like proteins.\nANUBL1; BAG1; BAT3/BAG6; C1orf131; DDI1; DDI2; FAU; HERPUD1; HERPUD2; HOPS; IKBKB; ISG15; LOC391257; MIDN; NEDD8; OASL; PARK2; RAD23A; RAD23B; RPS27A; SACS; 8U SF3A1; SUMO1; SUMO2; SUMO3; SUMO4; TMUB1; TMUB2; UBA52; UBB; UBC; UBD; UBFD1; UBL4A; UBL4B; UBL7; UBLCP1; UBQLN1; UBQLN2; UBQLN3; UBQLN4; UBQLNL; UBTD1; UBTD2; UHRF1; UHRF2;\nPrediction of ubiquitination.\nCurrently available prediction programs are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32168", "revid": "47768208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32168", "title": "Ulfilas", "text": "Goth bishop and theologian (c. 311\u2013383)\nUlfilas (; c.\u2009311 \u2013 383), known also as Wulfila(s) or Urphilas, was a 4th-century Gothic preacher of Cappadocian Greek descent. He was the apostle to the Gothic people. \nUlfila served as a bishop and missionary, participated in the Arian controversy, and is credited with converting the Goths to Christianity as well as overseeing translation of the Bible into the Gothic language. For the purpose of the translation he developed the Gothic alphabet, largely based on the Greek alphabet, as well as Latin and Runic characters. Although the translation of the text into Gothic has traditionally been ascribed to Ulfila, analysis of the text of the Gothic Bible indicates the involvement of a team of translators, possibly under his supervision.\nLife.\nUlfila is mentioned by the Nicene Christians Socrates of Constantinople, Sozomen, and Theodoret, in addition to the Eunomian historian Philostorgius. He is also mentioned by the Gothic historian Jordanes, although the writer said comparatively little of him. The dominant and most important account of Ulfila's life comes from a 4th century letter from his pupil, Auxentius of Durostorum, who wrote it immediately after his death. A summary by Photios I of Philostorgius' \"Ecclesiastical History\" is also significant, but references to Ulfila's life are generally scarce, and he was omitted from Jerome's \"De Viris Illustribus\".\nAround the year 311, Ulfila was born presumably in what is now modern Romania. He was partially descended from Roman prisoners who were captured in a raid by Goths at Sadagolthina and carried away from Asia Minor. His ancestors were likely kidnapped by Western Goths in 264 or 267 then brought to an area near the Danube river. Prisoners taken in such raids from Anatolia were usually unrepentant Christians, and Ulfila was raised as a Christian in a pagan society. He lived in a diaspora community composed of Cappadocian Christians under the Thervingi between the Olt, Dniester, and Danube. It is believed that he was Cappadocian Greek on his maternal line and of Gothic descent through his father. Ulfila was either raised by Goths in his childhood as a captive or was born in captivity to Cappadocian parents.\nNo sources exist concerning Ulfila's education. However, he was a \"lector\" in a church in Gothia by age thirty, which required study of the Bible and prepared him as a translator. Since services were rendered in the Gothic language, he may have already had both the ability to translate and read. According to Philostorgius, he was sent by the Goths during the reign of Constantine I as an ambassador to the Roman Empire, where he was consecrated as the bishop of Gothia by the Arian Eusebius of Nicomedia. The Romans saw Ulfila as \"pontifex ipseque primas\" (bishop and tribal leader); Constantius II supposedly described him as the era's Moses and he was additionally compared to the prophet Elijah. His first journey to Constantinople was made between 332 and 337 for the purpose of accompanying a Gothic delegation, and he possibly lived in the city for a time with Aoric. His consecration took place in either 336 or 341. \nBishop.\nUlfila would master both Greek and Latin during his life, and as bishop he wrote theological and exegetical treatises in both languages. In 341, he returned to Gothia, spending the following seven years working to explain and confirm the doctrine of Arianism among existing adherents and the unconverted. His pursuits were abruptly ended in 348, when a Thervingian \"iudex\" began the persecution of Christians in the area. The exact catalyst of the persecution is unknown. Ulfila and his followers were expelled and fled to the Roman provinces, where they were accepted by Constantius II. Ulfila then established himself in the mountains near Nicopolis in Moesia Inferior, with no evidence that he would ever return north of the Danube. He had been the only religious and political leader of Christian Goths at the time of the expulsion, after which he held the honorary title of \"confessor\". His followers were shepherds, and their descendants remained 200 years later in Nicopolis as a poor and docile community. \nFor 33 years Ulfila continued to serve as bishop and attended church councils. Little is known about his life in Moesia, but he resumed preaching and likely exercised the office of \"chorepiscopus\" (Greek: \u03c7\u03ce\u03c1\u03b1)\".\" Most of his theological works, including the translation of the Bible from Greek into Gothic, were likely to have been produced in this period. He seemed to have remained the temporal and spiritual leader of the Christian Goths in Nicopolis, possibly exerting influence beyond the Roman frontier into Gothia as well. He also engaged in theological debates and subscribed to Homoeanism, which became established at the 357 Council of Sirmium.\nUlfila was present at the Council of Constantinople in 360, where he endorsed the council's creed and represented the Moesian Goths as their leader. The Roman emperors during the tenure of his bishopric were generally sympathetic to Arianism, though the situation changed near the end of his life. In 380, Theodosius I issued a law against heresy, supported the First Council of Nicaea, and deposed the Arian Demophilus of Constantinople in favor of orthodoxy. The next year, he confiscated all church property belonging to heretics and banned all heterodox religious meetings. After the convocation of the Second Ecumenical Council, the Arian bishops Palladius of Ratiaria and Secundianus of Singidunum were anathematized. Ulfila would journey with them to Constantinople upon being ordered by Theodosius to attend a disputation. He likely traveled to the city in 383, although the emperor came to reject the Homoian position. Ulfila soon became ill, died, and was buried soon after, though not before drafting a creed affirming his belief in Homoianism. He was succeeded as bishop by the Gotho-Phrygian Selenas.\nTranslation of the Bible.\nThe traditional date for Ulfila's completion of religious texts for the Goths of Moesia is around 369. Cassiodorus attests that he \"invented the Gothic letters and translated the divine scriptures into that language\". Walafrid Strabo wrote that \"(a team of) scholars translated the sacred books\". There is no primary evidence to support the traditional assumption that Ulfila translated the Bible into Gothic; the brief mentions of Ulfila as a translator in the works of ancient historians count only as circumstantial evidence. Authoritative scholarly opinion, based on rigorous analysis of the linguistic properties of the Gothic text, holds that the Gothic Bible was authored by a group of translators. This does not rule out the possibility that, while overseeing the translation of the Bible, Ulfila was one of several translators.\nCreed of Ulfila.\nThe Creed of Ulfila concludes a letter praising him written by his foster son and pupil Auxentius of Durostorum. It distinguishes God the Father (\"unbegotten\") from God the Son (\"only-begotten\"), who was begotten before time and created the world, and the Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son:\nI, Ulfila, bishop and confessor, have always so believed, and in this, the one true faith, I make the journey to my Lord; I believe in one God the Father, the only unbegotten and invisible, and in his only-begotten son, our Lord and God, the designer and maker of all creation, having none other like him (so that one alone among all beings is God the Father, who is also the God of our God); and in one Holy Spirit, the illuminating and sanctifying power, as Christ said after his resurrection to his apostles: \"And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be clothed with power from on high\" (Luke 24:49) and again \"But ye shall receive power, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you\" (); being neither God (the Father) nor our God (Christ), but the minister of Christ... subject and obedient in all things to the Son; and the Son, subject and obedient in all things to God who is his Father... (whom) he ordained in the Holy Spirit through his Christ.\nMaximinus, a 5th-century Arian theologian, copied Auxentius's letter, among other works, into the margins of one copy of Ambrose's \"De Fide\"; there are some gaps in the surviving text.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32169", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32169", "title": "Unified Modeling Language", "text": "Software design modeling notation\nThe Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a general-purpose, object-oriented, visual modeling language that provides a way to visualize the architecture and design of a system, like a blueprint. UML defines notation for many types of diagrams which focus on aspects such as behavior, interaction, and structure.\nUML is both a formal metamodel and a collection of graphical templates. The metamodel defines the elements in an object-oriented model such as classes and properties. It is essentially the same thing as the metamodel in object-oriented programming (OOP), however for OOP, the metamodel is primarily used at run time to dynamically inspect and modify an application object model. The UML metamodel provides a mathematical, formal foundation for the graphic views used in the modeling language to describe an emerging system.\nUML was created in an attempt to define a standard language for object-oriented programming at the OOPSLA '95 Conference. Originally, Grady Booch and James Rumbaugh merged their models into a unified model. This was followed by Booch's company Rational Software purchasing Ivar Jacobson's Objectory company and merging their model into the UML. At the time Rational and Objectory were two of the dominant players in the small world of independent vendors of object-oriented tools and methods. The Object Management Group (OMG) then took ownership of UML.\nThe creation of UML was motivated by the desire to standardize the disparate nature of notational systems and approaches to software design at the time. In 1997, UML was adopted as a standard by the Object Management Group (OMG) and has been managed by this organization ever since. In 2005, UML was also published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as the ISO/IEC 19501 standard. Since then the standard has been periodically revised to cover the latest revision of UML.\nMost developers do not use UML per se, but instead produce more informal diagrams, often hand-drawn. These diagrams, however, often include elements from UML.\nUse.\nUML is primarily used for software development (in any industry or domain) but also used outside elsewhere including business processes, system functions, database schemas, workflow in the legal systems, medical electronics, Health care systems, and hardware design.\nUML is designed for use with many object-oriented software development methods; both today and for the methods when it was first developed including OMT, Booch method, Objectory, and especially for RUP which it was originally intended to be used with when work began at Rational Software. Although originally intended for object-oriented design documentation, UML has been used effectively in other contexts such as modeling business process.\nAs UML is not inherently linked to a particular programming language, it can be used for modeling a system independent of language. Some UML tools generate source code from a UML model.\nElements.\nUML diagrams support visualizing system aspects like:\nIn addition to syntactical (notational) elements with well-defined semantics, UML diagrams also allow for free-form comments (notes) that explain aspects such as usage, constraints, and intents.\nSharing.\nUML models can be exchanged among UML tools via the XML Metadata Interchange (XMI) format.\nCardinality notation.\nAs with database Chen, Bachman, and ISO ER diagrams, class models are specified to use \"look-across\" cardinalities, even though several authors (Merise,\nElmasri &amp; Navathe,\namongst others)\nprefer same-side or \"look-here\" for roles and both minimum and maximum cardinalities. Recent researchers (Feinerer\nand Dullea et al.)\nhave shown that the \"look-across\" technique used by UML and ER diagrams is less effective and less coherent when applied to \"n\"-ary relationships of order strictly greater than 2.\nFeinerer says: \"Problems arise if we operate under the look-across semantics as used for UML associations. Hartmann\ninvestigates this situation and shows how and why different transformations fail.\", and: \"As we will see on the next few pages, the look-across interpretation introduces several difficulties which prevent the extension of simple mechanisms from binary to \"n\"-ary associations.\"\nArtifacts.\nAn artifact\nis the \"specification of a physical piece of information that is used or produced by a software development process, or by deployment and operation of a system\" including models, source code, scripts, executables, tables in database systems, development deliverables, a design documents, and email messages.\nAn artifact is the physical entity that is deployed to a \nnode. Other UML elements such as classes and components are first manifest into artifacts and instances of these artifacts are then deployed. Artifacts can be composed of other artifacts.\nMetamodeling.\nThe OMG developed a metamodeling architecture to define UML, called the Meta-Object Facility (MOF). MOF is designed as a four-layered architecture, as shown in the image at right. It provides a meta-meta model at the top, called the M3 layer. This M3-model is the language used by Meta-Object Facility to build metamodels, called M2-models.\nThe most prominent example of a Layer 2 Meta-Object Facility model is the UML metamodel, which describes UML itself. These M2-models describe elements of the M1-layer, and thus M1-models. These would be, for example, models written in UML. The last layer is the M0-layer or data layer. It is used to describe runtime instances of the system.\nThe metamodel can be extended using a mechanism called stereotyping. This has been criticized as being insufficient/untenable by Brian Henderson-Sellers and Cesar Gonzalez-Perez in \"Uses and Abuses of the Stereotype Mechanism in UML 1.x and 2.0\".\nDiagrams.\nUML 2 defines many types of diagrams \u2013 shown as a taxonomy in the image.\nStructure diagrams.\nStructure diagrams emphasize the structure of the system \u2013 using objects, classifiers, relationships, attributes and operations. They are used to document software architecture.\nBehavior diagrams.\nBehavior diagrams emphasize the behavior of a system by showing collaborations among objects and changes to the internal states of objects. They are used to describe the functionality of a system.\nInteraction diagrams.\nInteraction diagrams, a subset of behavior diagrams, emphasize the flow of control and data between components of a system.\nAdoption.\nIn 2013, UML had been marketed by OMG for many contexts, but aimed primarily at software development with limited success.\nIt has been treated, at times, as a design silver bullet, which leads to problems. UML misuse includes overuse (designing every part of the system with it, which is unnecessary) and assuming that novices can design with it.\nIt is considered a large language, with many constructs. Some people (including Jacobson) feel that UML's size hinders learning and therefore uptake.\nVisual Studio dropped support for UML in 2016 due to lack of use.\nAccording to Google Trends, use of the term \"UML\" has declined since 2004 although leveled off in the last 5 years.\nHistory.\nUML has evolved since the second half of the 1990s and has its roots in the object-oriented programming methods developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The image shows a timeline of the history of UML and other object-oriented modeling methods and notation.\nOrigin.\nRational Software hired James Rumbaugh from General Electric in 1994 and after that, the company became the source for two of the most popular object-oriented modeling approaches of the day: Rumbaugh's object-modeling technique (OMT) and Grady Booch's method. They were soon assisted in their efforts by Ivar Jacobson, the creator of the object-oriented software engineering (OOSE) method, who joined them at Rational in 1995.\nUML 1.x.\nUML is originally based on the notations of the Booch method, the object-modeling technique (OMT), and object-oriented software engineering (OOSE), which were integrated into a single language. UML was developed at Rational Software in 1994\u20131995, with further development led by them through 1996.\nUnder the technical leadership of Rumbaugh, Jacobson, and Booch, a consortium called the UML Partners was organized in 1996 to complete the \"Unified Modeling Language (UML)\" specification and propose it to the Object Management Group (OMG) for standardization. The partnership also contained additional interested parties (for example HP, DEC, IBM, and Microsoft). The UML Partners' UML 1.0 draft was proposed to the OMG in January 1997 by the consortium. During the same month, the UML Partners formed a group, designed to define the exact meaning of language constructs, chaired by Cris Kobryn and administered by Ed Eykholt, to finalize the specification and integrate it with other standardization efforts. The result of this work, UML 1.1, was submitted to the OMG in August 1997 and adopted by the OMG in November 1997.\nAfter the first release, a task force was formed to improve the language, which released several minor revisions, 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5.\nThe standards it produced (as well as the original standard) have been noted as being ambiguous and inconsistent.\nUML 2.\nUML 2.0 major revision replaced version 1.5 in 2005, which was developed with an enlarged consortium to improve the language further to reflect new experiences on the usage of its features.\nAlthough UML 2.1 was never released as a formal specification, versions 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 appeared in 2007, followed by UML 2.2 in February 2009. UML 2.3 was formally released in May 2010. UML 2.4.1 was formally released in August 2011. UML 2.5 was released in October 2012 as an \"In progress\" version and was officially released in June 2015.\nThe formal version 2.5.1 was adopted in December 2017.\nThere are four parts to the UML 2.x specification:\nUntil UML 2.4.1, the latest versions of these standards were:\nSince version 2.5, the UML Specification has been simplified (without Superstructure and Infrastructure), and the latest versions of these standards are now:\nIt continues to be updated and improved by the revision task force, who resolve any issues with the language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32170", "revid": "31868184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32170", "title": "UML (disambiguation)", "text": "UML may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32173", "revid": "217538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32173", "title": "United States Military Academy", "text": "U.S. Army federal service academy in West Point, New York\nThe United States Military Academy (USMA), commonly known as West Point, is a United States service academy in West Point, New York, that educates cadets for service as commissioned officers in the United States Army. The academy was founded in 1802, and it is the oldest of the five American service academies. The Army has occupied the site since establishing a fort there in 1780 during the American Revolutionary War, as it sits on strategic high ground overlooking the Hudson River north of New York City. \nWest Point's academic program grants the Bachelor of Science degree with a curriculum that grades cadets' performance upon a broad academic program, military leadership performance, and mandatory participation in competitive athletics. Candidates for admission must apply directly to the academy and receive a nomination, usually from a member of Congress. Students are officers-in-training with the rank of cadet. Collectively, the students at the academy are the \"United States Corps of Cadets\" (USCC). The Army fully funds tuition for cadets in exchange for an active duty service obligation upon graduation. About 1,300 cadets enter the academy each July, with about 1,000 cadets graduating. The academy began admitting female cadets in 1976, and women now comprise around 20% of entrants. The academy's traditions have influenced other institutions because of its age and unique mission. It was the first American college to have an accredited civil engineering program, and its technical curriculum became a model for engineering schools. It was also the first college to have class rings. \nWest Point fields 15 men's and nine women's National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) sports teams. Cadets compete in one sport every fall, winter, and spring season at the intramural, club, or intercollegiate level. Its football team was a national power in the early and mid-20th century, winning three national championships. Its alumni are collectively referred to as \"The Long Gray Line,\" which include U.S. presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower and Ulysses S. Grant; Confederate president Jefferson Davis; Confederate generals Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson; American poet Edgar Allan Poe; U.S. generals William Tecumseh Sherman, John J. Pershing, Douglas MacArthur, Omar Bradley, and George Patton; presidents of Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and the Philippines; and 76 Medal of Honor recipients.\nHistory.\nColonial period, founding, and early years.\nThe Continental Army first occupied West Point, New York, on 27 January 1778, and it is the oldest continuously operating Army post in the United States. Between 1778 and 1780, the Polish engineer and military hero Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko oversaw the construction of the garrison defenses. However, Ko\u015bciuszko's plan of a system of small forts did not meet with the approval of New York Governor (and General) George Clinton or the other general officers. It was determined that a battery along the river to \"annoy the shipping\" was more appropriate, and Washington's chief engineer, Rufus Putnam, directed the construction of a major fortification on a hill above sea level that commanded the West Point plain. General Alexander McDougall named it Fort Putnam. The Great Hudson River Chain and high ground above the narrow \"S\" curve in the river enabled the Continental Army to prevent the Royal Navy from sailing upriver and dividing Patriot forces in the Northern colonies from the south. While the fortifications at West Point were known as Fort Arnold during the war, as commander, Benedict Arnold committed his act of treason, attempting to turn the fort over to the British. After Arnold betrayed the patriot cause, the Army changed the name of the fortifications at West Point, New York, to Fort Clinton, named after General James Clinton. With the peace after the American Revolutionary War, various ordnance and military stores were left deposited at West Point.\n\"Cadets\" underwent training in artillery and engineering studies at the garrison since 1794. During the Quasi-War, Alexander Hamilton laid out plans for the establishment of a military academy at West Point and introduced \"A Bill for Establishing a Military Academy\" in the House of Representatives. In 1801, shortly after his inauguration as president, Thomas Jefferson directed that plans be set in motion to establish at West Point the United States Military Academy. He selected Jonathan Williams to serve as its first superintendent. Congress formally authorized the establishment and funding of the school with the Military Peace Establishment Act of 1802, which Jefferson signed on 16 March. The academy officially commenced operations on 4 July 1802. The academy graduated Joseph Gardner Swift, its first official graduate, in October 1802. He later returned as Superintendent from 1812 to 1814. In its tumultuous early years, the academy featured few standards for admission or length of study. Cadets ranged in age from 10 years to 37 years and attended between 6\u00a0months to 6\u00a0years. The impending War of 1812 caused the United States Congress to authorize a more formal system of education at the academy and increased the size of the Corps of Cadets to 250.\nIn 1817, Colonel Sylvanus Thayer became the Superintendent and established the curriculum, elements of which are still in use as of 2020[ [update]]. Thayer instilled strict disciplinary standards, set a standard course of academic study, and emphasized honorable conduct. He was very much inspired by the curriculum of the French , where he had been sent upon his demand, for two years in order to study the scientific and technological achievements developed by the French Republican faction and bring them back to the United States. Known as the \"Father of the Military Academy,\" he is honored with a monument on campus for the profound impact he had on the academy. Founded as a school of engineering, for the first half of the 19th century, USMA produced graduates who gained recognition for engineering the bulk of the nation's initial railway lines, bridges, harbors, and roads. The academy was the only engineering school in the country until the founding of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1824. It was so successful in its engineering curriculum that it significantly influenced every American engineering school founded prior to the Civil War.\nIn 1835, during the Army's first year of the Second Seminole War, they had only three generals: Winfield Scott, Edmund P. Gaines, and Thomas S. Jesup. The Army's remaining fourteen generals held only brevet ranks, and none of them were West Point graduates. Nearly the only way to obtain a commission up to 1835 was through the academy, which raised loud complaints and added to the deep desire of the era's Jacksonian Democracy \"to get rid of the Academy, where Jacksonians were sure, an aristocratic tradition was being bred.\"\nThe Mexican\u2013American War brought the academy to prominence as graduates proved themselves in battle for the first time. Future Civil War commanders Ulysses S. Grant and Robert E. Lee, who also later became the superintendent of the academy, first distinguished themselves in battle in Mexico. In all, 452 of 523 graduates who served in the war received battlefield promotions or awards for bravery. The school experienced a rapid modernization during the 1850s, often romanticized by the graduates who led both sides of the Civil War as the \"end of the Old West Point era.\" New barracks brought better heat and gas lighting, while new ordnance and tactics training incorporated new rifle and musket technology and accommodated transportation advances created by the steam engine. With the outbreak of the Civil War, West Point graduates filled the general officer ranks of the rapidly expanding Union and Confederate armies. 294 graduates served as general officers for the Union, and 151 served as general officers for the Confederacy. Of all living graduates at the time of the war, 105 (10%) were killed, and another 151 (15%) were wounded. Nearly every general officer of note from either army during the Civil War was a graduate of West Point, and a West Point graduate commanded the forces of one or both sides in every one of the 60 major battles of the war.\nAfter the Civil War.\nImmediately following the Civil War, the academy enjoyed unprecedented fame as a result of the role its graduates had played. The post-war years were a difficult time for the academy as it struggled to admit and reintegrate cadets from former Confederate states. The first cadets from Southern states were re-admitted in 1868, and 1870 saw the admission of the first black cadet, James Webster Smith of South Carolina. Smith endured harsh treatment and was eventually dismissed for academic deficiency under controversial circumstances in 1874. As a result, Henry O. Flipper of Georgia became the first black graduate in 1877, graduating 50th in a class of 76. Two of the most notable graduates during this period were George Washington Goethals from the class of 1880 and John J. Pershing from the class of 1886. Goethals gained prominence as the chief engineer of the Panama Canal, and Pershing would become famous for his exploits against the famed Pancho Villa in Mexico and later for leading American Forces during World War I. In 1898, the first Confederate leader since the Civil War was invited to the academy.\nBesides the integration of southern-state and black cadets, the post-war academy also struggled with the issue of hazing. In its first 65 years, hazing was uncommon or non-existent beyond small pranks played upon the incoming freshmen, but it took a harsher tone as Civil War veterans began to fill the incoming freshman classes. The upper-class cadets saw it as their duty to \"teach the plebes their manners.\" Hazing at the academy entered the national spotlight with the death of former cadet Oscar L. Booz on 3 December 1900. Congressional hearings, which included testimony by cadet Douglas MacArthur, investigated his death and the pattern of freshmen's systemic hazing. When MacArthur returned as superintendent, he made an effort to end the practice of hazing the incoming freshmen by placing Army sergeants in charge of training new cadets during freshman summer. The practice of hazing continued on some levels well into the late 20th century, but is no longer allowed in the present day.\nThe demand for junior officers during the Spanish\u2013American War caused the class of 1899 to graduate early, and the Philippine\u2013American War did the same for the class of 1901. This increased demand for officers led Congress to increase the Corps of Cadets' size to 481\u00a0cadets in 1900. The period between 1900 and 1915 saw a construction boom as much of West Point's old infrastructure was rebuilt. Many of the academy's most famous graduates graduated during the 15 years between 1900 and 1915: Douglas MacArthur (1903), Joseph Stilwell (1904), Henry \"Hap\" Arnold (1907), George S. Patton (1909), Dwight D. Eisenhower, and Omar Bradley (both 1915). The class of 1915 is known as \"the class the stars fell on\" for the exceptionally high percentage of general officers that rose from that class (59 of 164).\nThe outbreak of America's involvement in World War I caused a sharp increase in the demand for army officers, and the academy accelerated graduation of all four classes then in attendance to meet this requirement, beginning with the early graduation of the First Class on 20 April 1917, the Second Class in August 1917, and both the Third and Fourth Classes just before the Armistice of 11 November 1918, when only freshman cadets remained (those who had entered in the summer of 1918). In all, wartime contingencies and post-war adjustments resulted in ten classes, varying in length of study from two to four years, within a seven-year period before the regular course of study was fully resumed.\nDouglas MacArthur became superintendent in 1919, instituting sweeping reforms to the academic process, including introducing a greater emphasis on history and humanities. He made major changes to the field training regimen, and the Cadet Honor Committee was formed under his watch in 1922. MacArthur was a firm supporter of athletics at the academy, as he famously said, \"Upon the fields of friendly strife are sown the seeds that, upon other fields, on other days, will bear the fruits of victory.\" West Point was first officially accredited in 1925, and in 1933 began granting Bachelor of Science degrees to all graduates. In 1935, the academy's authorized strength increased to 1,960 cadets.\nWorld War II and The Cold War.\nAs World War II engulfed Europe, Congress authorized an increase to 2,496 cadets in 1942 and began graduating classes early. The class of 1943 graduated six months early in January 1943, and the next four classes graduated after only three years. To accommodate this accelerated schedule, summer training was formally moved to a recently acquired piece of land southwest of the main post. The site would later become Camp Buckner. The academy had its last serious brush with abolition or major reform during the war, when some members of Congress charged that even the accelerated curriculum allowed young men to \"hide out\" at West Point and avoid combat duty. A proposal was put forth to convert the academy to an officer's training school with a six-month schedule, but this was not adopted. West Point played a prominent role in WWII; four of the five, five-star generals were alumni, and nearly 500 graduates died. Immediately following the war in 1945, Maxwell Taylor (class of 1922) became superintendent. He expanded and modernized the academic program and abolished antiquated courses in fencing and horsemanship.\nUnlike previous conflicts, the Korean War did not disrupt class graduation schedules. More than half of the Army leadership during the war was composed of West Point graduates. The Class of 1950, which graduated only two weeks prior to the war's outbreak, suffered some of the heaviest casualties of any 20th-century class and became known sourly as \"the class the crosses fell on.\" A total of 157 alumni perished in the conflict. Garrison H. Davidson became superintendent in 1956 and instituted several reforms that included refining the admissions process, changing the core curriculum to include electives, and increasing the academic degree standards for academy instructors. The 1960s saw the size of the Corps expand to 4,400 cadets while the barracks and academic support structure grew proportionally.\nWest Point was not immune to the social upheaval of American society during the Vietnam War. The first woman joined the faculty of the all-male institution amidst controversy in 1968. West Point granted its first honorable discharge in 1971 to an African-American West Point cadet, Cornelius M. Cooper, of California, who applied for conscientious objector status in 1969. The academy struggled to fill its incoming classes as its graduates led troops in Southeast Asia, where 333 graduates died.\nModern era.\nFollowing the 1973 end of American involvement in Vietnam, the strain and stigma of earlier social unrest dissolved, and West Point enjoyed surging enrollments. On 20 May 1975, an amendment to the Defense Authorization Bill of 1976 opening the service academies to women was approved by the House of Representatives, 303\u201396. The Senate followed suit on 6 June. President Ford signed the bill on 7 October 1975.\nWest Point admitted its first 119 female cadets in 1976. Also in 1976, physics professor James H. Stith became the first tenured African American Professor. In 1979, Cadet, later General, Vincent K. Brooks became the first African American to lead the Corps of Cadets. Kristin Baker, ten years later, became the first female First Captain, the highest-ranking senior cadet at the academy in 1989. Seven other women have been appointed as First Captain: Grace H. Chung in 2003, Stephanie Hightower in 2005, Lindsey Danilack in 2013, Simone Askew in 2017, Reilly McGinnis in 2020, Lauren Drysdale in 2022, and Caroline Robinson in 2025. Simone Askew was the first African American woman to lead the Corps. In the 21st century, women comprise approximately 20% of entering new cadets.\nIn 1985, cadets were formally authorized to declare an academic major; all previous graduates had been awarded a general Bachelor of Science degree. Five years later there was a major revision of the \"Fourth-Class System\", as the Cadet Leader Development System (CLDS) became the guidance for the development of all four classes. The class of 1990 was the first one to be issued a standard and mandatory computer to every member of the class at the beginning of Plebe year, the Zenith 248 SX. The academy was also an early adopter of the Internet in the mid-1990s, and was recognized in 2006 as one of the nation's \"most wired\" campuses.\nDuring the Gulf War, alumnus General Schwarzkopf was the commander of Allied Forces. The American senior generals in Iraq, Generals Petraeus, Odierno and Austin, and Afghanistan, retired General Stanley McChrystal and General David Rodriguez, are also alumni. Following the September 11 attacks, applications for admission to the academy increased dramatically, security on campus was increased, and the curriculum was revamped to include coursework on terrorism and military drills in civilian environments. One graduate was killed during the 9/11 terrorist attacks and ninety graduates have died during operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the ongoing global war on terror. The Class of 2005 has been referred to as The Class of 9/11 as the attacks occurred during their first year at the academy, and they graduated 911 students. In 2008 gender-neutral lyrics were incorporated into West Point's \"Alma Mater\" and \"The Corps\" \u2013 replacing lines like \"The men of the Corps\" with \"The ranks of the Corps.\" In December 2009, President Barack Obama delivered a major speech in Eisenhower Hall Theater outlining his policy for deploying 30,000 additional troops to Afghanistan as well as setting a timetable for withdrawal. President Obama also provided the commencement address in 2014.\nAfter the Don't Ask, Don't Tell policy was lifted 20 September 2011, the academy began admitting and retaining openly gay cadets. By March 2012, cadets were forming a gay-straight alliance group called Spectrum. By March 2015, Spectrum had two faculty and 40 cadet members, a mixture of gay, straight, bi, and undecided. According to a Vanity Fair essay, the LGBT cadets were well accepted. After the ban on transgender service members was lifted in 2016, the Class of 2017 saw the first openly transgender graduate. However, she was denied a commission and was honorably discharged.\nBrig. Gen. Diana Holland became West Point's first woman Commandant of Cadets in January 2016.\nIn 2020, the campus confronted its first major pandemic in a century, with the COVID-19 pandemic causing limitations on classes, and the relocation of the traditional Army-Navy football game to ensure social distancing. For the first time in many years, the 121st iteration of the game was held at West Point rather than the traditional Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia. Ultimately, West Point beat Navy 15\u20130.\nCampus.\nThe academy is located approximately north of New York City on the western bank of the Hudson River. West Point, New York, is incorporated as a federal military reservation in Orange County and is adjacent to Highland Falls. Based on the significance both of the Revolutionary War fort ruins and of the military academy itself, the majority of the academy area was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960. In 1841, Charles Dickens visited the academy and said \"It could not stand on more appropriate ground, and any ground more beautiful can hardly be.\" One of the most visited and scenic sites on post, Trophy Point, overlooks the Hudson River to the north, and is home to many captured cannon from past wars as well as the Stanford White-designed Battle Monument. Though the entire military reservation encompasses , the academic area of the campus, known as \"central area\" or \"the cadet area\", is entirely accessible to cadets or visitors by foot.\nIn 1902, the Boston architectural firm Cram, Goodhue, and Ferguson was awarded a major construction contract that set the predominantly neogothic architectural style still seen today. Most of the buildings of the central cadet area are in this style, as typified by the Cadet Chapel, completed in 1910. These buildings are nearly all constructed from granite that has a predominantly gray and black hue. The barracks that were built in the 1960s were designed to mimic this style. Other buildings on post, notably the oldest private residences for the faculty, are built in the Federal, Georgian, or English Tudor styles. A few buildings, such as Cullum Hall and the Old Cadet Chapel, are built in the Neoclassical style.\nThe academy grounds are home to numerous monuments and statues. The central cadet parade ground, the Plain, hosts the largest number, and includes the Washington Monument, Thayer Monument, Eisenhower Monument, MacArthur Monument, Kosciuszko Monument, and Sedgwick Monument. Patton Monument was first dedicated in front of the cadet library in 1950, but in 2004 it was placed in storage to make room for the construction of Jefferson Hall. With the completion of Jefferson Hall, Patton's statue was relocated and unveiled at a temporary location on 15 May 2009, where it will remain until the completion of the renovation of the old cadet library and Bartlett Hall. There is also a statue commemorating brotherhood and friendship from the in the cadet central area just outside Nininger Hall. The remaining campus area is home to 27 other monuments and memorials.\nThe West Point Cemetery is the final resting place of many notable graduates and faculty, including George Armstrong Custer, Winfield Scott, William Westmoreland, Earl Blaik, Margaret Corbin, and eighteen Medal of Honor recipients. The cemetery is also the burial place of several recent graduates who have died during the ongoing conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan. Many of the older grave sites have large and ornate grave markers, the largest belonging to Egbert Viele (class of 1847), chief engineer of Brooklyn's Prospect Park. The cemetery is also home to a monument to Revolutionary War heroine Margaret Corbin.\nAthletic facilities.\nWest Point is home to historic athletic facilities like Michie Stadium and Gillis Field House as well as modern facilities such as the Lichtenberg Tennis Center, Anderson Rugby Complex, and the Lou Gross Gymnastics Facility. Michie Stadium recently underwent a significant upgrade in facilities for the football team, and the academy installed a new artificial turf field in the summer of 2008.\nWest Point Museum.\nThe visitor center is just outside the Thayer Gate in the village of Highland Falls and offers the opportunity to arrange for a guided tour. These tours, which are the only way the general public can access the academy grounds, leave the visitor center several times a day. The old West Point Visitor Center was housed in the now-demolished Ladycliff College library building. On 9 September 2016, West Point broke ground in order to begin construction of the new 31,000 square foot Malek West Point Visitors Center. It is being built on the location of the former visitor center. The Malek West Point Visitors Center is named after Frederic Malek, USMA Class of 1959 and a 2014 Distinguished Graduate.\nThe West Point Museum is directly adjacent to the visitor center, in the renovated Olmsted Hall on the grounds of the former Ladycliff College. Originally opened to the public in 1854, the West Point Museum is the oldest military museum in the country. During the summer months, the museum operates access to the Fort Putnam historic site on main post and access to the 282 acre Constitution Island. Some of the most notable items on display at the museum are George Washington's pistols, Napoleon's sword, a dagger carried by Hermann G\u00f6ring when he was captured, a revolver that belonged to G\u00f6ring, and a silver-plated party book, signed by Charles Lindbergh, Herbert Hoover and Mussolini, among others. In addition, a gold-plated Liliput pistol that belonged to Adolf Hitler is on display.\nAdministration.\nAcademy leadership.\nThe commanding officer at the USMA is the Superintendent, equivalent to the president or chancellor of a civilian university. In recent years, the position of superintendent has been held by a lieutenant general (three star general). The 61st Superintendent, Lieutenant General Steven W. Gilland, took command on 27 June 2022, replacing Darryl A. Williams. The academy is a direct reporting unit, and as such, the Superintendent reports directly to the Army Chief of Staff (CSA).\nThere are two other general officer positions at the academy. Brigadier General R.J. Garcia is the Commandant of Cadets, equivalent to a dean of students at the civilian level. Brigadier General Shane Reeves is the Dean of the Academic Board, equivalent to a provost at the civilian level. Brigadier General Diana Holland was the first female commandant. Brigadier General Jebb was the first female Dean. There are 13 academic departments at USMA, each with a colonel as the head of department. These 13 tenured colonels comprise the core of the Academic Board. These officers are titled \"Professors USMA\" or PUSMA. The academy is also overseen by the Board of Visitors (BOV). The BOV is a panel of Senators, Congressional Representatives, and presidential appointees who \"shall inquire into the morale and discipline, curriculum, instruction, physical equipment, fiscal affairs, academic methods, and other matters relating to the academy that the board decides to consider.\" Currently the BOV is chaired by Representative John Shimkus and is composed of three Senators, five Representatives and six presidential appointees.\nAdmission requirements.\nCandidates must be between 17 and 23 years old (waivers have been accepted for 24-year olds in rare cases where the candidate is in the military and deployed and therefore unable to attend before their 24th birthday), unmarried, and with no legal obligation to support a child. Above-average high school or previous college grades and strong performance on standardized testing are expected. The interquartile range on the old SAT was 1100\u20131360 and 68% ranked in the top fifth of their high school class.\nTo be eligible for appointment, candidates must also undergo a Candidate Fitness Assessment and a complete physical exam. Up to 60 students from foreign countries are present at USMA, educated at the expense of the sponsoring nation, with tuition assistance based on the GNP of their country. Of these foreign cadets the Code of Federal Regulations specifically permits one Filipino cadet designated by the President of the Philippines.\nThe actual application process consists of two main requirements: candidates apply to USMA for admission and separately provide a nomination. The majority of candidates receive a nomination from their United States Representative or Senator. Some receive a nomination from the Vice President or even the President of the United States.\nThe nomination process is not political. The academy applicant typically provides written essays and letters of recommendation. The applicant then submits to a formal interview. Admission to West Point is selective: 7.74% of applicants were admitted (total of 1232) to the Class of 2024.\nCandidates may have previous college experience, but they may not transfer, meaning that regardless of previous college credit, they enter the academy as a fourth class cadet and undergo the entire four-year program. Candidates considered academically disqualified and not selected may receive an offer to attend to the United States Military Academy Preparatory School. Upon graduation from USMAPS, these candidates are appointed to the academy if they receive the recommendation of the USMAPS Commandant and meet medical admission requirements.\nThe West Point Association of Graduates (WPAOG) also offers scholarship support to people who are qualified but not selected. The scholarships usually cover around $7,000 to civilian universities; the students who receive these scholarships do so under the stipulation that they will be admitted to and attend West Point a year later. Those who do not must repay the AOG. Marion Military Institute, New Mexico Military Institute, Georgia Military College, Hargrave Military Academy, Greystone Preparatory School at Schreiner University, and Northwestern Preparatory School are approved programs that students attend on the AOG scholarship prior to admission to West Point.\nResearch centers and institutes.\nThe academy's research centers and institutes include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCurriculum.\nWest Point is a highly residential baccalaureate college, with a full-time, four-year undergraduate program that emphasizes instruction in the arts, sciences, and professions with no graduate program. There are forty-five academic majors, the most popular of which are foreign languages, management information systems, history, economics, and mechanical engineering. West Point is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. Military officers compose 75% of the faculty, while civilian professors make up the remaining 25%.\nA cadet's class rank, which determines their Army branch and assignment upon graduation, is calculated as a combination of academic performance (55%), military leadership performance (30%), and physical fitness and athletic performance (15%).\nAcademics.\nThe academy's teaching style forms part of the Thayer method, which was implemented by Sylvanus Thayer during his tour as Superintendent. This form of instruction emphasizes small classes with daily homework, and strives to make students actively responsible for their own learning by completing homework assignments prior to class and bringing the work to class to discuss collaboratively.\nThe academic program consists of a structured core of thirty-one courses balanced between the arts and sciences. The academy operates on the semester system, which it labels as \"terms\" (Term 1 is the fall semester; Term 2 is the spring semester). Although cadets choose their majors in the spring of their freshmen year, all cadets take the same course of instruction until the beginning of their second year. This core course of instruction consists of mathematics, information technology, chemistry, physics, engineering, history, physical geography, philosophy, leadership and general psychology, English composition and literature, foreign language, political science, international relations, economics, and constitutional law. Some advanced cadets may \"validate\" out of the base-level classes and take advanced or accelerated courses earlier as freshmen or sophomores. Regardless of major, all cadets graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree.\nMilitary.\nAs all cadets are commissioned as second lieutenants upon graduation, military and leadership education is nested with academic instruction. Military training and discipline fall under the purview of the Office of the Commandant of Cadets. Entering freshmen, or fourth class cadets, are referred to as New Cadets, and enter the academy on Reception Day or R-day, which marks the start of cadet basic training (CBT), known colloquially as Beast Barracks, or simply Beast. Most cadets consider Beast to be their most difficult time at the academy because of the transition from civilian to military life. Their second summer, cadets undergo cadet field training (CFT) at nearby Camp Buckner, where they train in more advanced field craft and military skills. During a cadet's third summer, they may serve as instructors for CBT or CFT. Rising Firstie (senior) cadets also spend one-month training at Camp Buckner, where they train for modern tactical situations that they will soon face as new platoon leaders. Cadets also have the opportunity during their second, third and fourth summers to serve in active army units and military schools around the world. The schools include Airborne, Air Assault, Sapper, Pathfinder, etc.\nActive duty officers in the rank of captain or major serve as Company Tactical Officers (TAC Officers). The role of the TAC is to mentor, train, and teach the cadets proper standards of good order and discipline and be a good role model. There is one TAC for every cadet company. There is also one senior Non-Commissioned Officer to assist each TAC, known as TAC-NCOs.\nThe Department of Military Instruction (DMI) is responsible for all military arts and sciences education as well as planning and executing the cadet summer training. Within DMI there is a representative from each of the Army's branches. These \"branch reps\" serve as proponents for their respective branches and liaise with cadets as they prepare for branch selection and graduation. Within DMI sits the Modern War Institute, a research center devoted to the study of contemporary conflict and the evolving character of war.\nPhysical.\nThe Department of Physical Education (DPE) administers the physical program, which includes both physical education classes, physical fitness testing, and competitive athletics. The head of DPE holds the title of Master of the Sword, dating back to the 19th century when DPE taught swordsmanship as part of the curriculum.\nAll cadets take a prescribed series of physical fitness courses such as military movement (applied gymnastics), boxing, survival swimming, and beginning in 2009, advanced combatives. Cadets can also take elective physical activity classes such as scuba, rock climbing, and aerobic fitness.\nAs with all soldiers in the Army, cadets also must pass the Army Physical Fitness Test twice per year. Additionally, every year, cadets must pass the Indoor Obstacle Course Test (IOCT), which DPE has administered in Hayes Gymnasium since 1944.\nSince Douglas MacArthur's tenure as superintendent, every cadet has been required to participate in either an intercollegiate sport, a club sport, or an intramural (referred to as \"company athletics\") sport each semester.\nMoral and ethical training.\nMoral and ethical development occurs throughout the entirety of the cadet experience by living under the honor code and through formal leadership programs available at the academy. These include instruction in the values of the military profession through Professional Military Ethics Education (PME2), voluntary religious programs, interaction with staff and faculty role models, and an extensive guest-speaker program. The foundation of the ethical code at West Point is found in the academy's motto, \"Duty, Honor, Country.\"\nWest Point's Cadet Honor Code reads simply that: \"A cadet will not lie, cheat, steal, or tolerate those who do.\" Cadets accused of violating the Honor Code face an investigative and hearing process. If they are found guilty by a jury of their peers, they face severe consequences ranging from being \"turned back\" (repeating an academic year) to separation from the academy. Cadets previously enforced collective censure by an unofficial sanction known as \"silencing\" by not speaking to cadets accused of violating the honor code, but the practice ended in 1973 after national scrutiny.\nAlthough the academy's honor code is well known and has been influential for many other colleges and universities, the academy has experienced several significant violations. For example, 151 junior cadets were found guilty of \"violating the honor code\" in their exams in 1976. In 2020, more than 70 cadets were also accused of cheating on exams.\nCadet life.\nRank and organization.\nCadets are not referred to as freshmen, sophomores, juniors, or seniors. Instead they are officially called fourth class, third class, second class, and first class cadets. Colloquially, freshmen are \"plebes\", sophomores are \"yearlings\" or \"yuks\", juniors are \"cows\", and seniors are \"firsties\". Only some of the origins of the class names are known. Plebeians were the lower class of ancient Roman society, while yearling is a euphemism for a year-old animal. There are a number of theories for the origin of the term \"cow\"; however the most prevalent and probably accurate one is that cadets had no leave until the end of their yearling year, when they were granted a summer-long furlough. Their return as second classmen was heralded as \"the cows coming home.\"\nThe Corps of Cadets is officially organized into a brigade. The senior ranking cadet, the Brigade Commander, is known traditionally as the \"First Captain\". The brigade is organized into four regiments. Within each regiment there are three battalions, each consisting of three companies. Companies are lettered A through I, with a number signifying which regiment it belongs to. For example, there are four \"H\" companies: H1, H2, H3, and H4. First class cadets hold the leadership positions within the brigade from the First Captain down to platoon leaders within the companies. Leadership responsibility decreases with the lower classes, with second class cadets holding the rank of cadet sergeant, third class cadets holding the rank of cadet corporal, and fourth class cadets as cadet privates.\nLife in the corps.\nBecause of the academy's congressional nomination process, students come from all 50 states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, the Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the US Virgin Islands. The academy is also authorized up to 60 international exchange cadets, who undergo the same four-year curriculum as fully integrated members of the Corps of Cadets. Cadets attend the United States Military Academy free of charge, with all tuition and board paid for by the Army in return for a service commitment of five years of active duty and three years of reserve status upon graduation. \nMost graduates are commissioned as second lieutenants in the Army. Foreign cadets are commissioned into the armies of their home countries. Since 1959, cadets have also had the option of \"cross-commissioning,\" or requesting a commission in one of the other armed services, provided they meet that service's eligibility standards. Every year, a small number of graduates do this, usually in a one-for-one \"trade\" with a similarly inclined cadet or midshipman at one of the other service academies.\nStarting on the first day of a cadet's second class year, non-graduates after that point are expected to fulfill their obligations in enlisted service. Cadets receive a monthly stipend of $1,017.00 for books, uniforms, and other necessities, as of 2015. From this amount, pay is automatically deducted for the cost of uniforms, books, supplies, services, meals, and other miscellaneous expenses. All remaining money after deductions is used at the individual cadets' discretion. All cadets receive meals in the dining halls and have access to internet on approved, issued devices. The student population was 4,389 cadets for the 2016\u20132017 academic year. The student body has recently been around 20% female.\nAll cadets reside on campus for their entire four years in one of the nine barracks buildings. Most cadets are housed with one roommate, but some rooms are designed for three cadets. Cadets are grouped into \"companies\" identified by alpha-numeric codes. All companies live together in the same barracks area. The commandant may decide to have cadets change companies at some point in their cadet career. This process is known as scrambling and the method of scrambling has changed several times in recent years. All 4,000 cadets dine together at breakfast and lunch in the Washington Hall during the weekdays. The cadet fitness center, Arvin Cadet Physical Development Center (usually just called \"Arvin\" by cadets and faculty), which was rebuilt in 2004, houses extensive physical fitness facilities and equipment for student use.\nEach class of cadets elects representatives to serve as class president and fill several administrative positions. They also elect a ring and crest committee, which designs the class's crest, the emblem that signifies their class and is embossed upon their class rings. Each class crest is required to contain the initials \"USMA\" and their class motto. The class motto is proposed by the class during cadet basic training and voted on by the class prior to the beginning of their freshman academic year. Class mottos typically have wording that rhymes or is phonetically similar with their class year.\nCadets today live and work within the framework of the West Point Leader Development System (WPLDS), which specifies the roles that a cadet plays throughout their four years at the academy. Cadets begin their USMA careers as trainees (new cadets), then advance in rank, starting as CDT Privates (freshmen) and culminating as CDT Officers (seniors). Freshmen have no leadership responsibilities, but have a host of duties to perform as they learn how to follow orders and operate in an environment of rigid rank structure, while seniors have significant leadership responsibilities and significantly more privileges that correspond to their rank.\nActivities.\nCadets have a host of extracurricular activities available, most run by the office of the Directorate of Cadet Activities (DCA). DCA sponsors or operates 113\u00a0athletic and non-sport clubs. Many cadets join several clubs during their time at the academy and find their time spent with their clubs a welcome respite from the rigors of cadet life. DCA is responsible for a wide range of activities that provide improved quality of life for cadets, including: three cadet-oriented restaurants, the Cadet Store, and the \"Howitzer\" and \"Bugle Notes\". \"The Howitzer\" is the annual yearbook, while \"Bugle Notes\", also known as the \"plebe bible,\" is the manual of plebe knowledge. Plebe knowledge is a lengthy collection of traditions, songs, poems, anecdotes, and facts about the academy, the army, the \"Old Corps\", and the rivalry with Navy that all plebes must memorize during cadet basic training. During plebe year, plebes may be asked, and are expected to answer, any inquiry about plebe knowledge asked by upper class cadets. Other knowledge is historical in nature, including information as found in \"Bugle Notes\". However, some knowledge changes daily, such as \"the days\" (a running list of the number of days until important academy events), the menu in the mess hall for the day, or the lead stories in \"The New York Times\".\nEach cadet class celebrates at least one special \"class weekend\" per academic year. Fourth class cadets participate in Plebe Parent Weekend during the first weekend of spring break. In February, third class cadets celebrate the winter season with Yearling Winter Weekend. In late January the second class cadets celebrate 500th Night, marking the remaining 500 days before graduation. First class cadets celebrate three different formal occasions. In late August, first class cadets celebrate Ring Weekend, in February they mark their last 100 days with 100th Night, and in May they have a full week of events culminating in their graduation. All of the \"class weekends\" involve a formal dinner and social dance, known in old cadet slang as a \"hop,\" held at Eisenhower Hall. Grant Hall, formerly the cadet mess hall at West Point, is now a social center. Cadets also have an array of extracurricular options beyond the school's grounds, including in the Peace &amp; Dialogue Leadership Initiative and the academy's Foreign Academy Exchange Program.\nAthletics.\nSince 1899, Army's mascot has officially been a mule because the animal symbolizes strength and perseverance. The academy's football team was nicknamed \"The Black Knights of the Hudson\" due to the black color of its uniforms. This nickname has since been officially shortened to the \"Black Knights.\" U.S. sports media use \"Army\" as a synonym for the academy. \"On Brave Old Army Team\" is the school's fight song. Army's chief sports rival is the Naval Academy due to its long-standing football rivalry and the interservice rivalry with the Navy in general. Fourth class cadets verbally greet upper-class cadets and faculty with \"Beat Navy,\" while the tunnel that runs under Washington Road is named the \"Beat Navy\" tunnel. Army also plays the U.S. Air Force Academy for the Commander-in-Chief's Trophy. In the first half of the 20th century, Army and Notre Dame were football rivals, but that rivalry has since died out. Notre Dame beat Army 44 \u2013 6 in 2016.\nFootball.\nArmy football began in 1890, when Navy challenged the cadets to a game of the relatively new sport. Navy defeated Army at West Point that year, but Army avenged the loss in Annapolis the following year. The rival academies still clash every December in what is traditionally the last regular-season Division I college-football game. The 2015 football season marked Navy's fourteenth consecutive victory over Army, the longest streak in the series since inception. The following year, Army won 21\u201317. Army's football team reached its pinnacle of success under coach Earl Blaik when Army won consecutive national championships in 1944, 1945 and 1946, and produced three Heisman Trophy winners: Doc Blanchard (1945), Glenn Davis (1946) and Pete Dawkins (1958). Past NFL coaches Vince Lombardi and Bill Parcells were Army assistant coaches early in their careers. The football team plays its home games at Michie Stadium, where the playing field is named after Earl Blaik. Cadets' attendance is mandatory at football games and the Corps stands for the duration of the game. At all home games, one of the four regiments marches onto the field in formation before the team takes the field and leads the crowd in traditional Army cheers. From 1992 through 1996, Army won all of the games against Navy for the first time since the legendary days of Blanchard and Davis, and it introduced the fraternal group of players identifying themselves as the Fat Man Club, initiated by the offensive linemen of the Class of 1996. Between the 1998 and 2004 seasons, Army's football program was a member of Conference USA, but has since reverted to its former independent status.\nOther sports.\nThough football may receive a lot of media attention due to its annual rivalry game, West Point has a long history of athletics in other NCAA sports. Army is a member of the Division I Patriot League in most sports, while its men's ice hockey program competes in Atlantic Hockey. John P. Riley Jr. was the hockey coach at West Point for more than 35 years. Every year, Army faces the Royal Military College of Canada (RMC) Paladins in the annual West Point Weekend hockey game. This series was first conceived in 1923.\nThe men's lacrosse team has won eight national championships and appeared in the NCAA tournament sixteen times. In its early years, lacrosse was used by football players, like the \"Lonesome End\" Bill Carpenter, to stay in shape during the off-season. The 2005\u201306 women's basketball team went 20\u201311 and won the Patriot League tournament. They went to the 2006 NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Tournament as a 15th-ranked seed, where they lost to Tennessee, 102\u201354. It was the first March Madness tournament appearance for any Army basketball team. The head coach of that team, Maggie Dixon, died soon after the season at only 28 years of age. Bob Knight, formerly the winningest men's basketball coach in NCAA history, began his head coaching career at Army in the late 1960s before moving on to Indiana and Texas Tech. One of Knight's players at Army was Mike Krzyzewski, who later was head coach at Army before moving on to Duke, where he has won five national championships.\nApproximately 15% of cadets are members of a club sport team. West Point fields a total of 24 club sports teams that have been very successful in recent years, winning national championships in judo, boxing, orienteering, pistol, triathlon, crew, cycling, and team handball.\nThe majority of the student body, about 65%, competes in intramural sports, known at the academy as \"company athletics.\" DPE's Competitive Sports committee runs the club and company athletics sports programs and was recently named one of the \"15\u00a0Most Influential Sports Education Teams in America\" by the Institute for International Sport. The fall season sees competition in basketball, flag-football, team handball, soccer, ultimate disc, and wrestling; while the spring season sees competition in combative grappling, floor hockey, orienteering, flicker ball, and swimming. In the spring, each company also fields a team entry into the annual Sandhurst Competition, a military skills event conducted by the Department of Military Instruction.\nTraditions.\nDue to West Point's age and its unique mission of producing Army officers, it has many time-honored traditions. The list below are some of the traditions unique to or started by the academy.\nCullum number.\nThe Cullum number is a reference and identification number assigned to each graduate. It was created by brevet Major General George W. Cullum (USMA Class of 1833) who, in 1850, began the monumental work of chronicling the biographies of every graduate. He assigned number one to the first West Point graduate, Joseph Gardner Swift, and then numbered all successive graduates in sequence. Before his death in 1892, General Cullum completed the first three volumes of a work that eventually comprised 10 volumes, titled \"General Cullum's Biographical Register of the Officers and Graduates of the United States Military Academy, and covering USMA classes from 1802 through 1850\". From 1802 through the Class of 1977, graduates were listed by General Order of Merit. Beginning with the Class of 1978, graduates were listed alphabetically within each class. Ten graduates have an \"A\" suffix after their Cullum Number. For various reasons these graduates were omitted from the original class rosters, and a suffix letter was added to avoid renumbering the entire class and subsequent classes.\nFormer cadets, those who attended but did not graduate but separated under honorable conditions, are also given Cullum numbers in a different configuration.\nClass ring.\nWest Point began the collegiate tradition of the class ring, beginning with the class of 1835. The class of 1836 chose no rings, and the class of 1879 had cuff links in lieu of a class ring. Before 1917, cadets could design much of the ring individually, but now only the center stone can be individualized. One side of the ring bears the academy crest, while the other side bears the class crest and the center stone ring bears the words \"West Point\" and the class year. The academy library has a large collection of cadet rings on display. Senior cadets receive their rings during Ring Weekend in the early fall of their senior year. Immediately after senior cadets return to the barracks after receiving their rings, fourth class cadets take the opportunity to surround senior cadets from their company and ask to touch their rings. After the cadets recite a poem known as the \"Ring Poop\", the senior usually grants the freshmen permission to touch the ring. In 2002, the Memorial Class ring donor program began. Donations of class rings are melted and merged. A portion of the original gold is infused with gold from preceding melts to become part of the rings for each 'Firstie' class.\nThayer Award.\nWest Point is home to the Sylvanus Thayer Award. Given annually by the academy since 1958, the award honors an outstanding citizen whose service and accomplishments in the national interest exemplify the academy's motto, \"Duty, Honor, Country.\" Currently, the award guidelines state that the recipient not be a graduate of the academy. The award has been awarded to many notable American citizens, to include Barack Obama, George H. W. Bush, Colin Powell, Tom Brokaw, Sandra Day O'Connor, Henry Kissinger, Ronald Reagan, Barry Goldwater, Carl Vinson, Barbara Jordan, William J. Perry, Bob Hope, Condoleezza Rice and Leon E. Panetta.\nSedgwick's spurs.\nA monument to Civil War Union General John Sedgwick stands on the outskirts of the Plain. Sedgwick's bronze statue has spurs with rowels that freely rotate. Legend states that if a cadet is in danger of failing a class, they are to don their full-dress parade uniform the night before the final exam. The cadet visits the statue and spins the rowels at the stroke of midnight. Then the cadet runs back to the barracks as fast as possible. According to legend, if Sedgwick's ghost catches them, they will fail the exam. Otherwise, the cadet will pass the exam and the course. Although being out of their rooms after midnight is officially against regulations, violations have been known to be overlooked for the sake of tradition.\nGoat-Engineer game.\nAs part of the run-up to the Navy football game, the Corps of Cadets plays the Goat-Engineer game. First played in 1907, it is a game between the \"Goats\" (the bottom half of the senior (Firstie) class academically), and the \"Engineers\" (the top half). The game is played with full pads and helmets using eight-man football rules. The location has changed over the years, with recent venues being Richard Shea Stadium/Doubleday Field, Michie Stadium, and Daly Field. Legend states that Army will beat Navy if the goats win, and the opposite if the engineers win. In recent years, female cadets have begun playing a flag football contest, so there are now two Goat-Engineer games, played consecutively the same night.\nWalking the area.\nFrom the earliest days of the academy, one form of punishment for cadets who commit regulatory infractions has been a process officially known as \"punishment tours\". This process is better known to the cadets as \"hours\" because as punishment, cadets must walk a specified number of hours in penalty. Cadets are \"awarded\" punishment tours based upon the severity of the infraction. Being late to class or having an unkempt room may result in as little as 2 hours while more severe misconduct infractions may result in upwards of 60 to 80 hours. In its most traditional form, punishment tours are \"walked off\" by wearing the dress gray uniform under arms and walking back and forth in a designated area of the cadet barracks courtyard, known as \"Central Area.\" Cadets who get into trouble frequently and spend many weekends \"walking off their hours\" are known as \"area birds.\" Cadets who walk more than 100 total hours in their career are affectionately known as \"Century Men.\" An alternate form of punishment to walking hours is known as \"fatigue tours,\" where assigned hours may be \"worked off\" by manual labor, such as cleaning the barracks. Certain cadets whose academics are deficient may also conduct \"sitting tours,\" where they have to \"sit hours\" in a designated academic room in a controlled study environment, for which they receive half credit towards their reduction of tours. Cadets' uniforms are inspected before their tours begin each day. The inspection process is arduous and considered part of the punishment, but the time spent does not count against the awarded number of tours. A small number of cadets may be relieved of their tours that day if their uniforms are exceptionally presentable. Another tradition associated with punishment tours is that any visiting head of state has the authority to grant \"amnesty,\" releasing all cadets with outstanding hours from the remainder of their assigned tours.\nSandhurst Military Skills Competition.\nIn 1967 the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst presented West Point with a British Army officer's sword for use as a trophy in a military skills competition at West Point. In 2019 the Sandhurst competition spans two days, 12 and 13 April, with teams from USMA, the ROTC programs, the Naval, Coast Guard, and the Air Force academies. International academies including the UK, Canada, Australia and Ireland have won the Sandhurst Military Skills Competition.\nEducation of dependents.\nThe Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) maintains, for children of military personnel, West Point Elementary School and West Point Middle School on the academy grounds.\nThe academy is physically in the Highland Falls Central School District. USMA sends high school aged students who are dependents of on-base military personnel to James I. O'Neill High School of Highland Falls schools under contract. In 2021, 190 children living on West Point attended O'Neill. In 2021 the agency at West Point announced that the bid to educate West Point High School students would be competitive. In March 2022 the O'Neill contract was renewed.\nRanking.\nThe U.S. Military Academy at West Point is considered a liberal arts college by U.S. News and it is ranked #8 in the 2025 edition of Best Colleges in National Liberal Arts Colleges.\nPreparatory school.\nThe U.S. Military Academy Preparatory School, known as USMAPS, the Prep School, or West Point Prep, was formally established in 1946, but the history of \"prepping\" soldiers for West Point has been done since Congress enacted legislation in 1916 authorizing soldier appointments to West Point. The school exists today to prepare soldiers and civilians with the academic, leadership, and physical skills to become successful cadets at the United States Military Academy. It is primarily an academic institution that accepts students and soldiers.\nNotable alumni.\nAn unofficial motto of the academy's history department is \"Much of the history we teach was made by people we taught.\" Graduates of the academy refer to themselves as \"The Long Gray Line,\" a phrase taken from the academy's traditional hymn \"The Corps.\" The academy has produced just under 65,000\u00a0alumni, including two Presidents of the United States: Ulysses S. Grant and Dwight D. Eisenhower; the president of the Confederate States of America, Jefferson Davis; and four foreign heads of state or government: Former Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza Debayle, Former Philippine President Fidel V. Ramos, Former Costa Rican President Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Figueres, and Current Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Manet. Alumni currently serving in public office include Senator Jack Reed and Congressmen Warren Davidson, Mark Green, and Brett Guthrie.\nMilitary leaders.\nThe academy has graduated many notable leaders since its inception in 1802. During the Civil War, a West Point graduate commanded one or both armies in every one of the 60 major battles of the war. Graduates included Ulysses S. Grant, George McClellan, George G. Meade, Phillip Sheridan, William Tecumseh Sherman, John Bell Hood, Stonewall Jackson, Robert E. Lee, Simon Bolivar Buckner, James Longstreet, J.E.B. Stuart and Oliver O. Howard. George Armstrong Custer graduated last in his class of 1861 (34th out of a starting class of 108 candidates, 68 passing the entrance exam, of whom 34 graduated). The Spanish\u2013American War saw the first combat service of Lt. (later, Brigadier General) John \"Gatling Gun\" Parker, the first Army officer to employ machine guns in offensive fire support of infantry and Brig. General Irving Hale, who holds the highest grade point average from the academy, and helped found the VFW.\nDuring World War I, academy alumni included General of the Armies John J. Pershing, and Major Generals Charles T. Menoher and Mason Patrick. West Point was the alma mater of many notable World War II generals, Henry H. Arnold, Omar Bradley, Mark Wayne Clark, Robert L. Eichelberger, James M. Gavin, Leslie Groves, Douglas MacArthur, George S. Patton, Joseph Stilwell, Maxwell D. Taylor, James Van Fleet, Jonathan Mayhew Wainwright IV, and Simon Bolivar Buckner, Jr. the highest ranking General to be killed in combat during World War II, with many of these graduates also serving in commanding roles in the Korean War. During the Vietnam War, notable graduates general officers included Creighton Abrams, Hal Moore, and William Westmoreland. West Point also produced some famous generals and statesmen of recent note including John Abizaid, Stanley A. McChrystal, Wesley Clark, Alexander Haig, Barry McCaffrey, Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr., Brent Scowcroft, Lloyd Austin, and former Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, retired General David Petraeus.\nA total of 76 graduates have been awarded the Medal of Honor.\nWest Point has also graduated 18 NASA astronauts, including five who went to the moon.\nBusiness.\nWest Point has been emerging as a \"CEO Factory\" due to the number of alumni who go on to success in the business world. Noted alumni include:\nSports.\nContributions to sport include three Heisman Trophy winners: Glenn Davis, Doc Blanchard, and Pete Dawkins. Abner Doubleday, once thought by some to have created baseball, graduated from West Point in 1842.\nGovernment.\nWest Point alumni include many prominent government officials, including Brent Scowcroft, the National Security Advisor under presidents Gerald Ford and George H. W. Bush, and Eric Shinseki, former Secretary of Veterans Affairs under President Barack Obama. West Point graduate Frank Medina organized and led the nationwide campaign that brought the Congressional Gold Medal to the 65th Infantry Regiment, also known as the Borinqueneers. \nAmong American universities, the academy is fifth on the list of total winners for Rhodes Scholarships, seventh for Marshall Scholarships and fourth on the list of Hertz Fellowships. The official alumni association of West Point is the West Point Association of Graduates (WPAOG or AOG), headquartered at Herbert Hall.\nWest Point Garrison and Stewart Army Subpost.\nAs an active-duty U.S. Army installation, there are several regular Army units that provide support for the USMA and the West Point installation. The U.S. Army Garrison includes a Headquarters and Headquarters Company, Provost Marshal and Military Police, Religious Program Support, Keller Army Community Hospital, the West Point Dental Activity, the USMA Band (a regular Army band\u2014USMA cadets are not members of the USMA band), and the Directorate of Human Resources (DHR). The DHR is the higher headquarters for: Military Personnel Division (MPD), Army Continuing Education System (ACES), Administrative Services Division (ASD) and the Army Substance Abuse Program (ASAP).\nThe 1st Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment (1\u20131 INF) and the 2d Army Aviation Detachment, both stationed on nearby Stewart Army Subpost, provide military training and aviation support to the USMA and the West Point Garrison. Additionally, active duty Army support is sometimes provided by the 10th Mountain Division, based at Fort Drum, NY.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32175", "revid": "33328895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32175", "title": "Ursual K. le Guin", "text": ""}
{"id": "32176", "revid": "51020230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32176", "title": "United States Minor Outlying Islands", "text": "Statistical designation of small offshore islands of the United States\nThe United States Minor Outlying Islands is a statistical designation applying to the minor outlying islands and groups of islands that comprise eight United States insular areas and territories in the Pacific Ocean (Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Atoll, Palmyra Atoll, and Wake Island) and one in the Caribbean Sea (Navassa Island). \nIt is defined by the International Organization for Standardization's ISO 3166-1 code. The entry code is .\nWhile the islands scattered across Polynesia and Micronesia are relatively small, they are strategically important and are rich in history and nature. The nearly barren Howland is famous for being the island renowned American pilot Amelia Earhart intended to land on before she vanished during her round-the-world flight in 1937. Wake, home to a now extinct flightless bird, was the site of a pitched World War II battle in 1941, and was an essential stopover for aircraft transiting the Pacific in the mid-20th century. Likewise, Midway Atoll is home to many corals and birds and was also the center of a major battle of WWII, which helped turn the tide of the Pacific War. Other islands are rich in unique biodiversity, such as Palmyra, the site of a WWII base. Johnston Atoll was a famous island for its Cold War base, when it was expanded and used to destroy chemical weapon stockpiles; it was also the site of a nuclear accident. Johnston was heavily modified with land expansion, while others are nearly untouched nature reserves.\nHistory.\nIn 1936, a colonization program began to settle Americans on Baker, Howland, and Jarvis islands. All were evacuated in 1942 due to World War II.\nThe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) introduced the term \"United States Minor Outlying Islands\" in 1986. From 1974 until 1986, five of the islands (Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Palmyra Atoll, and Kingman Reef) were grouped under the term United States Miscellaneous Pacific Islands, with ISO 3166 code PU. The code of Midway Atoll was MI, the code of Johnston Atoll was JT, and the code of Wake Island was WK. Before 1986, Navassa Island, along with several small islands in the Caribbean Sea that are no longer under U.S. sovereignty, were grouped under the term United States Miscellaneous Caribbean Islands, with FIPS country code BQ.\nThe populated Stewart Islands, called Sikaiana and now effectively controlled by the Solomon Islands, are not included in official lists of U.S. Minor Outlying Islands. In 1856, the Kingdom of Hawaii Privy Council and King Kamehameha IV voted to accept their voluntary cession. The Kingdom later became the Republic of Hawaii, all of which was annexed by the United States in 1898. In 1959, the resulting federal U.S. Territory of Hawaii, excluding only Palmyra Atoll and Midway Atoll, became a U.S. state. Residents of the Stewart Islands, who are Polynesian like the native Hawaiians rather than Melanesian, claimed to be citizens of the United States since the Stewart Islands were given to King Kamehameha IV in 1856 and were part of Hawaii at the time of the United States annexation in 1898. The U.S. federal and Hawaii state governments informally accept the recent claim of the Solomon Islands over the Stewart Islands, and the United States makes no official claim of sovereignty.\nOverview.\nExcept for Palmyra Atoll, all of these islands are unincorporated unorganized territories of the United States. Currently, none of the islands have any known permanent residents. However, military personnel, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service personnel, and temporarily stationed scientific and research staff are posted to some islands. The 2000 census counted 315 people on Johnston Atoll and 1 person on Wake Island. The Territory of Palmyra Atoll is an incorporated territory, separated in 1959 from the rest of the former incorporated Territory of Hawaii when Hawaii became a state.\nThere has been no recorded modern Indigenous population, except at the 1940 census. During the late 2010s, the U.S. military began reinvesting in the airfield and other assets on Wake Island.\nThe islands are grouped for statistical convenience. They are neither administered collectively nor share a single cultural or political history beyond being uninhabited islands under the sovereignty of the United States. They are all outside the customs territory of the United States and have no customs duties. Except for Midway Atoll, the Pacific islands are surrounded by large exclusive economic zones and are within the bounds of the Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument.\nThey are collectively represented by the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code . The individual islands have ISO 3166-2 numerical codes.\nThe Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) \".um\" has historically been assigned to the islands; however, the .um ccTLD was retired in January 2007.\nMost of the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands islands are closed to the public. Visitors to islands such as Jarvis Island need a permit. Palmyra Atoll is open to the public, but there is no easy way to reach it.\nIslands and atolls.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nAirports in the United States Minor Outlying Islands provide critical emergency landing points across the vast Pacific Ocean for all aircraft types, allow for important military presence in key strategic zones, and have limited scheduled commercial services. The following is a list of island airports with ICAO (IATA) codes:\nOther airports include:\nSeaports.\nThree of the islands are listed with ports in the World Port Index, with World Port Number:\nBaker Island, Howland Island, and Jarvis Island each have small boat landing places. Kingman Reef and Navassa Island only have offshore anchorages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32177", "revid": "15928360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32177", "title": "Unary operator", "text": ""}
{"id": "32178", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32178", "title": "United Nations Environment Programme", "text": "UN environmental response agency\nThe United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) is responsible for coordinating responses to environmental issues within the United Nations System. It was established by Maurice Strong, its first director, after the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in June 1972. Its mandate is to provide leadership, deliver science and develop solutions on a wide range of issues, including climate change, the management of marine and terrestrial ecosystems, and green economic development. The organization also develops international environmental agreements; publishes and promotes environmental science and helps national governments achieve environmental targets.\nAs a member of the United Nations Development Group, UNEP aims to help the world meet the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. UNEP hosts the secretariats of several multilateral environmental agreements and research bodies, including The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), The Minamata Convention on Mercury, The Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions, The Convention on Migratory Species and The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), among others.\nIn 1988, the World Meteorological Organization and UNEP established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). UNEP is also one of several Implementing Agencies for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol. UNEP sometimes uses the alternative name UN Environment. The headquarters of the agency is in Nairobi, Kenya.\nHistory.\nIn the 1970s, the need for environmental governance at a global level was not universally accepted, particularly by developing nations. Some argued that environmental concerns were not a priority for nations in poverty. The leadership of Canadian diplomat Maurice Strong convinced many of the developing nations' governments that they needed to prioritize this issue. In the words of Nigerian professor Adebayo Adedeji: \"Mr. Strong, through the sincerity of his advocacy, soon made it clear that all of us, irrespective of the stage of our development, have a large stake in the matter.\"\nAfter developing organizations such as the International Labour Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization, the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (the Stockholm Conference) was convened. In this conference various topics were discussed such as pollution, marine life, protection of resources, environmental change, and disasters relating to natural and biological change. This conference resulted in a \"Declaration on the Human Environment\" (Stockholm Declaration) and the establishment of an environmental management body, which was later named the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). UNEP was established by General Assembly Resolution 2997. Headquarters were established in Nairobi, Kenya, with a staff of 300, including 100 professionals in a variety of fields, and with a five-year fund of more than US$100 million. At the time, US$40 million were pledged by the United States and the remainder by 50 other nations. The 'Voluntary Indicative Scale of Contribution' established in 2002 has the role to increase the supporters of the UNEP. The finances related to all programs of UNEP is voluntarily contributed by Member states of the United Nations. The Environmental Fund, which all nations of UNEP invest in, is the core source of UNEP's programs. Between 1974 and 1986 UNEP produced more than 200 technical guidelines or manuals on environment including forest and water management, pest control, pollution monitoring, the relationship between chemical use and health, and management of industry.\nThe location of the headquarters proved to be a major controversy, with developed countries preferring Geneva, where several other UN offices are based, while developing countries preferred Nairobi, as that would be the first international organization headquartered in the Global South. At first, Mexico City, New Delhi, and Cairo were also competing to be the headquarters, but they pulled out to support Nairobi. Many of the developing countries were \"not particularly supportive of creating a new formal institution for environmental governance\", but supported its creation as an act of \"Southern solidarity\".\nIn 2000, the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, based in Cambridge and sponsored by IUCN, became part of UNEP.\nGovernance.\nExecutive director.\nIn December 1972, the UN General Assembly unanimously elected Maurice Strong to be the first head of UN Environment. He was also secretary-general of both the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment and the Earth Summit (1992).\nThe position was then held for 17 years (1975\u20131992) by Mostafa Kamal Tolba, who was instrumental in bringing environmental considerations to the forefront of global thinking and action. Under his leadership, UN Environment's most widely acclaimed success\u2014the historic 1987 agreement to protect the ozone layer\u2014the Montreal Protocol was negotiated. He was succeeded by Elizabeth Dowdeswell (1992\u20131998), Klaus T\u00f6pfer (1998\u20132006), Achim Steiner (2006\u20132016), and Erik Solheim (2016\u20132018).\nUNEP's acting executive director, Joyce Msuya, took office in November 2018 following the resignation of Erik Solheim. Prior to that appointment, she was UNEP's deputy executive director. Inger Andersen was appointed executive director of UNEP by UN secretary-general Ant\u00f3nio Guterres in February 2019.\nEnvironment Assembly.\nThe United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA) is UNEP's governing body. Created in 2012 to replace the Governing Council, it currently has 193 members and meets every two years.\nThe first session of the assembly took place in Nairobi from 23-27 June 2014.\nThe sixth session (UNEA-6) took place in Nairobi, Kenya, from 26 February to 1 March 2024, and the seventh session (UNEA-7) is scheduled to take place from 8 to 12 December 2025, also in Nairobi. The theme for UNEA-7 is \"Advancing sustainable solutions for a resilient planet\".\nStructure.\nUNEP's structure includes eight divisions:\nTopic areas.\nUNEP's main activities are related to:\nAdvocacy.\nUNEP uses its position to raise awareness for a range of issues.\nClimate change.\nAlready in 1989, UNEP published a statement predicting that \"entire nations could be wiped off the face of the Earth by sea level rise if the global warming trend is not reversed by the year 2000\". In 2005, UNEP issued a joint statement with the United Nations University predicting that \"50 million people could become environmental refugees by 2010, fleeing the effects of climate change\". This was reinforced in 2008, by Srgjan Kerim, President of the UN General Assembly, who estimated that there would be between 50 million and 200 million environmental migrants by 2010.\nAt the fifth Magdeburg Environmental Forum held in 2008, in Magdeburg, Germany, UNEP and car manufacturer Daimler AG called for the establishment of infrastructure for electric vehicles. At this international conference 250 politicians and representatives of non-government organizations discussed future road transportation under the motto of \"Sustainable Mobility\u2013the Post-2012 CO2 Agenda\".\nVarious initiatives.\nInternational Environmental Education Programme (1975\u20131995).\nFor two decades, UNESCO and UNEP led the International Environmental Education Programme (1975\u20131995), which set out a vision for, and gave practical guidance on how to mobilize education for environmental awareness. In 1976 UNESCO launched an environmental education newsletter \"Connect\" as the official organ of the UNESCO-UNEP International Environmental Education Programme (IEEP). Until 2007 it served as a clearinghouse to exchange information on environmental education in general and to promote the aims and activities of the IEEP in particular, as well as being a network for institutions and individuals interested and active in environment education.\nCircular economy.\nUNEP is the co-chair and a founding partner (along with groups such as the Ellen MacArthur Foundation) for the Platform for Accelerating the Circular Economy, which is a public-private partnership of over 50 global organizations and governments seeking to support the transition to a global circular economy.\nThe Regional Seas Programme.\nEstablished in 1974, this is the world's only legal programme for the purpose of protecting the oceans and seas at the regional level. More than 143 countries participate in 18 regional programmes established by the Regional Seas Conventions and Action Plans, with 14 of them underpinned by legally binding international conventions, such as the Helsinki Convention, the Oslo Dumping Convention, the Barcelona Convention or the Bucharest Convention. The RSCAPs include the Caribbean region, East Asian seas, East African region, Mediterranean Basin, Pacific Northwest region, West African region, Caspian Sea, Black Sea region, Northeast Pacific region, Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, ROPME Sea Area, South Asian seas, Southeast Pacific region, Pacific region, Arctic region, Antarctic region, Baltic Sea, and Northeast Atlantic region. Each programme consists of countries which share the same sea and manages this sea at the regional level. The programmes are controlled by secretariats or Regional Coordinating Units and Regional Activity Centers. UNEP protects seas by promoting international conventions through education and training.\nThe Mediterranean Action Plan of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP/MAP) was established in 1975 as the first regional action plan under the Regional Seas Programme.\nFaith for Earth Initiative.\nLaunched in 2017, the initiative's goal is to encourage and collaborate with faith-based organizations to protect the environment and invest in green resources. In 2020, UNEP published a book with the Parliament of the World's Religions Climate Action Program entitled, \"Faith for Earth: A Call for Action.\" The book serves as an educational resource for students, teachers, and leaders across the world and highlights the role that faith-based organizations can play in addressing critical environmental issues.\nOther activities.\nAwards programs.\nSeveral awards programs have been established to recognize outstanding work in the environmental field. The Global 500 Roll of Honour was initiated in 1987 and ended in 2003. Its 2005 successor, Champions of the Earth, and a similar award, Young Champions of the Earth, are given annually to entrepreneurs, scientists, policy leaders, upcoming talent, individuals and organizations who make significant positive impacts on resources and the environment in their areas.\nInternational years.\nUN assigns specific years to topics to raise awareness and engagement. The following years pertain to environmental topics:\nSee international observance and list of environmental dates.\nNotable achievements.\nUNEP has registered several successes, such as the 1987 Montreal Protocol for limiting emissions of gases blamed for thinning the planet's protective ozone layer, and the 2017 Minamata Convention, a treaty to limit toxic mercury.\nUNEP has sponsored the development of solar loan programmes, with attractive return rates, to buffer the initial deployment costs and entice consumers to consider and purchase solar PV systems. The most famous example is the solar loan programme sponsored by UNEP that helped 100,000 people finance solar power systems in India. Success in India's solar programme has led to similar projects in other parts of the developing world, including Tunisia, Morocco, Indonesia and Mexico.\nIn 2001, UNEP alerted about the destruction of the Marshlands when it released satellite images showing that 90 percent of the marsh had been lost. The UNEP \"support for environmental management of the Iraqi Marshland\" began in 2004, to manage the marshland area in an environmentally sound manner.\nUNEP has a programme for young people known as Tunza. Within this programme are other projects like the AEO for Youth.\nReform.\nFollowing the 2007 publication of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report, the \"Paris Call for Action\", presented by French president Jacques Chirac and supported by 46 countries, called for the UNEP to be replaced by a new and more powerful \"United Nations Environment Organization\", to be modeled on the World Health Organization. The 46 countries included the European Union nations, but notably did not include the United States, Saudi Arabia, Russia, and China, the top four emitters of greenhouse gases.\nIn December 2012, following the Rio+20 Summit, a decision by the General Assembly of the United Nations to \"strengthen and upgrade\" the UNEP and establish universal membership of its governing body was confirmed. In other words, it was reorganized by applying the existing executive member system (58 member states) from 1973 to 2013 to a universal member system (all UN member states). It was implemented in 2014.\nFunding.\nThe European Investment Bank and the United Nations Environment Programme created the Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP) in 2015 to assist a United Nations project dubbed Sustainable Energy for All. Renewable Energy Performance Platform was established with $67 million from the United Kingdom's International Climate Finance initiative, administered by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, in 2015, and $128 million in 2018. REPP was established with a five-year goal of improving energy access for at least two million people in Sub-Saharan Africa. It has so far invested around $45 million to renewable energy projects in 13 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Solar power and hydropower are among the energy methods used in the projects.\nFunding complications.\nIn September 2018, a series of allegations were made against the executive director of the UNEP, Eric Solheim, at that time, including excessive number of days spent outside the headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya. As a result, Eric Solheim resigned. Several donor countries withdrew their donation in the aftermath of the allegation, including the Dutch government who announced it would withhold $8 million in funding to UNEP until nepotism issues were resolved. Sweden and Denmark stopped funding as well. A spokesman for the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs said the freezing of funds was probably unprecedented.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA (https://). Text taken from https://, 26, 27, UNESCO. "}
{"id": "32179", "revid": "49409179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32179", "title": "United Australia Party", "text": "Former Australian political party (1931\u20131945)\nThe United Australia Party (UAP) was an Australian political party which was founded in 1931 and dissolved in 1945. It won four federal elections in that time, usually governing in coalition with the Country Party. It provided two prime ministers: Joseph Lyons (1932\u20131939) and Robert Menzies (1939\u20131941).\nThe UAP was created in the aftermath of the 1931 split in the Australian Labor Party. Six fiscally conservative Labor MPs left the party to protest the Scullin government's financial policies during the Great Depression. Led by Joseph Lyons, a former Premier of Tasmania, the defectors initially sat as independents, but then agreed to merge with the Nationalist Party and form a united opposition. Lyons was chosen as the new party's leader due to his popularity among the general public, with former Nationalist leader John Latham becoming his deputy. He led the UAP to a landslide victory at the 1931 federal election, where the party secured an outright majority in the House of Representatives and was able to form government in its own right.\nAfter the 1934 election, the UAP entered into a coalition with the Country Party; it retained government at the 1937 election. After Lyons' death in April 1939, the UAP elected Robert Menzies as its new leader. This resulted in the Country Party leaving the coalition, but a new coalition agreement was reached in March 1940. The 1940 election resulted in a hung parliament and the formation of a minority government with support from two independents. In August 1941, Menzies was forced to resign as prime minister in favour of Arthur Fadden, the Country Party leader; he in turn survived only 40 days before losing a confidence motion and making way for a Labor government under John Curtin. Fadden continued on as Leader of the Opposition, with Billy Hughes replacing Menzies as UAP leader. Hughes resigned after the 1943 election, and Menzies subsequently returned as UAP leader and Leader of the Opposition. The UAP ceased to exist as a parliamentary party in February 1945, when its members joined the new Liberal Party of Australia. The modern United Australia Party has no connection or relationship with the former party.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nJoseph Lyons began his political career as an Australian Labor Party politician and served as Premier of Tasmania. Lyons was elected to the Australian Federal Parliament in 1929 and served in Prime Minister James Scullin's Labor Cabinet. Lyons became acting Treasurer in 1930 and helped negotiate the government's strategies for dealing with the Great Depression. With Scullin temporarily absent in London, Lyons and acting Prime Minister James Fenton clashed with the Labor Cabinet and Caucus over economic policy, and grappled with the differing proposals of the Premier's Plan, Lang Labor, the Commonwealth Bank and British adviser Otto Niemeyer.\nWhile Health Minister Frank Anstey supported Premier of New South Wales Jack Lang's bid to default on debt repayments, Lyons advocated orthodox fiscal management. When Labor reinstated the more radical Ted Theodore as Treasurer in 1931, Lyons and Fenton resigned from Cabinet.\nFoundation.\nThe UAP was formed in 1931 by Labor dissidents and a conservative coalition as a response to the more radical economic proposals of Labor Party members to deal with the Great Depression in Australia. Lyons and Fenton's opposition to the economic policies of the Scullin Labor government had attracted the support of a circle of socially prominent Melburnians known as \"the Group\" or \"Group of Six\", comprising stockbroker Staniforth Ricketson, insurance company president Charles Arthur Norris, metallurgist and businessman John Michael Higgins, writer Ambrose Pratt, state attorney-general Robert Menzies, and architect Kingsley Henderson. In parliament on 13 March 1931, though still a member of the ALP, Lyons supported a no confidence motion against the Scullin Labor government. Soon afterward, Lyons, Fenton and four other right-wing Labor MPs\u2014Moses Gabb, Allan Guy, Charles McGrath and John Price\u2014resigned from the ALP in protest of the Scullin government's economic policies. Five of the six Labor dissidents\u2014all except Gabb\u2014formed the \"All for Australia League\" and crossed over to the opposition benches. On 7 May, the All for Australia League, the Nationalist opposition (hitherto led by John Latham) and former Prime Minister Billy Hughes' Australian Party (a group of former Nationalists who had been expelled for crossing the floor and bringing down Stanley Bruce's Nationalist government in 1929), merged to form the UAP. Although the new party was dominated by former Nationalists, Lyons was chosen as the new party's leader, and thus became Leader of the Opposition, with Latham as his deputy. The Western Australia branch of the Nationalists, however, retained the Nationalist name.\nClaiming that the Scullin government was incapable of managing the economy, it offered traditional deflationary economic policies in response to Australia's economic crisis. Though it was basically an upper- and middle-class conservative party, the presence of ex-Labor MPs with working-class backgrounds allowed the party to present a convincing image of national unity transcending class barriers. This was especially true of the party leader, Lyons. Indeed, he had been chosen as the merged party's leader because he was thought to be more electorally appealing than the aloof Latham, and was thus better suited to win over traditional Labor supporters to the UAP.\nA further split, this time of left-wing NSW Labor MPs who supported the unorthodox economic policies of NSW Premier Jack Lang, cost the Scullin government its parliamentary majority. In November 1931, Lang Labor dissidents broke with the Scullin government and joined with the UAP opposition to pass a no-confidence motion, forcing an early election.\nLyons government.\nWith the Labor Party split between Scullin's supporters and Langites, and with a very popular leader (Lyons had a genial manner and the common touch), the UAP won the elections in December 1931 in a massive landslide which saw the two wings of the Labor Party cut down to 18 seats between them, and Lyons became Prime Minister in January 1932. He took office at the helm of a UAP majority government. The UAP initially hoped to renew the non-Labor Coalition with the Country Party of Earle Page after coming up four seats short of a majority in its own right. However, the five MPs elected from the Emergency Committee of South Australia, which stood in place of the UAP and Country Party in South Australia, joined the UAP party room, giving the UAP a bare majority of two seats. When negotiations with Page broke down, Lyons formed an exclusively UAP government. In 1934, the UAP lost six seats, forcing Lyons to take the Country Party into his government in a full-fledged Coalition.\nThe Lyons government followed the conservative economic policies it had promised in opposition, and benefited politically from the gradual worldwide economic recovery as the 1930s went on.\nResponse to Depression.\nLyons favoured the tough economic measures of the \"Premiers' Plan\", pursued an orthodox fiscal policy and refused to accept NSW Premier Jack Lang's proposals to default on overseas debt repayments. A dramatic episode in Australian history followed Lyons' first electoral victory when NSW Premier Jack Lang refused to pay interest on overseas State debts. The Lyons government stepped in and paid the debts and then passed the Financial Agreement Enforcement Act to recover the money it had paid. In an effort to frustrate this move, Lang ordered State departments to pay all receipts directly to the Treasury instead of into Government bank accounts. The New South Wales Governor, Sir Philip Game, intervened on the basis that Lang had acted illegally in breach of the state \"Audit Act\" and sacked the Lang Government, who then suffered a landslide loss at the consequent 1932 state election.\nAustralia entered the Depression with a debt crisis and a credit crisis. According to author Anne Henderson of the Sydney Institute, Lyons held a steadfast belief in \"the need to balance budgets, lower costs to business and restore confidence\" and the Lyons period gave Australia \"stability and eventual growth\" between the drama of the Depression and the outbreak of the Second World War. A lowering of wages was enforced and industry tariff protections maintained, which together with cheaper raw materials during the 1930s saw a shift from agriculture to manufacturing as the chief employer of the Australian economy \u2013 a shift which was consolidated by increased investment by the commonwealth government into defence and armaments manufacture. Lyons saw restoration of Australia's exports as the key to economic recovery. A devalued Australian currency assisted in restoring a favourable balance of trade. Tariffs had been a point of difference between the Country Party and United Australia Party. The CP opposed high tariffs because they increased costs for farmers, while the UAP had support among manufacturers who supported tariffs. Lyons was therefore happy to be perceived as \"protectionist\". Australia agreed to give tariff preference to British Empire goods, following the 1932 Imperial economic conference. The Lyons government lowered interest rates to stimulate expenditure. Another point of difference was the issue of establishing national unemployment insurance. Debate on this issue became strained with the Country Party opposing the plan. On this issue, deputy leader Robert Menzies and Country Party leader Earle Page would have a public falling out.\nAccording to author Brian Carroll, Lyons had been underestimated when he assumed office in 1932 and as leader he demonstrated: \"a combination of honesty, native shrewdness, tact, administrative ability, common sense, good luck and good humour that kept him in the job longer than any previous Prime Minister except Hughes\". Lyons was assisted in his campaigning by his politically active wife, Enid Lyons. She had a busy official role from 1932 to 1939 and, following her husband's death, stood for Parliament herself, becoming Australia's first female Member of the House of Representatives, and later first woman in Cabinet, joining the Menzies Cabinet in 1951.\nPreparation for war.\nDefence issues became increasingly dominant in public affairs with the rise of fascism in Europe and militant Japan in Asia. The UAP largely supported the western powers in their policy of appeasement, however veteran UAP minister Billy Hughes was an exception and he embarrassed the government with his 1935 book \"Australia and the War Today\" which exposed a lack of preparation in Australia for what Hughes correctly supposed to be a coming war. Hughes was forced to resign, but the Lyons government tripled its defence budget.\nOn 7 April 1939, with the storm clouds of the Second World War gathering in Europe and the Pacific, Joseph Lyons became the first Prime Minister of Australia to die in office. Driving from Canberra to Sydney, en route to his home in Tasmania for Easter, he suffered a heart attack, dying soon after in hospital in Sydney, on Good Friday. The UAP's Deputy leader, Robert Menzies, had resigned in March, citing the coalition's failure to implement a plan for national insurance. In the absence of a UAP deputy, the Governor-General, Lord Gowrie, appointed Country Party leader Sir Earle Page as his temporary replacement, pending the selection of Lyons' successor by the UAP.\nMenzies government.\nRobert Menzies defeated Hughes for the UAP leadership and became Prime Minister on 26 April 1939. Page refused to serve under Menzies, leaving the UAP with a minority government.\nIn addition to the office of Prime Minister, Menzies served as Treasurer. The First Menzies Ministry included the ageing former Prime Minister Billy Hughes and the young future Prime Minister Harold Holt. Menzies tried and failed to have the issue of national insurance examined by a committee of parliamentarians. Though no longer in formal coalition, his government survived because the Country Party preferred a UAP government to that of a Labor government.\nWorld War II.\nThe growing threat of war dominated politics through 1939. Menzies supported British policy against Hitler's Germany (negotiate for peace, but prepare for war) and\u00a0\u2013 fearing Japanese intentions in the Pacific\u00a0\u2013 established independent embassies in Tokyo and Washington to receive independent advice about developments. Menzies announced Australia's entry into World War Two on 3 September 1939 as a consequence of Nazi Germany's invasion of Poland. Australia was ill-prepared for war. A National Security Act was passed, the recruitment of a volunteer military force for service at home and abroad was announced, the 2nd Australian Imperial Force, and a citizen militia was organised for local defence.\nTroubled by Britain's failure to increase defences at Singapore, Menzies was cautious in committing troops to Europe, nevertheless in 1940\u201341, Australian forces played prominent roles in the fighting in the Mediterranean theatre.\nA special War Cabinet was created;\u2013 initially composed of Menzies and five senior ministers (RG Casey, GA Street, Senator McLeay, HS Gullet and World War I Prime Minister Billy Hughes). In January 1940, Menzies dispatched potential leadership rival Richard Casey to Washington as Australia's first \"Minister to the United States\". In a consequent by-election, the UAP suffered a heavy defeat and Menzies re-entered coalition negotiations with the Country Party. In March 1940, troubled negotiations were concluded with the Country Party to re-enter Coalition with the UAP. The replacement of Earle Page as leader by Archie Cameron allowed Menzies to reach accommodation. A new Coalition ministry was formed including a number of Country Party members.\nWith the 1940 election looming, Menzies lost his Chief of the General Staff and three loyal ministers in the Canberra air disaster. The Labor Party meanwhile experienced a split along pro and anti Communist lines over policy towards the Soviet Union for its co-operation with Nazi Germany in the invasion of Poland; this resulted in the formation of the Non-Communist Labor Party. The Communist Party of Australia (CPA) opposed and sought to disrupt Australia's war effort. Menzies banned the CPA after the fall of France in 1940, but by 1941 Stalin was forced to join the allied cause when Hitler reneged on the Pact and invaded the USSR. The USSR came to bear the brunt of the carnage of Hitler's war machine and the Communist Party in Australia lost its early war stigma as a result.\nAt the general election in September 1940, there was a large swing to Labor and the UAP-Country Party coalition lost its majority, continuing in office only because of the support of two independent MPs, Arthur Coles and Alexander Wilson. The UAP\u2013Country Party coalition and the Labor parties won 36 seats each. Menzies proposed an all party unity government to break the impasse, but the Labor Party under John Curtin refused to join. Curtin agreed instead to take a seat on a newly created Advisory War Council in October 1940. New Country Party leader Arthur Fadden became Treasurer and Menzies unhappily conceded to allow Earle Page back into his ministry.\nIn January 1941, Menzies flew to Britain to discuss the weakness of Singapore's defences and sat with Winston Churchill's British War Cabinet. En route he inspected Singapore's defences\u00a0\u2013 finding them alarmingly inadequate\u00a0\u2013 and visited Australian troops in the Mid-East. He at times clashed with Churchill in the War Cabinet, and was unable to achieve significant assurances for increased commitment to Singapore's defences, but undertook morale boosting excursions to war affected cities and factories and was well received by the British press and generally raised awareness in Britain of Australia's contribution to its war effort. He returned to Australia via Canada and the United States \u2013 addressing the Canadian parliament and lobbying President Roosevelt for more arms production. After four months, Menzies returned to Australia to face a lack of enthusiasm for his global travels and a war-time minority government under ever increasing strain.\nIn Menzies's absence, Curtin had co-operated with Fadden in preparing Australia for the expected Pacific War. With the threat of Japan imminent and with the Australian army suffering badly in the Greek and Crete campaigns, Menzies re-organised his ministry and announced multiple multi-party committees to advise on war and economic policy. Government critics however called for an all-party government.\nMenzies' resignation.\nIn August, Cabinet decided that Menzies should travel back to Britain to represent Australia in the War Cabinet\u00a0\u2013 but this time the Labor caucus refused to support the plan. Menzies announced to his Cabinet that he thought he should resign and advise the Governor General to invite Curtin to form Government. The Cabinet instead insisted he approach Curtin again to form a war cabinet. Unable to secure Curtin's support, and with an unworkable parliamentary majority, Menzies faced continuing problems with the administration of the war effort and the undermining of his leadership by members of his own coalition. Menzies resigned as prime minister on 29 August 1941, but initially stayed on as UAP leader.\nFadden government.\nFollowing Menzies' resignation, a joint UAP\u2013Country Party meeting chose Fadden to be his successor as prime minister, even though the Country Party was the junior partner in the coalition. Menzies became Minister for Defence Co-ordination.\nAustralia marked two years of war on 7 September 1941 with a day of prayer, on which Prime Minister Fadden broadcast to the nation an exhortation to be united in the \"supreme task of defeating the forces of evil in the world\". With the Pacific on the brink of war, Opposition leader John Curtin offered friendship and co-operation to Fadden, but refused to join in an all-party wartime national government.\nColes and Wilson were angered at how Menzies had been treated, and on 3 October voted with the Opposition in the House of Representatives to reject Fadden's budget; Fadden promptly resigned. This became a rare moment in Parliament in which a sitting government is defeated in the House. This did not occur in Australia again for another 78 years. Under the prodding of Governor-General Lord Gowrie, who wanted to avoid calling an election given the dangerous international situation, Coles and Wilson threw their support to Labor. Gowrie then duly swore Curtin in as prime minister on 7 October 1941. Eight weeks later, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor.\nOn 9 October, Menzies resigned as UAP leader, but not before calling for a partyroom meeting to determine whether the party should form a united opposition with the Country Party or go it alone. His preferred option was the latter, and he had intended to re-contest the leadership if he was successful. However, the party voted 19\u201312 to form a united opposition under the leadership of Fadden. Although the UAP had been in government for a decade, Menzies' resignation revealed a party almost completely bereft of leadership. With no obvious successor to Menzies, the UAP was forced to turn to the 79-year-old former prime minister Billy Hughes as its new leader. With Menzies out and the aged Hughes seen as a stop-gap leader, UAP members jostled for position.\nThe UAP had first won power by winning the 1931 election before losing government on the floor of parliament in 1941 was in reverse circumstances of how its predecessor the Nationalists came in and out of power.\nThe Nationalists as a new party came into government on the floor of parliament in 1917 before eventually losing power at the 1929 election.\nNotwithstanding Country Party leader Fadden had led the Coalition into the 1943 election, the Nationalists and UAP leaders never led the Coalition into an election after losing government.\nDemise of the party.\nHaving spent all but eight months of its existence prior to 1941 in government, the UAP was ill-prepared for a role in opposition. Curtin proved a popular leader, rallying the nation in the face of the danger of invasion by the Japanese after Japan's entry into the war in December 1941. Even allowing for the advantages a sitting government has in wartime, the Labor government seemed more effective than its predecessor, while Fadden and Hughes were unable to get the better of Curtin. By the time the writs were issued for the 1943 federal election, the Coalition had sunk into a state of near paralysis, and at the election, suffered a landslide defeat, being reduced to only 23 seats nationwide, including 14 for the UAP.\nAfter this election defeat, Menzies returned to the UAP leadership, and Fadden handed the post of opposition leader to him as well. However, as the Nationalists had a decade earlier, the party and its organisation now seemed moribund, particularly in NSW. UAP branches tended to become inactive between elections, and its politicians were seen as compromised by their reliance on large donations from business and financial organisations. In New South Wales, the party merged with the Commonwealth Party to form the Democratic Party, which merged with the Liberal Democratic Party the following year. In Queensland the state branch was absorbed into the Queensland People's Party.\nMenzies became convinced that the UAP was no longer viable, and a new anti-Labor party needed to be formed to replace it. He circulated a confidential memorandum expressing his wish for the UAP to be replaced:\nThe name United Australia Party has fallen into complete disregard. It no longer means anything. Many of my own strongest supporters in my own electorate decline to have anything to do with the Party as such. [...] To establish a new party under a new name, it is, I think, essential to recognise that the new groups and movements which sprang up in the six months before the election were all expressions of dissatisfaction with the existing set-up. [...] The time between now and the next election is already beginning to run out!\nOn 31 August 1945, the UAP was absorbed into the newly formed Liberal Party of Australia, with Menzies as its leader. The new party was dominated by former UAP members; with a few exceptions, the UAP party room became the Liberal party room.\nThe Liberal Party went on to become the dominant centre-right party in Australian politics. After an initial loss to Labor at the 1946 election, Menzies led the new non-Labor Coalition (of the Liberal and Country parties) to victory at the 1949 election, defeating the incumbent Labor government led by Curtin's successor, Ben Chifley. The Coalition stayed in office for a record 23 years.\nElectoral performance.\nNote: the United Australia Party did not run candidates in South Australia in 1931. The Emergency Committee of South Australia was the main anti-Labor party, but five MPs elected under that banner joined the parliamentary UAP after the election.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32181", "revid": "7061136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32181", "title": "USS Scorpion", "text": "USS \"Scorpion\" may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32184", "revid": "38020738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32184", "title": "Joint Intelligence Committee (United Kingdom)", "text": "British interagency intelligence organisation\nThe Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) is an interagency deliberative body of the United Kingdom responsible for intelligence assessment, coordination, and oversight of the Secret Intelligence Service, Security Service, GCHQ, and Defence Intelligence. The JIC is supported by the Joint Intelligence Organisation under the Cabinet Office.\nHistory.\nThe JIC was founded on 7 July 1936 as a sub-committee of the Committee of Imperial Defence, the advisory peacetime defence planning agency. During World War II, it became the senior intelligence assessment body in the UK. In 1957 the JIC moved to the Cabinet Office, where its assessments staff prepare draft intelligence assessments for the committee to consider.\nRole in the Iraq dossier.\nThe JIC played a controversial role in compiling a dossier in which the UK government highlighted the threat posed by Iraq's weapons of mass destruction in the run up to the Iraq War. There were allegations that the dossier was \"sexed up\" prior to publication in order to bolster the case for military action. Evidence that the wording of the dossier was \"strengthened\" was presented to the Hutton Inquiry, a judicial review set up to investigate the circumstances leading up to the death of an eminent government weapons expert, David Kelly, who had criticised the wording of the dossier in off-the-record briefings to journalists. Doctor Kelly committed suicide shortly after his identity was confirmed to the media by the government. JIC members Sir John Scarlett and Sir Richard Dearlove (both then head of MI6, the Secret Intelligence Service) gave evidence to the Inquiry in which they argued that the words used in the dossier were consistent with their assessment of the intelligence available at the time.\nDespite the work of the 1400 strong Iraq Survey Group in post-war Iraq, no evidence of actual WMD capability has so far been uncovered; according to its final report in September 2004. The US and UK Governments both announced investigations into the assessment of WMD intelligence in the run up to war. The British inquiry, headed by Lord Butler of Brockwell, in its report in July 2004, while critical of the British intelligence community, did not recommend that anyone should resign. Similarly, the US Senate Intelligence Committee, while critical of US intelligence officials, did not recommend any resignations in its report, also issued in July 2004.\nStructure.\nThe committee is chaired by a permanent chairman, a member of the Senior Civil Service, and is supported by the Joint Intelligence Organisation which includes an assessments staff. The assessment staff is made up of experienced senior analysts drawn from across government and the military and conducts all-source analysis on subjects of interest to the committee. JIC papers draw input from across the intelligence and security agencies and other related bodies.\nMembership comprises senior officials in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Ministry of Defence and United Kingdom Armed Forces, Home Office, Department for International Development, HM Treasury and the Cabinet Office.\nThe JIC is subject to oversight by the Intelligence and Security Committee. It is supported by the Joint Intelligence Organisation.\nRole and functions.\nThe JIC is responsible for:\nThe JIC has three functions:\nIntelligence requirements.\nThe JIC drafts the annual Requirements and Priorities for collection and analysis, for approval by Ministers. These support the strategic national security objectives of the UK:\nForeign liaison.\nEver since World War II, the chief of the London station of the United States Central Intelligence Agency has attended the JIC's weekly meetings. One former US intelligence officer has described this as the \"highlight of the job\" for the London CIA chief. Resident intelligence chiefs from Australia, Canada, and New Zealand may attend when certain issues are discussed.\nChairs of the Joint Intelligence Committee.\nSince founding, the committee's Chair has been as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32185", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32185", "title": "List of U. S. postal abbreviations", "text": ""}
{"id": "32186", "revid": "21878292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32186", "title": "USS Ohio", "text": "USS \"Ohio\" may refer to the following ships of the United States Navy:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32187", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32187", "title": "USS Kitty Hawk (CV-63)", "text": "Kitty Hawk-class aircraft carrier (active 1961\u20132009)\nUSS \"Kitty Hawk\" (hull number CV-63), formerly CVA-63, was a United States Navy supercarrier. She was the second naval ship named after Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, the site of the Wright brothers' first powered airplane flight. The lead ship of her class, \"Kitty Hawk\" was the first of the three s to be commissioned and the last to be decommissioned.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" was laid down by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation, Camden, New Jersey, on 27 December 1956. The ship was launched on 21 May 1960, sponsored by Mrs. Camilla F. McElroy, wife of Defense Secretary Neil H. McElroy. \"Kitty Hawk\" was launched by flooding her drydock; the conventional slide-down method was ruled out because of her mass and the risk that she might hit the Philadelphia shore on the far side of the Delaware River.\nThe ship was commissioned 29 April 1961, at Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, Captain William F. Bringle in command.\nWith the decommissioning of on 30 September 1998, \"Kitty Hawk\" became the United States warship with the second-longest active status, after the sailing ship ( passed her in 2012; these two aircraft carriers were two of the three carriers to fly the First Navy Jack).\nFor ten years, \"Kitty Hawk\" was the forward-deployed carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base in Yokosuka, Japan. In October 2008, she was replaced in this role by . \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to the United States and had her decommissioning ceremony on 31 January 2009. She was officially decommissioned on 12 May 2009 after 48 years of service. \"Kitty Hawk\" was replaced by . She was stricken from the \"Naval Vessel Register\" on 20 October 2017, and was designated for disposal by dismantling a few days later. On 15 January 2022 \"Kitty Hawk\" left Puget Sound Naval Shipyard under tow en route to Brownsville, Texas, for scrapping, arriving there on 31 May 2022.\nService history.\n1961 to 1964.\nFollowing shakedown in the Western Atlantic, \"Kitty Hawk\" departed Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia on 11 August 1961. After a brief stop at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, where she embarked the Secretary of the Brazilian Navy for a demonstration during an exercise at sea with five Brazilian destroyers, the attack carrier rounded Cape Horn on 1 October. She steamed into Valpara\u00edso, Chile, on 13 October and then sailed two days later for Peru, arriving in Callao on 20 October where she entertained the President of Peru. At San Diego, Admiral George W. Anderson, Chief of Naval Operations, landed on her deck 18 November to witness antisubmarine demonstrations by and , a Terrier missile demonstration by and air demonstrations by \"Kitty Hawk\".\n\"Kitty Hawk\" entered San Francisco Naval Shipyard on 23 November 1961 for alterations. Following operations out of San Diego, she sailed from San Francisco on 13 September 1962. \"Kitty Hawk\" joined the United States Seventh Fleet on 7 October 1962, relieving as the flagship.\nAfter participating in the Philippine Republic Aviation Week Air Show, \"Kitty Hawk\" steamed out of Manila Harbor on 30 November 1962 and welcomed Admiral Harry D. Felt, Commander in Chief, United States Pacific Fleet, for a demonstration of modern naval weapons on 3 December. The ship visited Hong Kong early in December and returned to Japan, arriving at Yokosuka on 2 January 1963.\nIn conjunction with Commander, Carrier Division Seven, \"Kitty Hawk\" carried out several exercises in January and February 1963. On 4 January 1963, Operation Checkertail saw \"Kitty Hawk\" and three other attack aircraft carriers launch practice airstrikes against the Okinawa Air Defense Command. From 27 January \u2013 2 February 1963, 'Picture Window III' saw 'foreign aircraft' intercepted and visually identified in the Northern Japan area. Though the official ship's papers released in 2011 do not identify the nationality, the 'foreign aircraft' in question were likely from the Soviet Far Eastern Military District or Soviet Naval Aviation. From 16\u201319 February 1963, Exercise 'Red Wheel' was conducted around Southern Japan also under the direction of Commander, Carrier Division Seven. It aimed to improve the United States Seventh Fleet's ability to conduct conventional and nuclear warfare while maintaining defense against air and submarine attack. It also aimed to evaluate the capability of 'the HUK [Hunter-Killer] Group' to protect two CVA Task Groups. During these exercises, the ship visited Kobe, Beppu, and Iwakuni before returning to San Diego on 2 April 1963.\nOn 6 June 1963, President John F. Kennedy, with top civilian and military leaders, boarded \"Kitty Hawk\" to witness a carrier task force weapons demonstration off the California coast. Addressing the men of the task group from \"Kitty Hawk\", President Kennedy told them that, as in the past, control of the seas still means security, peace, and ultimate victory. He later wrote to President and Madame Chiang Kai-shek who had witnessed a similar demonstration onboard : \"I hope you were impressed as I was, on my visit to \"Kitty Hawk\", with the great force for peace or war, which these mighty carriers and their accompanying escorts provide, helping to preserve the freedom of distant nations in all parts of the world.\"\nAn F-4B Phantom II, aircraft no.401, while assigned to VF-114, made the ship's 16,000th trap on 17 August 1963.\nFilm director John Frankenheimer filmed shots for the movie \"Seven Days in May\" on board the vessel in 1963.\nFollowing a series of strike exercises and tactics reaching along the California coast and off Hawaii, \"Kitty Hawk\" again sailed for the Far East. While approaching Japan, she learned an assassin had shot President Kennedy. Flags were at half-mast as she entered Sasebo Harbor on 25 November 1963, the day of the President's funeral, and, as senior ship present, she had the sad honor of firing memorial salutes. After cruising the South China Sea and ranging to the Philippines in readiness operations with the 7th Fleet, she returned to San Diego on 20 July 1964.\n1965 to 1972.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" was overhauled in Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, then trained along the western seaboard. She sailed from San Diego on 19 October 1965, for Hawaii thence to Subic Bay, Philippines, where she prepared for combat operations off the coast of Vietnam.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" returned to San Diego in June 1966 for overhaul and training until 4 November 1966, when she again deployed to serve in waters of Southeast Asia. Scenes from the 1966 Walt Disney comedy \"Lt. Robin Crusoe, U.S.N.\" were filmed aboard the warship.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" arrived at Yokosuka, Japan on 19 November to relieve \"Constellation\" as flagship for Rear Admiral David C. Richardson, Commander Task Force 77. On 26 November, \"Kitty Hawk\" departed Yokosuka for Yankee Station via Subic Bay. On 5 December, aircraft from \"Kitty Hawk\" began their around-the-clock missions over North Vietnam. About this time \"Kitty Hawk\" \u2014 already accustomed to celebrities as guests \u2013 entertained several prominent visitors: William Randolph Hearst Jr.; Bob Considine; Dr. Billy Graham; Nancy Sinatra and John Steinbeck, among others. She remained in the Far East, supporting the U.S. in Southeast Asia until departing Subic Bay on 28 May 1968. Steaming via Japan, the carrier reached San Diego on 19 June and a week later entered the naval shipyard at Long Beach for maintenance. \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to San Diego on 25 August and began a rigorous training program to prepare her for future action.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for exceptionally meritorious and heroic service from 23 December 1967 to 1 June 1968, which included the Tet Offensive, while participating in combat operations in Southeast Asia, and the Navy Unit Meritorious Commendation for exceptionally meritorious service from 15 January 1969 to 27 August 1969 while participating in combat operations in Southeast Asia and contingency operations in Northeast Asia. Both awards noted that the officers and men of the \"Kitty Hawk\" displayed undaunted spirit, courage, professionalism, and dedication to maintain their ship as a fighting unit under the most arduous operating conditions to enable her pilots to destroy vital military targets in North Vietnam despite intense opposition and extremely adverse weather conditions.\nWhile on deployment from November 1967 to June 1968, \"Kitty Hawk\" experienced a fire in while in port at Subic Bay and went to general quarters for 51 hours. On 16 January 1968 year, a C-1A Trader swerved off the wet deck. Four personnel aboard were lost along with the aircraft and could not be recovered. After a deployment from November 1968 to June 1969, \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to San Diego for a month and then went to Puget Sound shipyard in September 1969 for dry dock.\nOn 12 October 1972 during the Vietnam War, \"Kitty Hawk\" was en route to her station in the Gulf of Tonkin when a race riot involving more than 200 sailors broke out. Nearly 50 sailors were injured in this widely publicized incident. This incident spread racial violence to other US Navy ships, such as the aircraft carrier USS \"Constellation\" and the replenishment ship USS \"Hassayampa\". Tensions among the crews resulted in a Congressional inquiry into discipline in the Navy.\n1973 to 1977.\nFrom January through July 1973, \"Kitty Hawk\" changed home ports from San Diego to San Francisco. \"Kitty Hawk\" moved into dry dock on 14 January 1973. Work began to convert the ship from an attack (CVA) to a multi-mission carrier (CV). The \"CV\" designation indicated that \"Kitty Hawk\" was no longer strictly an attack carrier, in that anti-submarine warfare would also become a major role. \"Kitty Hawk\" became the first Pacific Fleet carrier to carry the multi-purpose \"CV\" designation. The conversion consisted of adding ten new helicopter calibrating stations, installing sonar/sonobuoy readout and analysis center and associated equipment, and changing a large portion of the ship's operating procedures. One of the significant equipment/space changes in the conversion was the addition of the Anti-Submarine Classification and Analysis Center (ASCAC) in the CIC area. ASCAC worked in close conjunction with the anti-submarine warfare aircraft assigned aboard Carrier Air Wing 11. The Engineering Department underwent a significant change in its propulsion plant during the yard period. The Navy Standard Oil (black oil) fuel system was completely converted to Navy Distillate Fuel. The Air Department added several significant changes to the flight deck, including enlarging the jet blast deflectors (JBD) and installing more powerful catapults to handle the new Grumman F-14 Tomcat, which \"Kitty Hawk\" was due to receive for its next deployment. Enlarging JBD#1 meant the No. 1 Aircraft Elevator had to be redesigned, making \"Kitty Hawk\" the only carrier at the time having an aircraft elevator that tracked from the hangar deck to the flight deck angling out 6\u00b0. \"Kitty Hawk\" moved out of dry dock on 28 April 1973, and the next day, on her 12th birthday, she was named a Multi-Purpose Aircraft Carrier (CV).\nAfter much-needed upgrades and modifications to \"Kitty Hawk\"'s systems, she departed Hunters Point navy shipyards in San Francisco to begin \"sea trial\" exercises and then made a short three-day layover in Pearl Harbor for some crew R&amp;R. She then departed for the South China Sea. However, while en route, during routine maintenance to the ship's fuel oil systems in the No. 1 machinery room on 11 December 1973, a flange gasket failed in one of the fuel transfer tubes of JP5 jet fuel that pass through Number 1 engine room. Jet fuel was sprayed, atomized, and ignited, and the ship went to General Quarters for nearly 38 hours. Due to the massive amounts of thick black smoke, the crew was ordered topside to the flight deck until the fire could be controlled and the smoke cleared. Because two and then three of the ship's four propulsion systems had to be shut down during the fire, \"Kitty Hawk\" began to list about 7 degrees portside. As a result, many of the aircraft were moved starboard to balance the ship until the fire was finally brought under control and two propulsion systems restored. \"Kitty Hawk\" then headed toward the Philippines, where she ported in Subic Bay until the ship's damage could be assessed, and repairs could be made, but there would be three days of waiting before reaching port. Six enlisted sailors died in the fire: FR Michael Deverich, FR Linn Schambers, FR Kevin Johnson, FA Alan Champine, Samuel Cardenas, and FA Joseph Tulipana. Thirty-four sailors were treated for smoke inhalation and several minor injuries, and one sailor for a broken wrist reported. The bodies of those men who died in the fire were escorted home by members of their respective Divisions for burial.\nAs a result of the deaths of the six crew members, on 10 January 1974, an investigation was ordered by Rear Admiral Donald C. Davis, Commander of Carrier Group 1 and Senior Officer onboard \"Kitty Hawk\" designated as his flagship. Although initial reports lay blame to one of the six men who perished in the tragic fire, upon conclusion of the investigation filed by the Department of the Navy, Commander Seventh Fleet, several opinions on causes were noted within the investigation, which included but were not limited to the Fourth Endorsement on Captain Kenneth L. Shugart, USN. The investigative report of 10 January 1974, section 3, paragraph 3 stated, \"The replacement of the defective gasket in the strainer cover assembly by Fireman Apprentice Kevin W. Johnson (deceased) reflected, in the words of the investigating officer, poor judgment and unsound maintenance practices.\" Further, \"Fireman Apprentice Johnson was therefore negligent in the performance of his duties.\" However, in consonance with the investigating officer, the opinion is expressed that under the circumstances, the maintenance deficiencies noted herein constitute simple, rather than culpable, negligence.\"\nIn light of the efforts made by all six navy personnel, FA Cardenas, Champine and Tulipana, and FR Deverich, Schambers and Johnson assigned to the machinery room on 11 December 1973, who all died during the suppression efforts, \"It has administratively been determined each were posthumously awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for their heroic devotion to duty in fighting the fire which is the subject of this investigative report.\"\n\"Kitty Hawk\" stayed busy throughout the mid-1970s with numerous deployments to the Western Pacific and involvement in a large number of exercises, including RIMPAC in 1973 and 1975. \"Kitty Hawk\" departed San Diego on 8 March 1976, and on 12 March entered dry dock at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington, to commence a US$100 million complex overhaul, scheduled to last just more than 12 months. This overhaul configured \"Kitty Hawk\" to operate with the F-14 and S-3A \"Viking\" aircraft in a total CV sea control mode. This included adding spaces for storage, ordnance handling, and maintenance facilities for the two aircraft. Also included in the work package were more efficient work areas for airframes and a repair facility for ground support equipment, and the addition of avionics support capability for the S-3. The ship also replaced the Terrier Surface-to-Air missile system with the NATO Sea Sparrow system and added elevators and modified weapons magazines to provide an increased capability for handling and stowing the newer, larger air-launched weapons. \"Kitty Hawk\" completed the overhaul in March 1977 and departed the shipyard on 1 April of that year to return to San Diego. After a six-month pre-deployment workup, \"Kitty Hawk\" departed NAS North Island 25 October 1977 for another Western Pacific Ocean deployment and returned 15 May 1978.\n1979 to 1998.\nIn May 1979, the ship teamed up with Carrier Air Wing 15 (CVW-15) for another Western Pacific deployment. Her duties included search and assistance operations to aid refugees in small boats fleeing the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.\nDuring that deployment, \"Kitty Hawk\" also offered contingency support off the coast of Korea following the assassination of Republic of Korea President Park Chung Hee. The deployment was then extended &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 months to support contingency operations in the North Arabian Sea during the Iran hostage crisis. For their actions in the region, \"Kitty Hawk\" and CVW-15 were awarded the Navy Expeditionary Medal.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" had a cameo appearance in the 1980 movie \"The Final Countdown\", standing in for . On her way home from her Western Pacific deployment, \"Kitty Hawk\" was filmed entering Pearl Harbor with the crew manning the rails as the ship passed the USS \"Arizona\" Memorial. (At the time of the filming, \"Nimitz\" was still an Atlantic Fleet, vice Pacific Fleet, aircraft carrier.) \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to San Diego in late February 1980 and was also awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation and the Naval Air Force Pacific Battle Efficiency \"E\" Award as the best carrier in the Pacific Fleet.\nIn April 1981, \"Kitty Hawk\" left San Diego for her thirteenth deployment to the Western Pacific. Following the cruise, the crew was awarded the Navy Expeditionary Medal and the Humanitarian Service Medal for the rescue of Vietnamese refugees in the South China Sea.\nIn January 1982, \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to Bremerton for another year-long overhaul. Following the comprehensive upgrade and a vigorous training period with Carrier Air Wing 2, \"Kitty Hawk\" deployed in 1984 as the flagship for Battle Group Bravo. \"Kitty Hawk\" logged more than on this deployment and remained at \"Station Gonzo\" in the north Arabian Sea for more than 60 consecutive days.\nIn March 1984, \"Kitty Hawk\" participated in \"Team Spirit\" exercises in the Sea of Japan. The Soviet Victor-class nuclear attack submarine \"K-314\" shadowed the task group. On 21 March 1984, at the end of the Sea of Japan part of the exercise, \"K-314\" surfaced directly in front of \"Kitty Hawk\", time was 22:05, too dark and far too close for \"Kitty Hawk\" to see and avoid the resulting collision, with minor damage to the aircraft carrier, and significant damage to the Soviet submarine. At the time of the accident, \"Kitty Hawk\" is estimated to have carried several dozen nuclear weapons, and \"K-314\" probably carried two nuclear torpedoes. \"Kitty Hawk\" was thereafter considered the first antisubmarine carrier weapon and a red submarine was painted on her island near the bridge but was ordered removed upon return to home port North Island San Diego, CA.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" went to the U.S. Naval Base at Subic Bay in the Philippines for repairs. A piece of one of \"K-314\"'s propellers was embedded in \"Kitty Hawk\"'s bow, as were some chunks of the Soviet anechoic coating, from scraping along the side of the submarine. The result was an \"accidental\" intelligence coup for the U.S. Navy.\nThe ship returned to San Diego on 1 August 1984. Seven months later, \"Kitty Hawk\" was awarded another Battle Efficiency \"E\" Award.\nIn July 1985, \"Kitty Hawk\" and CVW-9 deployed again as flagship for Battle Group Bravo. \"Kitty Hawk\" and CVW-9 combined to set a standard for operations, completing their second consecutive fatality-free deployment.\nIn August 1985, People Magazine printed an article stating that Kitty Hawk's missiles and jet parts were illegally smuggled into Iran, at that time considered a hostile nation, as revealed by Kitty Hawk's Petty Officer Robert W Jackson. Later, the FBI arrested seven suspects involved in this smuggling scheme, an event related to what was later known as the Iran-Contra scandal.\nCVW-9 crews logged more than 18,000 flight hours and 7,300 arrested landings. At the same time \"Kitty Hawk\" maintained her catapults and arresting gear at 100 percent availability.\nIn 1986, during pre-cruise exercises, one Airman was killed during flight operations when he was struck by an aircraft while checking \"elongs\" during a launch.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" bid farewell to San Diego on 3 January 1987, as the ship departed her home port of 25 years and set out on a six-month world cruise. During the circumnavigation, \"Kitty Hawk\" and CVW-9 again showed their commitment to safety by conducting a third fatality-free deployment. \"Kitty Hawk\" spent 106 consecutive days on station in the Indian Ocean and was again awarded the Navy Expeditionary Medal and the Meritorious Unit Commendation for its service. The world cruise ended at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard on 3 July. Six months later, \"Kitty Hawk\" began a Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) overhaul. \"Kitty Hawk\" emerged from the yards on 2 August 1990. The overhaul was estimated to have added 20 years of service to the ship. The Aircraft Intermediate Maintenance Department was also awarded the Air Forces, US Pacific Fleet Departmental Excellence Award, the Black \"E\" for this deployment.\nWith the return of CVW-15 to its decks, \"Kitty Hawk\" began its second deployment around \"the Horn\" of South America to her original home port of San Diego on 11 December 1991, performing Gringo-Gaucho with the Argentine Naval Aviation and paying a visit to Mar del Plata during the transit.\nOn 1 August 1992, \"Kitty Hawk\" was appointed as Naval Air Force Pacific's \"ready carrier\". The ship embarked Commander, Cruiser-Destroyer Group 5; Commander, Destroyer Squadron 17 and CVW-15 for three months of work-ups before deploying to the Western Pacific on 3 November 1992. While on deployment, \"Kitty Hawk\" spent nine days off the coast of Somalia supporting U.S. Marines and coalition forces involved in Operation Restore Hope. In response to increasing Iraqi violations of United Nations sanctions, the ship rushed to the Persian Gulf on 27 December 1992. Just 17 days later, \"Kitty Hawk\" led a joint coalition offensive strike against designated targets in southern Iraq.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" set sail on her 17th deployment 24 June 1994, to provide a stabilizing influence operating in the Western Pacific during a time of great tension in the Far East, particularly concerning North Korea. This was the last cruise for VA-52 flying the A-6E SWIP Intruder. During the cruise, the Carrier led the first ASW persecution of both the Han Class and Oscar II Class Submarine(Most likely the Oscar II was K-442). During the ASW hunt of the Han Class Submarine of the PLA Navy, a standoff ensued between the United States and PRC leading to several PLAAF fighter aircraft flying near Kitty Hawk's S-3 Viking ASW aircraft from VS-37. Eventually, both sides backed down.\nIn 1995, \"Kitty Hawk\" embarked airwing transitioned to CVW-11, marking a change to a single F-14 squadron, and 3 F/A-18 squadrons.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" began her 18th deployment, this time with CVW-11, in October 1996. During the six-month underway period, the ship visited ports in the Persian Gulf and Western Pacific. The carrier made a rare visit to Hobart, Tasmania as well as being only the second carrier to ever stop in Manama, Bahrain. \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to San Diego 11 April 1997, immediately beginning a 15-month, $110 million overhaul, including three months in dry dock in Bremerton, from January to March 1998.\n1998 to 2008.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" departed San Diego on 6 July 1998, to assume new duties as America's only permanently forward-deployed aircraft carrier from . \"Kitty Hawk\" also welcomed aboard Carrier Air Wing 5, operating from Naval Air Facility Atsugi, Japan. \"Kitty Hawk\" arrived at her new operating location of U.S. Fleet Activities Yokosuka, Japan, on 11 August 1998.\nWith the decommissioning of \"Independence\" on 30 September 1998, \"Kitty Hawk\" became the second-oldest active warship in the US Navy and was authorized to fly the First Navy Jack.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" set sail for a planned three-month underway period on 2 March 1999, which included Exercise Tandem Thrust off Guam. Following the exercise, the \"Kitty Hawk\"/CVW-5 team was ordered to the Persian Gulf to enforce the No-Fly Zone over Southern Iraq. CVW-5 pilots flew more than 8,800 sorties in 116 days, including 1,300 combat sorties, dropping more than 20\u00a0tons of ordnance. On the return trip to Japan, \"Kitty Hawk\" made port visits to Perth, Western Australia, and Pattaya, Thailand. \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to Yokosuka on 25 August 1999. She was again underway to the Sea of Japan on 22 October to participate in Exercises Foal Eagle and AnnualEx 11G.\nOn 11 April 2000, \"Kitty Hawk\" departed Yokosuka, Japan, for routine local area operations and participated in Exercise Cobra Gold with the navies of Singapore and Thailand. \"Kitty Hawk\" participated in Exercise Foal Eagle in Fall 2000 and deployed again in March 2001 for a Spring underway period with a historic stop. On 22 March, \"Kitty Hawk\" became the first aircraft carrier to ever moor pier-side in Singapore, as the ship visited the brand new Changi Pier, located at the Republic of Singapore Navy's Changi Naval Base. On 29 April, shortly after a visit to Guam, \"Kitty Hawk\" celebrated 40 years of active service as the ship and crew sailed south to participate in Exercise Tandem Thrust 2001 with the Australian and Canadian navies. The ship returned to Yokosuka on 11 June 2001.\nOn 17 October 2000, and again on 9 November 2000, \"Kitty Hawk\" was buzzed by a group of Russian warplanes in the Sea of Japan, which proceeded to take pictures of the reaction on deck. General Anatoly Kornukov, then Russian air force's commander in chief, stated that the Russian warplanes managed to evade \"Kitty Hawk\"'s antiaircraft defense system and that \"In the pictures, you can clearly see the panic on deck.\"\nIn October 2001, \"Kitty Hawk\" deployed to the North Arabian Sea for the beginning of Operation Enduring Freedom. The ship served as an afloat forward staging base for the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment, with a reduced air wing.\nIn April 2002, \"Kitty Hawk\" was underway for her scheduled spring training. Along with a Guam port call, the spring underway included port visits to Singapore and Hong Kong, where the crew celebrated \"Kitty Hawk\"'s 41st birthday. In the fall of 2002, \"Kitty Hawk\" was training in the Western Pacific. \"Kitty Hawk\" and her battle group combined with U.S. Air Force units and elements of the Japan Maritime Self Defense Force to conduct AnnualEx 14G in the waters surrounding Japan. Later, the ship and her crew made a port visit to Hong Kong.\nOn 11 September 2002, all US Navy ships were ordered to fly the First Navy Jack. The ship once again departed Yokosuka on 23 January 2003 for a routine training mission, but a short time later, orders were received to transit to the U.S. Central Command area of responsibility to support the Global War on Terrorism and to prepare for future contingencies. \"Kitty Hawk\" was soon involved in Operations Southern Watch and Iraqi Freedom in the North Persian Gulf. Although the cruise was originally intended to be short, the ship served 110 continuous days at sea. \"Kitty Hawk\" returned to Yokosuka on 6 May 2003, immediately entering an extensive drydock period, or drydocking ship's restricted availability (DSRA), that lasted until October of that year.\nIn 2005 \"Kitty Hawk\" participated in the inaugural edititon of Exercise Talisman Saber. In October 2006, \"Kitty Hawk\" and her escort warships were undergoing exercises near Okinawa, and a Chinese \"Song\"-class submarine shadowed the group then surfaced within of the group on 26 October 2006. It was considered to be quite rare for Chinese subs to operate that far from their home ports on the mainland, though with this incident that may be changing. Reports claim that the submarine had been undetected until it surfaced. In 2009, Timothy J. Keating, commander of the United States Pacific Command, commented on the issue, stating that the carrier was \"in a very relaxed posture. If there were some heightened state of tension, we would, believe me, we would not let them get that close.\"\nOn 11 January 2007, \"Kitty Hawk\" entered a scheduled period of maintenance in Yokosuka, her place being taken by which made an unscheduled deployment three weeks later. This refit is \"smaller than the one the ship completed [in 2006]\", which took six months.\nOn 5 July 2007, \"Kitty Hawk\" arrived at Sydney, Australia, for six days of shore leave after participating in Exercise Talisman Sabre.\nOn 21 September 2007, \"Kitty Hawk\" pulled into Yokosuka, Japan, after a four-month summer deployment.\nIn November 2007, \"Kitty Hawk\" and other US Navy ships participated in the joint military exercise Malabar, in the Bay of Bengal. Other nations that took part were Australia, Japan, Singapore and host nation India. Later that month, \"Kitty Hawk\" was scheduled to dock at Hong Kong for Thanksgiving. However, China denied entry to \"Kitty Hawk\" and the rest of her carrier group. China then reversed its position based on humanitarian grounds but by that time, \"Kitty Hawk\" was too far away to dock in time for the holiday. The cause of the Chinese refusal remains unclear.\n\"Kitty Hawk\" was deployed off the coast of China along with two other ships during the Taiwan election on 20 March 2008. After the elections, she entered Hong Kong for the last time.\nOn 28 May 2008, \"Kitty Hawk\" departed Japan for the last time, to be replaced in Japan by \"George Washington\". However, during \"George Washington\"'s transit of the Pacific Coast of South America en route to the planned turnover with \"Kitty Hawk\" in Hawaii, a major fire broke out that led to \"Washington\" diverting to San Diego for repairs. This led to the US Navy retaining \"Kitty Hawk\" in Hawaii to take part in the RIMPAC 2008 exercises in June and July. On 7 August 2008, \"Kitty Hawk\" arrived at NAS North Island.\nRetirement.\nOn 1 December 2005, the United States Navy announced that \"George Washington\" would replace \"Kitty Hawk\" in 2008 as the forward-deployed carrier in Japan and it would also assume host carrier duties for forward-deployed Carrier Air Wing 5.\nIn March 2007, the Navy announced that Captain Todd Zecchin, the captain responsible during the decommissioning of , had been tasked with overseeing the decommissioning of \"Kitty Hawk\".\n\"Kitty Hawk\" left Yokosuka on 28 May 2008 to begin the decommissioning process. However, on 22 May, a fire seriously damaged \"George Washington\", causing the ship to go to San Diego for repairs. \"Kitty Hawk\" participated in the RIMPAC exercise near Hawaii in \"George Washington\"'s place. The turnover between the two carriers was postponed and took place in August. After the turnover, \"Kitty Hawk\" arrived at Bremerton, Washington in September and was informally retired on 31 January 2009. \"Kitty Hawk\", the USN's last diesel-fueled aircraft carrier, was finally decommissioned on 12 May 2009.\nPost decommissioning.\nAs the last conventional American aircraft carriers to be decommissioned, \"Kitty Hawk\" and were the last two carriers suitable for conversion into museum ships. Nuclear carriers, such as and the , require extensive disassembly to remove their nuclear reactors during decommissioning, leaving them in an unsuitable condition for donation.\nAfter \"Kitty Hawk\" was decommissioned, groups based in Wilmington, North Carolina and Pensacola, Florida lobbied to acquire the ship after her release from the Navy Inactive Ships Program.\nBy March 2017, the USS \"Kitty Hawk\" Veterans Association had raised $5 million in pledges to preserve the aircraft carrier as a museum ship. Members sought to donate $15,000 in memorabilia for display if it came to fruition.\nAfter President Donald Trump gave a speech on board and promised to build a 12-carrier navy, US Navy officials extended \"Kitty Hawk\"'s stay in the reserve inactive fleet and considered the possibility of recommissioning her to help with the buildup.\nOn 20 October 2017, \"Kitty Hawk\" was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register, and on 25 October 2017, the Navy announced its intentions to dispose of her by scrapping.\nOn 9 March 2021, \"Kitty Hawk\" arrived at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard to be put in dry dock and have the hull scraped of marine life before being towed to her final destination.\nOn 6 October 2021, \"Kitty Hawk\" and \"John F. Kennedy\" were sold for one cent each to International Shipbreaking Limited.\nOn 15 January 2022, \"Kitty Hawk\" left the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, under tow, en-route to Brownsville, Texas, for scrapping. As she is too big to transit the Panama Canal, she went instead by way of the Straits of Magellan.\nOn 31 May 2022, \"Kitty Hawk\" arrived in Brownsville, Texas, for scrapping. Scrapping was mostly complete by early 2024, as shown by aerial footage posted online.\nIt was also announced that the Air Zoo in Kalamazoo, Michigan was donated one of the ship's anchors and several pieces of the flight deck for outside display. This will go on display in June 2024 with help of the USS Kitty Hawk Veterans Association.\nAwards and decorations.\nAwarded to \"Kitty Hawk\":\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32188", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32188", "title": "UTF-8", "text": "ASCII-compatible variable-width encoding of Unicode\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Mono/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUTF-8 is a character encoding standard used for electronic communication. Defined by the Unicode Standard, the name is derived from \"Unicode Transformation Format\u00a0\u2013 8-bit\". As of July 2025, almost every webpage is transmitted as UTF-8.\nUTF-8 supports all 1,112,064 valid Unicode code points using a variable-width encoding of one to four one-byte (8-bit) code units.\nCode points with lower numerical values, which tend to occur more frequently, are encoded using fewer bytes. It was designed for backward compatibility with ASCII: the first 128 characters of Unicode, which correspond one-to-one with ASCII, are encoded using a single byte with the same binary value as ASCII, so that a UTF-8-encoded file using only those characters is identical to an ASCII file. Most software designed for any extended ASCII can read and write UTF-8, and this results in fewer internationalization issues than any alternative text encoding.\nUTF-8 is dominant for all countries/languages on the internet, is used in most standards, often the only allowed encoding, and is supported by all modern operating systems and programming languages.\nHistory.\nThe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) set out to compose a universal multi-byte character set in 1989. The draft ISO 10646 standard contained a non-required annex called UTF-1 that provided a byte stream encoding of its 32-bit code points. This encoding was not satisfactory on performance grounds, among other problems, and the biggest problem was probably that it did not have a clear separation between ASCII and non-ASCII: new UTF-1 tools would be backward compatible with ASCII-encoded text, but UTF-1-encoded text could confuse existing code expecting ASCII (or extended ASCII), because it could contain continuation bytes in the range 0x21\u20130x7E that meant something else in ASCII, e.g., 0x2F for codice_1, the Unix path directory separator.\nIn July 1992, the X/Open committee XoJIG was looking for a better encoding. Dave Prosser of Unix System Laboratories submitted a proposal for one that had faster implementation characteristics and introduced the improvement that 7-bit ASCII characters would \"only\" represent themselves; multi-byte sequences would only include bytes with the high bit set. The name \"File System Safe UCS Transformation Format\" (\"FSS-UTF\") and most of the text of this proposal were later preserved in the final specification. In August 1992, this proposal was circulated by an IBM X/Open representative to interested parties. \nA modification by Ken Thompson of the Plan 9 operating system group at Bell Labs made it self-synchronizing, letting a reader start anywhere and immediately detect character boundaries, at the cost of being somewhat less bit-efficient than the previous proposal. It also abandoned the use of biases that prevented overlong encodings. Thompson's design was outlined on September 2, 1992, on a placemat in a New Jersey diner with Rob Pike. In the following days, Pike and Thompson implemented it and updated Plan 9 to use it throughout, and then communicated their success back to X/Open, which accepted it as the specification for FSS-UTF. UTF-8 was first officially presented at the USENIX conference in San Diego, from January 25 to 29, 1993. The Internet Engineering Task Force adopted UTF-8 in its Policy on Character Sets and Languages in RFC\u00a02277 (BCP 18) for future internet standards work in January 1998, replacing Single Byte Character Sets such as Latin-1 in older RFCs.\nIn November 2003, UTF-8 was restricted by to match the constraints of the UTF-16 character encoding: explicitly prohibiting code points corresponding to the high and low surrogate characters removed more than 3% of the three-byte sequences, and ending at U+10FFFF removed more than 48% of the four-byte sequences and all five- and six-byte sequences.\nDescription.\nUTF-8 encodes code points in one to four bytes, depending on the value of the code point. In the following table, the characters u to z are replaced by the bits of the code point, from the positions U+uvwxyz:\nThe first 128\u00a0code points (ASCII) need 1\u00a0byte. The next 1,920\u00a0code points need two bytes to encode, which covers the remainder of almost all Latin-script alphabets, and also IPA extensions, Greek, Cyrillic, Coptic, Armenian, Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac, Thaana and N'Ko alphabets, as well as Combining Diacritical Marks. Three bytes are needed for the remaining 61,440\u00a0codepoints of the Basic Multilingual Plane (BMP), including most Chinese, Japanese and Korean characters. Four bytes are needed for the 1,048,576\u00a0non-BMP code points, which include emoji, less common CJK characters, and other useful characters.\nUTF-8 is a \"prefix code\" and it is unnecessary to read past the last byte of a code point to decode it. Unlike many earlier multi-byte text encodings such as Shift-JIS, it is \"self-synchronizing\" so searches for short strings or characters are possible; and the start of a code point can be found from a random position by backing up at most 3 bytes. The values chosen for the lead bytes means sorting a list of UTF-8 strings puts them in the same order as sorting UTF-32 strings.\nOverlong encodings.\nUsing a row in the above table to encode a code point less than \"First code point\" (thus using more bytes than necessary) is termed an \"overlong encoding\". These are a security problem because they allow character sequences such as malicious JavaScript and codice_2 to bypass security validations, which has been reported in numerous high-profile products such as Microsoft's IIS web server and Apache's Tomcat servlet container. Overlong encodings should therefore be considered an error and never decoded.\nError handling.\nNot all sequences of bytes are valid UTF-8. A UTF-8 decoder should be prepared for:\nMany of the first UTF-8 decoders would decode these, ignoring incorrect bits. Carefully crafted invalid UTF-8 could make them either skip or create ASCII characters such as NUL, slash, or quotes, leading to security vulnerabilities. It is also common to throw an exception or truncate the string at an error but this turns what would otherwise be harmless errors (i.e. \"file not found\") into a denial of service, for instance early versions of Python 3.0 would exit immediately if the command line or environment variables contained invalid UTF-8.\nRFC 3629 states \"Implementations of the decoding algorithm MUST protect against decoding invalid sequences.\" \"The Unicode Standard\" requires decoders to: \"...\u00a0treat any ill-formed code unit sequence as an error condition. This guarantees that it will neither interpret nor emit an ill-formed code unit sequence.\" The standard now recommends replacing each error with the replacement character \"\ufffd\" (U+FFFD) and continue decoding.\nSome decoders consider the sequence E1,A0,20 (a truncated 3-byte code followed by a space) as a single error. This is not a good idea as a search for a space character would find the one hidden in the error. Since Unicode\u00a06 (October\u00a02010) the standard (chapter\u00a03) has recommended a \"best practice\" where the error is either one continuation byte, or ends at the first byte that is disallowed, so E1,A0,20 is a two-byte error followed by a space. An error is no more than three bytes long, never contains the start of a valid character, and there are \u00a0different possible errors. Many decoders instead make \"each\" byte be an error, in which case E1,A0,20 is \"two\" errors followed by a space; there are now only 128 different errors which makes it practical to store the errors in the output string, or replace them with characters from a legacy encoding.\nOnly a small subset of possible byte strings are error-free UTF-8: several bytes cannot appear; a byte with the high bit set cannot be alone; and in a truly random string a byte with a high bit set has only a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204415 chance of starting a valid UTF-8 character. This has the consequence of making it easy to detect if a legacy text encoding is accidentally used instead of UTF-8, making conversion of a system to UTF-8 easier and avoiding the need to require a Byte Order Mark or any other metadata.\nSurrogates.\nSince RFC 3629 (November\u00a02003), the high and low surrogates used by UTF-16 (U+D800 through U+DFFF) are not legal Unicode values, and their UTF-8 encodings must be treated as an invalid byte sequence. These encodings all start with 0xED followed by 0xA0 or higher. This rule is often ignored as surrogates are allowed in Windows filenames and this means there must be a way to store them in a string. UTF-8 that allows these surrogate halves has been (informally) called \"WTF-8\", for \"wobbly transformation format\", while another variation that also encodes all non-BMP characters as two surrogates (6\u00a0bytes instead of 4) is called \"CESU-8\".\nByte map.\nThe chart below gives the detailed meaning of each byte in a stream encoded in UTF-8.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:UTF-8 byte map/styles.css\" /&gt;\nByte-order mark.\nIf the Unicode byte-order mark U+FEFF is at the start of a UTF-8 file, the first three bytes will be 0xEF, 0xBB, 0xBF.\nThe Unicode Standard neither requires nor recommends the use of the BOM for UTF-8, but warns that it may be encountered at the start of a file trans-coded from another encoding. While ASCII text encoded using UTF-8 is backward compatible with ASCII, this is not true when Unicode Standard recommendations are ignored and a BOM is added. A BOM can confuse software that isn't prepared for it but can otherwise accept UTF-8, e.g. programming languages that permit non-ASCII bytes in string literals but not at the start of the file. Nevertheless, there was and still is software that always inserts a BOM when writing UTF-8, and refuses to correctly interpret UTF-8 unless the first character is a BOM (or the file only contains ASCII).\nComparison to UTF-16.\nFor a long time there was considerable argument as to whether it was better to process text in UTF-16 or in UTF-8. The primary advantage of UTF-16 is that the Windows API required it for access to all Unicode characters (UTF-8 was not fully supported in Windows until May 2019). This caused several libraries such as Qt to also use UTF-16 strings which propagates this requirement to non-Windows platforms. In the early days of Unicode there were no characters greater than U+FFFF and combining characters were rarely used, so the 16-bit encoding was effectively fixed-size. Some believed fixed-size encoding could make processing more efficient, but any such advantages were lost as soon as UTF-16 became variable width as well. The code points U+0800\u2013U+FFFF take 3 bytes in UTF-8 but only 2 in UTF-16. This led to the idea that text in Chinese and other languages would take more space in UTF-8. However, text is only larger if there are more of these code points than 1-byte ASCII code points, and this rarely happens in real-world documents due to spaces, newlines, digits, punctuation, English words, and markup. UTF-8 has the advantages of being trivial to retrofit to any system that could handle an extended ASCII, not having byte-order problems, and taking about half the space for any language using mostly Latin letters.\nImplementations and adoption.\nUTF-8 has been the most common encoding for the World Wide Web since 2008. As of \u00a02025[ [update]], UTF-8 is used by 98.8% of surveyed web sites. Although many pages only use ASCII characters to display content, very few websites now declare their encoding to only be ASCII instead of UTF-8. Virtually all countries and languages have 95% or more use of UTF-8 encodings on the web. \nMany standards only support UTF-8, e.g. JSON exchange requires it (without a byte-order mark (BOM)). UTF-8 is also the recommendation from the WHATWG for HTML and DOM specifications, and stating \"UTF-8 encoding is the most appropriate encoding for interchange of Unicode\" and the Internet Mail Consortium recommends that all e\u2011mail programs be able to display and create mail using UTF-8. The World Wide Web Consortium recommends UTF-8 as the default encoding in XML and HTML (and not just using UTF-8, also declaring it in metadata), \"even when all characters are in the ASCII range ... Using non-UTF-8 encodings can have unexpected results\".\nMany software programs have the ability to read/write UTF-8. It may require the user to change options from the normal settings, or may require a BOM (byte-order mark) as the first character to read the file. Examples of software supporting UTF-8 include Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel (Office 2003 and later), Google Drive, LibreOffice, and most databases.\nSoftware that \"defaults\" to UTF-8 (meaning it writes it without the user changing settings, and it reads it without a BOM) has become more common since 2010. Windows Notepad, in all currently supported versions of Windows, defaults to writing UTF-8 without a BOM (a change from Windows 7 \"Notepad\"), bringing it into line with most other text editors. Some system files on Windows\u00a011 require UTF-8 with no requirement for a BOM, and almost all files on macOS and Linux are required to be UTF-8 without a BOM. Programming languages that default to UTF-8 for I/O include Ruby\u00a03.0, R\u00a04.2.2, Raku and Java\u00a018. Although the current version of Python requires an option to codice_3 to read/write UTF-8, plans exist to make UTF-8 I/O the default in Python\u00a03.15. C++23 adopts UTF-8 as the only portable source code file format.\nBackwards compatibility is a serious impediment to changing code and APIs using UTF-16 to use UTF-8, but this is happening. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], Microsoft added the capability for an application to set UTF-8 as the \"code page\" for the Windows API, removing the need to use UTF-16; and more recently has recommended programmers use UTF-8, and even states \"UTF-16 [...] is a unique burden that Windows places on code that targets multiple platforms\".\nThe default string primitive in Go,\nJulia, Rust, Swift (since version 5), and PyPy uses UTF-8 internally in all cases. Python (since version 3.3) uses UTF-8 internally for Python C API extensions and sometimes for strings and a future version of Python is planned to store strings as UTF-8 by default. Modern versions of Microsoft Visual Studio use UTF-8 internally. Microsoft's SQL Server 2019 added support for UTF-8, and using it results in a 35% speed increase, and \"nearly 50% reduction in storage requirements.\"\nJava internally uses UTF-16 for the \"char\" data type and, consequentially, the \"Character\", \"String\", and the \"StringBuffer\" classes, but for I/O uses \"Modified UTF-8\" (MUTF-8), in which the null character U+0000 uses the two-byte overlong encoding 0xC0,\u00a00x80, instead of just 0x00. Modified UTF-8 strings never contain any actual null bytes but can contain all Unicode code points including U+0000, which allows such strings (with a null byte appended) to be processed by traditional null-terminated string functions. Java reads and writes normal UTF-8 to files and streams, but it uses Modified UTF-8 for object serialization, for the Java Native Interface, and for embedding constant strings in Java class files. The dex format defined by Dalvik also uses the same modified UTF-8 to represent string values. Tcl also uses the same modified UTF-8 as Java for internal representation of Unicode data, but uses strict CESU-8 for external data. All known Modified UTF-8 implementations also treat the surrogate pairs as in CESU-8.\nThe Raku programming language (formerly Perl 6) uses codice_4 encoding by default for I/O (Perl 5 also supports it); though that choice in Raku also implies \"normalization into Unicode NFC (normalization form canonical). In some cases the user will want to ensure no normalization is done; for this codice_5\" can be used. That \"UTF-8 Clean-8\" variant, implemented by Raku, is an encoder/decoder that preserves bytes as is (even illegal UTF-8 sequences) and allows for Normal Form Grapheme synthetics.\nVersion 3 of the Python programming language treats each byte of an invalid UTF-8 bytestream as an error (see also changes with new UTF-8 mode in Python 3.7); this gives 128 different possible errors. Extensions have been created to allow any byte sequence that is assumed to be UTF-8 to be losslessly transformed to UTF-16 or UTF-32, by translating the 128 possible error bytes to 128 reserved code points, and transforming those code points back to error bytes to output UTF-8. The most common approach is to translate the codes to U+DC80...U+DCFF which are low (trailing) surrogate values and thus \"invalid\" UTF-16, as used by Python's PEP 383 (or \"surrogateescape\") approach. NumPy version 2.0, and its file formats, support UTF-8 (adding StringDType for it). Another encoding called MirBSD OPTU-8/16 converts them to U+EF80...U+EFFF in a Private Use Area. In either approach, the byte value is encoded in the low eight bits of the output code point. These encodings are needed if invalid UTF-8 is to survive translation to and then back from the UTF-16 used internally by Python, and as Unix filenames can contain invalid UTF-8 it is necessary for this to work.\nLinux and macOS filesystems support UTF-8: ext4 and Apple's APFS. Apple's older HFS Plus uses UTF-16 for file names, but uses UTF-8 in symbolic links. Windows' filesystem, NTFS, uses UTF-16 for file names.\nStandards.\nThe official name for the encoding is , the spelling used in all Unicode Consortium documents. The hyphen-minus is required and no spaces are allowed. Some other names used are:\nThere are several current definitions of UTF-8 in various standards documents:\nThey supersede the definitions given in the following obsolete works:\nThey are all the same in their general mechanics, with the main differences being on issues such as allowed range of code point values and safe handling of invalid input.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32189", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32189", "title": "Underground railway", "text": "Underground railway may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32190", "revid": "50381850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32190", "title": "Underground Railroad", "text": "Network for fugitive slaves in 19th-century U.S.\nThe Underground Railroad was an organized network of secret routes and safe houses used by freedom seekers to escape to the abolitionist Northern United States and Eastern Canada. Slaves escaped from slavery as early as the 16th century; many of their escapes were unaided. However, a network of safe houses generally known as the Underground Railroad began to organize in the 1780s among Abolitionist Societies in the North. It ran north and grew steadily until President Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863. The escapees sought primarily to escape into free states, and potentially from there to Canada. \nThe Underground Railroad started at the place of enslavement. The routes followed natural and man-made modes of transportation: rivers, canals, bays, the Atlantic Coast, ferries and river crossings, roads and trails. Locations close to ports, free territories and international boundaries prompted many escapes. \nThe network, primarily the work of free and enslaved African Americans, was assisted by abolitionists and others sympathetic to the cause of the escapees. The slaves who risked capture and those who aided them were collectively referred to as the passengers and conductors of the Railroad, respectively. Various other routes led to Mexico, where slavery had been abolished, and to islands in the Caribbean that were not part of the slave trade. An earlier escape route running south toward Florida, then a Spanish possession (except 1763\u20131783), existed from the late 17th century until approximately 1790. During the American Civil War, freedom seekers escaped to Union lines in the South to obtain their freedom. One estimate suggests that by 1850, approximately 100,000 slaves had escaped to freedom via the network. According to former professor of Pan-African studies J. Blaine Hudson, who was dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Louisville, by the end of the Civil War, 500,000 or more African Americans had self-emancipated from slavery on the Underground Railroad.\nOrigin of the name.\nEric Foner wrote that the term \"was perhaps first used by a Washington newspaper in 1839, quoting a young slave hoping to escape bondage via a railroad that 'went underground all the way to Boston'\". Dr. Robert Clemens Smedley wrote that following slave catchers' failed searches and lost traces of fugitives as far north as Columbia, Pennsylvania, they declared in bewilderment that \"there must be an underground railroad somewhere,\" giving origin to the term. Scott Shane wrote that the first documented use of the term was in an article written by Thomas Smallwood in the August 10, 1842, edition of \"Tocsin of Liberty\", an abolitionist newspaper published in Albany. He also wrote that the 1879 book \"Sketches in the History of the Underground Railroad\" said the phrase was mentioned in an 1839 Washington newspaper article and that the book's author said 40 years later that he had quoted the article from memory as closely as he could.\nTerminology.\nMembers of the Underground Railroad often used specific terms, based on the metaphor of the railway. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Big Dipper (whose \"bowl\" points to the North Star) was known as the \"drinking gourd\". The Railroad was often known as the \"freedom train\" or \"Gospel train\", which headed towards \"Heaven\" or \"the Promised Land\", i.e., Canada.\nPolitical background.\nMany of the fugitive slaves who \"rode\" the Underground Railroad considered Canada their final destination. An estimated 30,000 to 40,000 of them settled in Canada, half of whom came between 1850 and 1860. Others settled in free states in the north. Thousands of court cases for escaping fugitive slaves were recorded between the Revolutionary War and the Civil War. Under the original Fugitive Slave Act of 1793, officials from free states were required to assist slaveholders or their agents who recaptured fugitives, but some state legislatures prohibited this. The law made it easier for slaveholders and slave catchers to capture African Americans and return them to slavery, and in some cases allowed them to enslave free blacks. It also created an eagerness among abolitionists to help enslaved people, resulting in the growth of anti-slavery societies and the Underground Railroad.\nWith heavy lobbying by Southern politicians, the Compromise of 1850 was passed by Congress after the Mexican\u2013American War. It included a more stringent Fugitive Slave Law; ostensibly, the compromise addressed regional problems by compelling officials of free states to assist slave catchers, granting them immunity to operate in free states. Because the law required sparse documentation to claim a person was a fugitive, slave catchers also kidnapped free blacks, especially children, and sold them into slavery. Southern politicians often exaggerated the number of escaped slaves and often blamed these escapes on Northerners interfering with Southern property rights. The law deprived people suspected of being slaves of the right to defend themselves in court, making it difficult to prove free status. Some Northern states enacted personal liberty laws that made it illegal for public officials to capture or imprison former slaves. The perception that Northern states ignored the fugitive slave laws and regulations was a major justification offered for secession.\nRoutes and methods of escape.\nUnderground Railroad routes went north to free states and Canada, to the Caribbean, to United States western territories, and to Indian territories. Some fugitive slaves traveled south into Mexico for their freedom. Many escaped by sea, including Ona Judge, who had been enslaved by President George Washington. Some historians view the waterways of the South as an important component for freedom seekers to escape as water sources were pathways to freedom. In addition, historians of the Underground Railroad found 200,000 runaway slave advertisements in North American newspapers from the middle of the 1700s until the end of the American Civil War. Freedom seekers in Alabama hid on steamboats heading to Mobile, Alabama in hopes of blending in among the city's free Black community, and also hid on other steamboats leaving Alabama that were headed further northward into free territories and free states. In 1852, a law was passed by the Alabama legislature to reduce the number of freedom seekers escaping on boats. The law penalized slaveholders and captains of vessels if they allowed enslaved people on board without a pass. Alabama freedom seekers also made canoes to escape. Freedom seekers escaped from their enslavers in Panama on boats heading for California by way of the Panama route. Slaveholders used the Panama route to reach California. In Panama slavery was illegal and Black Panamanians encouraged enslaved people from the United States to escape into the local city of Panama.\nFreedom seekers created methods to throw off the slave catchers' bloodhounds from tracking their scent. One method was using a combination of hot pepper, lard, and vinegar on their shoes. In North Carolina freedom seekers put turpentine on their shoes to prevent slave catchers' dogs from tracking their scents, in Texas escapees used paste made from a charred bullfrog. Other runaways escaped into the swamps to wash off their scent. Most escapes occurred at night when the runaways could hide under the cover of darkness.\nAnother method freedom seekers used to prevent capture was carrying forged free passes. During slavery, free Blacks showed proof of their freedom by carrying a pass that proved they were free. Free Blacks and enslaved people created forged free passes for freedom seekers as they traveled through slave states.\nNorth to free states and Canada.\nStructure.\nDespite the thoroughfare's name, the escape network was neither literally underground nor a railroad. (The first literal underground railroad did not exist until 1863.) According to John Rankin, \"It was so called because they who took passage on it disappeared from public view as really as if they had gone into the ground. After the fugitive slaves entered a depot on that road no trace of them could be found. They were secretly passed from one depot to another until they arrived at a destination where they were able to remain free.\" It was known as a railroad, using rail terminology such as stations and conductors, because that was the transportation system in use at the time.\nThe Underground Railroad did not have a headquarters or governing body, nor were there published guides, maps, pamphlets, or even newspaper articles. It consisted of meeting points, secret routes, transportation, and safe houses, all of them maintained by abolitionist sympathizers and communicated by word of mouth, although there is also a report of a numeric code used to encrypt messages. Participants generally organized in small, independent groups; this helped to maintain secrecy. People escaping enslavement would move north along the route from one way station to the next. \"Conductors\" on the railroad came from various backgrounds and included free-born blacks, white abolitionists, the formerly enslaved (either escaped or manumitted), and Native Americans. Believing that slavery was \"contrary to the ethics of Jesus\", Christian congregations and clergy played a role, especially the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), Congregationalists, Wesleyan Methodists, and Reformed Presbyterians, as well as the anti-slavery branches of mainstream denominations which entered into schism over the issue, such as the Methodist Episcopal Church and the Baptists. The role of free blacks was crucial; without it, there would have been almost no chance for fugitives from slavery to reach freedom safely. The groups of underground railroad \"agents\" worked in organizations known as vigilance committees.\nFree Black communities in Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and New York helped freedom seekers escape from slavery. Black Churches were stations on the Underground Railroad, and Black communities in the North hid freedom seekers in their churches and homes. Historian Cheryl Janifer Laroche explained in her book, \"Free Black Communities and the Underground Railroad The Geography of Resistance\" that: \"Blacks, enslaved and free, operated as the main actors in the central drama that was the Underground Railroad.\" Laroche further explained how some authors center white abolitionists and white people involved in the antislavery movement as the main factors for freedom seekers escapes and overlook the important role of free Black communities. In addition, author Diane Miller states: \"Traditionally, historians have overlooked the agency of African Americans in their own quest for freedom by portraying the Underground Railroad as an organized effort by white religious groups, often Quakers, to aid 'helpless' slaves.\" Historian Larry Gara argues that many of the stories of the Underground Railroad belonged in folklore and not history. The actions of real historical figures such as Harriet Tubman, Thomas Garrett, and Levi Coffin are exaggerated, and Northern abolitionists who guided the enslaved to Canada are hailed as the heroes of the Underground Railroad. This narrative minimizes the intelligence and agency of enslaved Black people who liberated themselves, and implies that freedom seekers needed the help of Northerners to escape.\nGeography.\nThe Underground Railroad benefited greatly from the geography of the U.S.\u2013Canada border: Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and most of New York were separated from Canada by water, over which transport was usually easy to arrange and relatively safe. The main route for freedom seekers from the South led up the Appalachians, Harriet Tubman going via Harpers Ferry, through the highly anti-slavery Western Reserve region of northeastern Ohio to the vast shore of Lake Erie, and then to Canada by boat. A smaller number, traveling by way of New York or New England, went via Syracuse (home of Samuel May) and Rochester, New York (home of Frederick Douglass), crossing the Niagara River or Lake Ontario into Canada. By 1848 the Niagara Falls Suspension Bridge had been built\u2014it crossed the Niagara River and connected New York to Canada. Enslaved runaways used the bridge to escape their bondage, and Harriet Tubman used the bridge to take freedom seekers into Canada. Those traveling via the New York Adirondacks, sometimes via Black communities like Timbuctoo, New York, entered Canada via Ogdensburg, on the St. Lawrence River, or on Lake Champlain (Joshua Young assisted). The western route, used by John Brown among others, led from Missouri west to free Kansas and north to free Iowa, then east via Chicago to the Detroit River.\nThomas Downing was a free Black man in New York and operated his Oyster restaurant as a stop on the Underground Railroad. Freedom seekers (runaway slaves) escaping slavery and seeking freedom hid in the basement of Downing's restaurant. Enslaved people helped freedom seekers escape from slavery. Arnold Gragstone was enslaved and helped runaways escape from slavery by guiding them across the Ohio River for their freedom.\nWilliam Still, sometimes called \"The Father of the Underground Railroad\", helped hundreds of slaves escape (as many as 60 a month), sometimes hiding them in his Philadelphia home. He kept careful records, including short biographies of the people, that contained frequent railway metaphors. He maintained correspondence with many of them, often acting as a middleman in communications between people who had escaped slavery and those left behind. He later published these accounts in the book \"The Underground Railroad: Authentic Narratives and First-Hand Accounts\" (1872), a valuable resource for historians to understand how the system worked and learn about individual ingenuity in escapes.\nAccording to Still, messages were often encoded so that they could be understood only by those active in the railroad. For example, the following message, \"I have sent via at two o'clock four large hams and two small hams\", indicated that four adults and two children were sent by train from Harrisburg to Philadelphia. The additional word \"via\" indicated that the \"passengers\" were not sent on the usual train, but rather via Reading, Pennsylvania. In this case, the authorities were tricked into going to the regular location (station) in an attempt to intercept the runaways, while Still met them at the correct station and guided them to safety. They eventually escaped either further north or to Canada, where slavery had been abolished during the 1830s.\nTo reduce the risk of infiltration, many people associated with the Underground Railroad knew only their part of the operation and not of the whole scheme. \"Conductors\" led or transported the \"passengers\" from station to station. A conductor sometimes pretended to be enslaved to enter a plantation. Once a part of a plantation, the conductor would direct the runaways to the North. Enslaved people traveled at night, about to each station. They rested, and then a message was sent to the next station to let the station master know the escapees were on their way. They would stop at the so-called \"stations\" or \"depots\" during the day and rest. The stations were often located in basements, barns, churches, or in hiding places in caves.\nThe resting spots where the freedom seekers could sleep and eat were given the code names \"stations\" and \"depots\", which were held by \"station masters\". \"Stockholders\" gave money or supplies for assistance. Using biblical references, fugitives referred to Canada as the \"Promised Land\" or \"Heaven\" and the Ohio River, which marked the boundary between slave states and free states, as the \"River Jordan\".\nTraveling conditions.\nAlthough the freedom seekers sometimes traveled on boat or train, they usually traveled on foot or by wagon, sometimes lying down, covered with hay or similar products, in groups of one to three escapees. Some groups were considerably larger. Abolitionist Charles Turner Torrey and his colleagues rented horses and wagons and often transported as many as 15 or 20 people at a time. Free and enslaved black men occupied as mariners (sailors) helped enslaved people escape from slavery by providing a ride on their ship, providing information on the safest and best escape routes, and safe locations on land, and locations of trusted people for assistance. Enslaved African-American mariners had information about slave revolts occurring in the Caribbean, and relayed this news to enslaved people they had contact with in American ports. Free and enslaved African-American mariners assisted Harriet Tubman in her rescue missions. Black mariners provided to her information about the best escape routes and helped her on her rescue missions. In New Bedford, Massachusetts, freedom seekers stowed away on ships leaving the docks with the assistance of Black and white crewmembers and hid in the ships' cargoes during their journey to freedom.\nEnslaved people living near rivers escaped on boats and canoes. In 1855, Mary Meachum, a free Black woman, attempted to help eight or nine slaves escape from slavery on the Mississippi River near St. Louis, Missouri to the free state of Illinois. To assist with the escape were white antislavery activists and an African American guide from Illinois named \"Freeman.\" However, the escape was not successful because word of the escape reached police agents and slave catchers who waited across the river on the Illinois shore. Breckenridge, Burrows and Meachum were arrested. Prior to this escape attempt, Mary Meachum and her husband John, a former slave, were agents on the Underground Railroad and helped other slaves escape from slavery crossing the Mississippi River.\nRoutes were often purposely indirect to confuse pursuers. Most escapes were by individuals or small groups; occasionally, there were mass escapes, such as with the \"Pearl\" incident. The journey was often considered particularly difficult and dangerous for women or children. Children were sometimes hard to keep quiet or were unable to keep up with a group. In addition, enslaved women were rarely allowed to leave the plantation, making it harder for them to escape in the same ways that men could. Although escaping was harder for women, some women were successful. One of the most famous and successful conductors (people who secretly traveled into slave states to rescue those seeking freedom) was Harriet Tubman, a woman who escaped slavery.\nDue to the risk of discovery, information about routes and safe havens was passed along by word of mouth, although in 1896 there is a reference to a numerical code used to encrypt messages. Southern newspapers of the day were often filled with pages of notices soliciting information about fugitive slaves and offering sizable rewards for their capture and return. Federal marshals and professional bounty hunters known as slave catchers pursued freedom seekers as far as the Canada\u2013U.S. border.\nFreedom seekers (runaway slaves) foraged, fished, and hunted for food on their journey to freedom on the Underground Railroad. With these ingredients, they prepared one-pot meals (stews), a West African cooking method. Enslaved and free Black people left food outside their front doors to provide nourishment to the freedom seekers. The meals created on the Underground Railroad became a part of the foodways of Black Americans called soul food.\nMaroons.\nThe majority of freedom seekers that escaped from slavery did not have help from an abolitionist. Although there are stories of black and white abolitionists helping freedom seekers escape from slavery, many escapes were unaided.\nOther Underground Railroad escape routes for freedom seekers were maroon communities. Maroon communities were hidden places, such as wetlands or marshes, where escaped slaves established their own independent communities. Examples of maroon communities in the United States include the Black Seminole communities in Florida, as well as groups that lived in the Great Dismal Swamp in Virginia and in the Okefenokee swamp of Georgia and Florida, among others. In the 1780s, Louisiana had a maroon community in the bayous of Saint Malo. The leader of the Saint Malo maroon community was Jean Saint Malo, a freedom seeker who escaped to live among other runaways in the swamps and bayous of Saint Malo. The population of maroons was fifty and the Spanish colonial government broke up the community and on June 19, 1784, Jean Saint Malo was executed. Colonial South Carolina had a number of maroon settlements in its marshland regions in the Lowcountry and near rivers. Maroons in South Carolina fought to maintain their freedom and prevent enslavement in Ashepoo in 1816, Williamsburg County in 1819, Georgetown in 1820, Jacksonborough in 1822, and near Marion in 1861. Historian Herbert Aptheker found evidence that fifty maroon communities existed in the United States between 1672 and 1864. The history of maroons showed how the enslaved resisted enslavement by living in free independent settlements. Historical archeologist Dan Sayer says that historians downplay the importance of maroon settlements and place valor in white involvement in the Underground Railroad, which he argues shows a racial bias, indicating a \"...reluctance to acknowledge the strength of black resistance and initiative.\"\nFreedom routes into Native American lands.\nFrom colonial America into the 19th century, Indigenous peoples of North America assisted and protected enslaved Africans journey to freedom. However, not all Indigenous communities were accepting of freedom seekers, some of whom they enslaved themselves or returned to their former enslavers. The earliest accounts of escape are from the 16th century. In 1526, Spaniards established the first European colony in the continental United States in South Carolina called San Miguel de Gualdape. The enslaved Africans revolted and historians suggest they escaped to Shakori Indigenous communities. As early as 1689, enslaved Africans fled from the South Carolina Lowcountry to Spanish Florida seeking freedom. The Seminole Nation accepted Gullah runaways (today called Black Seminoles) into their lands. This was a southern route on the Underground Railroad into Seminole Indian lands that went from Georgia and the Carolinas into Florida. In Northwest Ohio in the 18th and 19th centuries, three Indigenous/Native American nations, the Shawnee, Ottawa, and Wyandot assisted freedom seekers escape from slavery. The Ottawa people accepted and protected runaways in their villages. Other escapees were taken to Fort Malden by the Ottawa. In Upper Sandusky, Wyandot people allowed a maroon community of freedom seekers in their lands called Negro Town for four decades.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries in areas around the Chesapeake Bay and Delaware, Nanticoke people hid freedom seekers in their villages. The Nanticoke people lived in small villages near the Pocomoke River; the river rises in several forks in the Great Cypress Swamp in southern Sussex County, Delaware. African Americans escaping slavery were able to hide in swamps, and the water washed off the scent of enslaved runaways, making it difficult for dogs to track their scent. As early as the 18th century, mixed-blood communities formed. In Maryland, freedom seekers escaped to Shawnee villages located along the Potomac River. Slaveholders in Virginia and Maryland filed numerous complaints and court petitions against the Shawnee and Nanticoke for hiding freedom seekers in their villages. Odawa people also accepted freedom seekers into their villages. The Odawa transferred the runaways to the Ojibwe who escorted them to Canada. Some enslaved people who escaped slavery and fled to Native American villages stayed in their communities. White pioneers who traveled to Kentucky and the Ohio Territory saw \"Black Shawnees\" living with Indigenous people in the trans-Appalachian west. During the colonial era in New Spain and in the Seminole Nation in Florida, African Americans and Indigenous marriages occurred.\nSouth to Florida and Mexico.\nBackground.\nBeginning in the 16th century, Spaniards brought enslaved Africans to New Spain, including Mission Nombre de Dios in what would become the city of St. Augustine in Spanish Florida. Over time, free Afro-Spaniards took up various trades and occupations and served in the colonial militia. After King Charles II of Spain proclaimed Spanish Florida a safe haven for escaped slaves from British North America, they began escaping to Florida by the hundreds from as far north as New York. The Spanish established Fort Mose for free Blacks in the St. Augustine area in 1738.\nIn 1806, enslaved people arrived at the Stone Fort in Nacogdoches, Texas seeking freedom. They arrived with a forged passport from a Kentucky judge. The Spanish refused to return them back to the United States. More freedom seekers traveled through Texas the following year.\nEnslaved people were emancipated by crossing the border from the United States into Mexico, which was a Spanish colony into the nineteenth century. In the United States, enslaved people were considered property. That meant that they did not have rights to marry and they could be sold away from their partners. They also did not have rights to fight inhumane and cruel punishment. In New Spain, fugitive slaves were recognized as humans. They were allowed to join the Catholic Church and marry. They also were protected from inhumane and cruel punishment.\nDuring the War of 1812, U.S. Army general Andrew Jackson invaded Spanish Florida in part because enslaved people had run away from plantations in the Carolinas and Georgia to Florida. Some of the runaways joined the Black Seminoles who later moved to Mexico. However, Mexico sent mixed signals on its position against slavery. Sometimes it allowed enslaved people to be returned to slavery and it allowed Americans to move into Spanish territorial property in order to populate the North, where the Americans would then establish cotton plantations, bringing enslaved people to work the land.\nIn 1829, Mexican president Vicente Guerrero (who was a mixed race black man) formally abolished slavery in Mexico. Freedom seekers from Southern plantations in the Deep South, particularly from Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas, escaped slavery and headed for Mexico. At that time, Texas was part of Mexico. The Texas Revolution, initiated in part to legalize slavery, resulted in the formation of the Republic of Texas in 1836. Following the Battle of San Jacinto, there were some enslaved people who withdrew from the Houston area with the Mexican army, seeing the troops as a means to escape slavery. When Texas joined the Union in 1845, it was a slave state and the Rio Grande became the international border with Mexico.\nPressure between free and slave states deepened as Mexico abolished slavery and western states joined the Union as free states. As more free states were added to the Union, the lesser the influence of slave state representatives in Congress.\nSlave states and slave hunters.\nThe Southern Underground Railroad went through slave states, lacking the abolitionist societies and the organized system of the north. People who spoke out against slavery were subject to mobs, physical assault, and being hanged. There were slave catchers who looked for runaway slaves. There were never more than a few hundred free blacks in Texas, which meant that free blacks did not feel safe in the state. The network to freedom was informal, random, and dangerous.\nU.S. military forts, established along the Rio Grande border during the Mexican\u2013American War of the 1840s, captured and returned fleeing enslaved people to their slaveholders.\nThe Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 made it a criminal offense to aid fleeing enslaved people in free states. Similarly, the United States government wanted to enact a treaty with Mexico to facilitate the capture and return of escaped slaves in that country. Mexico, however, continued its practice of allowing any slave who crossed its border to be free. Slave catchers, though, continued to cross the southern border into Mexico and illegally capture black people and return them to slavery. A group of slave hunters became the Texas Rangers.\nRoutes.\nThousands of freedom seekers traveled along a network from the southern United States to Texas and ultimately Mexico. Southern enslaved people generally traveled across \"unforgiving country\" on foot or horseback while pursued by lawmen and slave hunters. Some stowed away on ferries bound for a Mexican port from New Orleans, Louisiana and Galveston, Texas. There were some who transported cotton to Brownsville, Texas on wagons and then crossed into Mexico at Matamoros.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSometimes someone would come 'long and try to get us to run up north and be free. We used to laugh at that.\n\u2014Former slave Felix Haywood, interviewed in 1937 for the federal Slave Narrative Project.\nMany traveled through North Carolina, Arkansas, Alabama, Louisiana, or Mississippi toward Texas and ultimately Mexico. People fled slavery from Indian Territory (now Oklahoma). Black Seminoles traveled on a southwestern route from Florida into Mexico.\nGoing overland meant that the last 150 miles or so were traversed through the difficult and extremely hot terrain of the Nueces Strip located between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande. There was little shade and a lack of potable water in this brush country. Escapees were more likely to survive the trip if they had a horse and a gun.\nThe National Park Service identified a route from Natchitoches, Louisiana to Monclova, Mexico in 2010 that is roughly the southern Underground Railroad path. It is also believed that \"El Camino Real de los Tejas\" was a path for freedom. It was made a National Historic Trail by President George W. Bush in 2004.\nAssistance.\nSome journeyed on their own without assistance, and others were helped by people along the southern Underground Railroad. Assistance included guidance, directions, shelter, and supplies.\nBlack people, black and white couples, and anti-slavery German immigrants provided support, but most of the help came from Mexican laborers. So much so that enslavers came to distrust any Mexican, and a law was enacted in Texas that forbade Mexicans from talking to enslaved people. Mexican migrant workers developed relationships with enslaved black workers whom they worked with. They offered guidance, such as what it would be like to cross the border, and empathy. Having realized the ways in which Mexicans were helping enslaved people to escape, slaveholders and residents of Texan towns pushed people out of the town, whipped them in public, or lynched them.\nSome border officials helped enslaved people crossing into Mexico. In Monclova, Mexico a border official took up a collection in the town for a family in need of food, clothing, and money to continue on their journey south and out of reach of slave hunters. Once they crossed the border, some Mexican authorities helped former enslaved people from being returned to the United States by slave hunters.\nFreedom seekers that were taken on ferries to Mexican ports were aided by Mexican ship captains, one of whom was caught in Louisiana and indicted for helping enslaved people escape.\nKnowing the repercussions of running away or being caught helping someone runaway, people were careful to cover their tracks, and public and personal records about fugitive slaves are scarce. In greater supply are records by people who promoted slavery or attempted to catch fugitive slaves. More than 2,500 escapes are documented by the Texas Runaway Slave Project at Stephen F. Austin State University.\nSouthern freedom seekers.\nAdvertisements were placed in newspapers offering rewards for the return of their \"property\". Slave catchers traveled through Mexico. There were Black Seminoles, or \"Los Mascogos\" who lived in northern Mexico who provided armed resistance.\nSam Houston, president of the Republic of Texas, was the slaveholder to Tom who ran away. He headed to Texas and once there he enlisted in the Mexican military.\nOne enslaved man was branded with the letter \"R\" on each side of his cheek after a failed attempt to escape slavery. He tried again in the winter of 1819, leaving the cotton plantation of his enslaver on horseback. With four others, they traveled southwest to Mexico at the risk of being attacked by hostile Native Americans, apprehended by slave catchers, or attacked by \"horse-eating alligators\".\nMany people did not make it to Mexico. In 1842, a Mexican man and a black woman left Jackson County, Texas on two horses, but they were caught at the Lavaca River. The wife, an enslaved woman, was valuable to her owner so she was returned to slavery. Her husband, possibly a farm laborer or an indentured servant, was immediately lynched.\nFugitive slaves changed their names in Mexico. They married into Mexican families and relocated further south of the American-Mexican border. All of these factors makes it hard to trace the whereabouts of the formerly enslaved people. A database at Stephen F. Austin State University has a database of runaway slave advertisements as part of The Texas Runaway Slave Project. The Works Progress Administration during the Great Depression initiated a Federal Writers' Project to document slave narratives, including those who settled in Mexico. One of them was Felix Haywood, who found freedom when he crossed the Rio Grande.\nRio Grande stations.\nTwo families, the Webbers and the Jacksons, lived along the Rio Grande and helped people escape slavery. The husbands were white and the wives were black women who had been formerly enslaved. It is not known if Nathaniel Jackson purchased the freedom of Matilda Hicks and her family, but in the early 1860s they moved to Hidalgo county, where they settled and lived as a family. He was a white southerner and she was an enslaved woman, who had been childhood sweethearts in Alabama. He was the son of her slaveholder, who helped a group of seven families in 1857 and others cross into Mexico.\nSilvia Hector Webber was born enslaved in West Florida and in 1819 was sold to a slaveholder in Clark County, Arkansas. The slaveholders' son, John Cryer, illegally brought Silvia to Mexican Texas in 1828, four years after Mexico had deemed the slave trade into Mexican territory against the law. Silvia, however, with the help of John Webber secured her and her 3 children's freedom papers in 1834. Together Silvia and John lived an antislavery life and often harbored fugitives from slavery in their ranch and house. Silvia was known to transport freedom seekers, on a ferry she licensed at her ranch, onto freedom in Mexico.\nJohn Ferdinand Webber, born in Vermont, lived along the Rio Grande with his wife, Silvia Hector Webber, and together were known to have helped enslaved people cross the Rio Grande. The Jacksons and Webbers, who both owned licensed ferry service, were well known among runaways.\nArrival in Mexico.\nBlack freedom seekers arrived in Mexico with uncertain fates due to Mexican immigration policy. The law required that all persons entering the country and seeking to settle obtain a visa. Formerly enslaved Africans could not get a visa because the application required documentation from the country of origin. Although the visa policy did create barriers in obtaining a legal stay and increased the chances of recapture from slave catchers up until 1857, when it was eliminated, becoming members of civic society, such as joining the Mexican military, becoming godparents to Mexican children, and marrying into families, offered a unique citizenship status that the Mexican government recognized. \nMexican people also helped formerly enslaved Africans by offering them \u201chospitality\u201d into Mexico and protecting them from recapture. In one of many instances,\u00a0Mexican officials and civilians in Piedras Negras, Mexico, rejected fugitive slave laws and \u201cexpelled\u201d American slave catchers who attempted to recapture freed Africans. When formerly enslaved Africans could be deported or recaptured, Mexican people would rally behind them and advocate for their legal stay. In most cases, formerly enslaved Africans were recognized as citizens by the Mexican government, which allowed them to remain in Mexico at most. \nColonies.\nThere were abolitionists from the north who petitioned the Mexican government to establish colonies for free and runaway blacks. Benjamin Lundy, a Quaker, lobbied for a colony to be established in what is now Texas during the early 1830s, but he was unable to do so when Texas legalized slavery when it separated from Mexico and became the Republic of Texas (1836). Black Seminoles successfully petitioned for land and established a colony in 1852. The land is still owned by their descendants.\nScholarship.\nThe Texas Runaway Slave Project, located in Nacogdoches at the Stephen F. Austin State University, has researched runaway advertisements that appeared in 19,000 editions of newspapers from the mid-19th century.\nAlice L. Baumgartner has studied the prevalence of people who fled slavery from the Southern states to Mexico. She published \"South to Freedom: Runaway Slaves to Mexico and the Road to the Civil War\". Thomas Mareite completed a doctoral dissertation at Leiden University on the social and political experiences of enslaved people who escaped from the U.S. South to Mexico, titled \"Conditional Freedom: Free Soil and Fugitive Slaves from the U.S. South to Mexico's Northeast, 1803\u20131861\". Roseann Bacha-Garza, of the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, has managed historical archeology projects and has researched the incidence of enslaved people who fled to Mexico. Mekala Audain has also published a chapter titled \"A Scheme to Desert: The Louisiana Purchase and Freedom Seekers in the Louisiana-Texas Borderlands, 1804\u20131806\" in the edited volume \"In Search of Liberty: African American Internationalism in the Nineteenth-Century Atlantic World.\" Maria Esther Hammack completed her doctoral dissertation on the subject in 2021 at the University of Texas at Austin.\n\"Reverse Underground Railroad\".\nFreedom seekers were not the only black people at risk from slave catchers. With demand for slaves high in the Deep South as cotton was planted, strong, healthy blacks in their prime working and reproductive years were seen and treated as highly valuable commodities. Both former slaves and free blacks were sometimes kidnapped and sold into slavery, as in the well-documented case of Solomon Northup, a New York-born free black who was kidnapped by Southern slavers while visiting Washington, DC. \"Certificates of freedom\", also known as \"free papers\", were signed and notarized statements attesting to the free status of individual Blacks. They could easily be destroyed or stolen, so they provided little protection.\nSome buildings, such as the Crenshaw House in far-southeastern Illinois, are known sites where free blacks were sold into slavery, known as the \"Reverse Underground Railroad\".\nAmerican Revolutionary War routes (1775 to 1783).\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, enslaved people escaped from bondage and fled to British forces, Canada, Florida, and Native American lands. The last Royal Governor of Virginia, Lord Dunmore, planned to weaken American colonists by issuing a proclamation in 1775 that gave freedom to the enslaved who escaped their American colonial masters and joined the British. According to a PBS and National Park Service article this proclamation resulted in an estimated 100,000 freedom seekers escaping during the war. American colonial officers received numerous requests for the return of escaped slaves. In November of 1775, Dunmore started a military unit of 300 freedom seekers in North Carolina called \"the Ethiopian Regiment.\" In Virginia 800 freedom seekers joined the regiment. American colonists tried to deter freedom seekers from joining the British by sending slave patrols to stop runaways, and published newspapers and editorials stating the British will not act on their promise of granting freedom to runaway slaves. Thousands of free and enslaved Black people fought with the British in hopes to gain their freedom were called Black Loyalists. Black Loyalists who served with the British for one year received Certificates of Freedom and were taken to Caribbean British colonies to live as free people in the Bahamas and Jamaica, and others were taken north to Canada. Between 1783 and 1785, 3,000 enslaved and free Black Americans settled in the British colony of Nova Scotia, Canada. Other enslaved people ran away to join the Continental Army or Patriot militias. Black Americans who fought in the Continental Army were called Black Patriots, and some did earn their freedom through their military service. Some enslaved runaways took the war as an opportunity to escape using their enslaver's horse.\nWar of 1812 routes.\nDuring the War of 1812, 700 enslaved people in Maryland escaped from slavery. Before the war, freedom seekers escaped to the Michigan Territory by crossing the Detroit River. Over the years the numbers of escaped African Americans grew in the territory. Territorial governor William Hull offered Peter Denison, an enslaved man, \"a written license\" allowing him to form a militia company of free Blacks and escaped slaves. The men were armed and trained but Hull disbanded the militia. Some of the Black men in the militia escaped from slavery in British Canada. In the 18th century, slavery was practiced in Canada, and by 1793 it was phased out, but some Black Canadians remained enslaved. During the late 18th century and early 19th century, the route of freedom seekers went south beginning in British Canada to their final destination in free American territories in the Old Northwest. By the War of 1812, slave laws in British Canada prohibited the continuation of slavery. This changed the final destinations of freedom seekers in the United States to look north to Canada to obtain their freedom. In the summer of 1812, Hull declared that enslaved runaways and free Blacks in the Michigan Territory were free citizens, and when war broke out with Britain, Black citizens of Michigan were armed to fight against the British. After his military service, Peter Denison and his family left Michigan and relocated north to Canada.\nBlack Refugees.\nIn April of 1814, the British Army promised freedom to enslaved Black Americans who joined the British military or who choose freedom in British colonies. In the Chesapeake Region of Virginia and Maryland and coastal areas of Georgia, about 4,000 enslaved Black Americans escaped from slavery. Within the number of 4,000 freedom seekers who escaped, 2,000 sailed to Nova Scotia between September 1813 and August 1816 on naval vessels and private ships chartered by the British and were taken to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, Canada and 400 freedom seekers were taken to Trinidad in the Caribbean. The Black people who settled in British Canada are known as Black refugees who escaped slavery in the United States and sided with the British during the War of 1812.\nMerikens.\nThe Merikins were formerly enslaved Black Americans that escaped slavery and joined the British military's all-Black unit of Colonial Marines during the War of 1812. When the war ended, they were taken to numerous British colonies to live as free people. About 700 Colonial Marines were taken to Trinidad in the Caribbean. Although slavery was legal in Trinidad, they were guaranteed protection under commander Robert Mitchell. The formerly Black Americans called themselves Merikens, \"an abbreviated word for 'Americans'\" and started new lives in Trinidad in six Company Villages in the southern part of the island. The Trinidadian government provided the Merikens with food, rations, clothing, and tools needed to build their homes, and they grew their own food of corn, pumpkin, plantain, and rice.\nThe \"Saltwater Railroad\" freedom route.\nFrom 1821 to 1861, freedom seekers escaped from the Southeastern slave states of South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida to the Bahamas on a secret route called the \"Saltwater Railroad.\" Prior to 1821, In Florida, a Spanish colony that historians know as Spanish Florida, enslaved runaways were declared free under Spanish laws. However, by 1821 Florida was under the control of the United States. Free Blacks in Florida feared they might be re-enslaved under American laws and hundreds of free people escaped to the Bahamas. From 1821 to 1825, the Southern beaches of Florida provided a safe haven for freedom seekers looking to escape on boats that departed from Florida going to the island. Other freedom seekers escaped by making their own canoes and boats and sailed to the Bahamas unaided.\nBy 1825, the construction of the Cape Florida Lighthouse (in present-day Miami-Dade County) was a setback to enslaved runaways looking to escape at night on boats off the Florida coast due to the bright light that was helpful to guide sailors off the Florida Reef. The Bahamas attracted enslaved people because there was a community of Black Seminoles and other escapees. The Bahamas was a British controlled island where under local imperial practices Black people owned land, had access to education, and were legally married. In addition, in 1825, Britain declared that any escapees reaching British controlled lands were free. This declaration resulted in hundreds of more slaves in the United States to escape to the island. By the 1830s, historians estimate that at least 6,000 freedom seekers made their way to the Bahamas, and by the 1840s, the Bahamas had more enslaved runaways than any British colony in the Caribbean. The actions of Britain to liberate enslaved Americans strained political relationships with the United States. In 1841 on the slave ship, \"Creole\", a slave revolt occurred. The Creole departed from Virginia with over one hundred enslaved people heading to New Orleans, Louisiana. The enslaved revolted and took control of the ship and sailed it to Nassau in the Bahamas. This revolt sparked international attention; the escapees were charged but later released.\nFugitive Slave Act of 1850.\nUnder the terms of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, when suspected fugitives were seized and brought to a special magistrate known as a commissioner, they had no right to a jury trial and could not testify on their own behalf. Between 1850 and 1860, 343 freedom seekers were taken before a commissioner and 332 were returned to slavery. Commissioners received ten dollars when they ruled in favor of a slaveholder and received five dollars if they ruled in a slave's favor. Technically, they were not accused of a crime. The marshal or private slave-catcher needed only to swear an oath to acquire a writ of \"replevin\" for the return of property. A fine of 1,000 dollars was charged to individuals who assisted a freedom seeker's escape.\nCongress was dominated by Southern congressmen because the population of their states was bolstered by the inclusion of three-fifths of the number of slaves in population totals. They passed the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 because of frustration at having fugitives from slavery helped by the public and even official institutions outside the South. In some parts of the North, slave catchers needed police protection.\nAccording to author Andrew Delbanco, \"Northerners began to realize slavery wasn't just a Southern issue after the passage of the 1850 law.\" Prior to the American Civil War, the nation was divided on how to deal with enslaved runaways. The Fugitive Slave Act further divided the nation as Southern slaveholders now had political power to return freedom seekers who escaped to the North and return them to the South, and Northerners were required by law to assist in the return of runaways.\nSome freedom seekers were arrested under the fugitive slave law; they were, Anthony Burns, John Price, Shadrach Minkins, Stephen Pembroke and his two sons, and others. Abolitionists used these cases to push the question of slavery at the center of national politics; they argued that enslaved people's resistance to enslavement through numerous escapes advocates the abolition of slavery.\nA few weeks after the fugitive slave law passed, Black populations in Northern cities declined due to formerly enslaved African Americans migrating to Canada in fear they might be captured and re-enslaved. On August 1, 1834, Britain abolished slavery in Canada and throughout the British Empire, making Canada a safer choice for American slaves and free Blacks seeking freedom. In Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania most of the Black waiters working in the city's hotel fled to Canada. Columbia, Pennsylvania's Black population decreased by half. Between mid-February and early March of 1851, one hundred free African Americans and fugitives fled the city of Boston. Abolitionists in Detroit, Michigan guided 1,200 free people to Canada. By December of 1850, it is estimated that 3,000 African Americans took refuge in Canada.\nAmerican Civil War routes (1861 to 1865).\nDuring the American Civil War, the Union Army captured Southern towns in Beaufort, South Carolina, St. Simons Island, Georgia, and other areas and setup encampments. As a result, enslaved people on nearby plantations escaped from slavery and ran to Union lines for freedom and to sign up to fight in the Union Army. American historian Eric Foner explains in his book, \"Gateway to Freedom: The Hidden History of the Underground Railroad,\" that: \"...the Civil War fundamentally transformed the opportunities available for slaves seeking freedom. As soon as federal troops which in Maryland meant the very beginning of the war, slaves sought refuge with the Union...\" Susie King Taylor was born enslaved in Liberty County, Georgia and escaped from slavery with her family to Union lines in St. Catherine's Island, Georgia with the help of her uncle who put her on a federal gunboat plying the waters near Confederate-held Fort Pulaski. In addition, thousands of enslaved Black Americans escaped slavery and fled to Union lines in the South Carolina Sea Islands. In 1861, Jarvis Harvey escaped from slavery and sailed to Union lines at Fortress Monroe, Virginia. Robert Sutton was born enslaved in Alberti Plantation along Florida's northeastern boundary with Georgia, and during the Civil War he escaped from slavery by making a canoe and sailed out to Port Royal, South Carolina where Black Americans were freed from slavery after the Battle of Port Royal and signed up to fight in the 1st South Carolina Volunteer Infantry Regiment. Prince Rivers escaped from slavery and found freedom in Union lines in Port Royal, South Carolina after his enslaver fled Beaufort upon arrival of the Union Navy and Army. Rivers later signed up to fight in the 1st South Carolina Volunteer Infantry Regiment. On May 12, 1862, Robert Smalls and sixteen enslaved people escaped from slavery during the Civil War on a Confederate ship and sailed it out the Charleston Harbor to a Union blockade in South Carolina.\nUnderground Railroad agents shifted their efforts and escape plans around Union encampments because large numbers of freedom seekers escaped to Union occupied territories and not the North for their freedom. For example, the Kansas territory became a state in 1861, and slavery was prohibited in the state of Kansas. During the Civil War, abolitionists, free staters, and Jayhawkers helped to emancipate freedom seekers who escaped slavery from Missouri (a slave state that bordered Kansas) and brought them back to Kansas as contraband of war. An article from the National Park Service explains how the Civil War shifted the escape routes and final destinations of freedom seekers: \"But, no sooner had Union troops appeared in the border states, on the islands off the Atlantic coast, and in the lower Mississippi Valley, than thousands of blacks took the opportunity to liberate themselves by absconding to the Yankee (Union) camps. A first effort to send them back to their masters was soon abandoned. The runaways became 'contraband,' or confiscated property of war. Many of them quickly found work within the Union lines and members of their families began to join them.\"\nThe word contraband was given to enslaved runaways by Union General Benjamin Butler. In 1861, three enslaved men in Norfolk, Virginia, Shepard Mallory, Frank Baker, and James Townsend, escaped from slavery and fled to Union lines at Fort Monroe. Butler refused to act on the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 that required the return of escaped slaves to their enslavers. Instead, Butler kept the three men because they were \"property\" of the Confederate States and not the United States where the Fugitive Slave Act was passed and enforced. An article from the National Trust for Historical Preservation explains: \"...Butler realized the absurdity of honoring the Fugitive Slave Law, which dictated that he return the three runaways to their owner. They had been helping to construct a Confederate battery that threatened his fort. Why send them back and bolster that effort? So the general struck upon a politically expedient solution: Because Virginia had seceded from the Union, he argued, he no longer had a constitutional obligation to return the runaways. Rather, in keeping with military law governing war between nations, he would seize the three runaways as contraband\u2014property to be used by the enemy against the Union.\"\nAs the Civil War continued, areas of the South and border states became refugee camps for freedom seekers. Washington D.C. was a large refugee area during the war. On April 16, 1862, Congress passed the Compensated Emancipation Act that abolished slavery in the District of Columbia. After the passage of this act, freedom seekers from Virginia and Maryland escaped and found freedom in the District of Columbia, and by 1863, there were 10,000 refugees (former runaway slaves) in the city and their numbers doubled the Black population in Washington, D.C. During the war, enslaved people living near Beaufort County, South Carolina escaped from slavery and fled to Union lines in Beaufort because African Americans in the county were freed from slavery after the Battle of Port Royal on November 7, 1861 when the plantation owners fled the area after the arrival of the Union Navy and Army. As a result, a refugee camp was started to provide safety and protection to freedom seekers. In the beginning there were sixty to seventy runaways, but as time progressed the numbers of refugees grew to 320. The Union Army did not have enough food rations and clothes to take care of them. Free men, women, and children in Beaufort's refugee camp were paid to work for the Union as cooks, laundress, servants, and carpenters. Union forces occupied Corinth, Mississippi and slaves from nearby plantations escaped to Union lines. To accommodate the freedom seekers, general Grenville M. Dodge established the Corinth Contraband Camp with homes, schools, hospitals, churches, and paid employment for African Americans. It was estimated that Corinth Contraband Camp provided a new life for 6,000 former slaves.\nUnion Navy and Emancipation.\nThe Secretary of the Navy during the Civil War was Gideon Welles and in September of 1861 Welles declared that enslaved and free African Americans could enlist at the lowest rating of \"Boy\" in the Union Navy. Union vessels located in Southern ports received numbers of runaways who fled slavery by way of small boats to vessels docked in Union controlled territories. Benjamin Gould recorded in his journal that by September 22, 1862, eight freedom seekers had arrived at the USS \"Cambridge\" and that 20 more runaways arrived two weeks later. One of the escaped freedom seekers listed was William Gould, who later joined the Union (U.S.) Navy and fought against the Confederacy from 1862 to 1865. The Union vessel USS Hartford helped to liberate enslaved people while going up the Mississippi River. Bartholomew Diggins, who served aboard the vessel, recalled the events of liberating the enslaved. He said: \"we picked [up] many negroes [sic] slaves who would come out to the ships in small boats at every place we anchored.\" Other Union vessels that helped to liberate the enslaved were the USS Essex and USS Iroquois. A few Union soldiers and sailors returned escaped slaves back to their enslavers. By the end of the war, 179,000 formerly enslaved and free Black Americans had fought in the Union Army, and 21,000 had fought in the Union Navy.\nFrom the American Revolutionary War, through the War of 1812, and then the American Civil War, the Underground Railroad contributed to hundreds and sometimes thousands of escapes by African Americans.\nLegal and political.\nWhen frictions between North and South culminated in the Civil War, many Black people, both enslaved and free, fought for the Union Army. Following Union victory in the Civil War, on December 6, 1865, the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution outlawed slavery except as punishment for a crime. Following its passage, in some cases the Underground Railroad operated in the opposite direction, as people who had escaped to Canada returned to the United States.\nCriticism.\nFrederick Douglass was a writer and orator who had escaped slavery. He wrote critically of the attention drawn to the ostensibly secret Underground Railroad in his first autobiography, \"Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave\" (1845):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have never approved of the very public manner in which some of our western friends have conducted what they call the \"Underground Railroad\", but which I think, by their open declarations, has been made most emphatically the \"upperground railroad.\"\nHe went on to say that, although he honored the movement, he felt that the efforts at publicity served more to enlighten the slave-owners than the slaves, making them more watchful and making it more difficult for future slaves to escape.\nArrival in Canada.\nBritish North America (present-day Canada) was a desirable destination, as its long border gave many points of access, it was farther from slave catchers, and it was beyond the reach of the United States' Fugitive Slave Acts. Further, slavery ended decades earlier in Canada than in the United States. Britain banned the institution of slavery in present-day Canada (and in most British colonies) in 1833, though the practice of slavery in Canada had effectively ended already early in the 19th century through case law, due to court decisions resulting from litigation on behalf of slaves seeking manumission.\nMost former enslaved, reaching Canada by boat across Lake Erie and Lake Ontario, settled in Ontario. More than 30,000 people were said to have escaped there via the network during its 20-year peak period, although U.S. census figures account for only 6,000. Numerous fugitives' stories are documented in the 1872 book \"The Underground Railroad Records\" by William Still, an abolitionist who then headed the Philadelphia Vigilance Committee.\nEstimates vary widely, but at least 30,000 slaves, and potentially more than 100,000, escaped to Canada via the Underground Railroad. The largest group settled in Upper Canada (Ontario), called Canada West from 1841. Numerous Black Canadian communities developed in Southern Ontario. These were generally in the triangular region bounded by Niagara Falls, Toronto, and Windsor. Several rural villages made up mostly of people freed from slavery were established in Kent and Essex counties in Ontario.\nFort Malden, in Amherstburg, Ontario, was deemed the \"chief place of entry\" for escaped slaves seeking to enter Canada. The abolitionist Levi Coffin, who was known for aiding over 2,000 fugitives to safety, supported this choice. He described Fort Malden as \"the great landing place, the principle terminus of the underground railroad of the west.\" After 1850, approximately thirty people a day were crossing over to Fort Malden by steamboat. The \"Sultana\" was one of the ships, making \"frequent round trips\" between Great Lakes ports. Its captain, C.W. Appleby, a celebrated mariner, facilitated the conveyance of several fugitives from various Lake Erie ports to Fort Malden. Other fugitives at Fort Malden had been assisted by William Wells Brown, himself someone who had escaped slavery. He found employment on a Lake Erie steamer and transported numerous fugitives from Cleveland to Ontario by way of Buffalo or Detroit. \"It is well known,\" he tells us, \"That a great number of fugitives make their escape to Canada, by way of Cleaveland. \"[sic]\" ...The friends of the slave, knowing that I would transport them without charge, never failed to have a delegation when the boat arrived at Cleaveland. \"[sic]\" I have sometimes had four or five on board at one time.\"\nAnother important destination was Nova Scotia, which was first settled by Black Loyalists during the American Revolution and then by Black Refugees during the War of 1812 (\"see Black Nova Scotians\"). Important Black settlements also developed in other parts of British North America (now parts of Canada). These included Lower Canada (present-day Quebec) and Vancouver Island, where Governor James Douglas encouraged Black immigration because of his opposition to slavery. He also hoped a significant Black community would form a bulwark against those who wished to unite the island with the United States.\nUpon arriving at their destinations, many freedom seekers were disappointed, as life in Canada was difficult. While not at risk from slave catchers due to being in a different country, racial discrimination was still widespread. Many of the new arrivals had to compete with mass European immigration for jobs, and overt racism was common. For example, in reaction to Black Loyalists being settled in eastern Canada by the Crown, the city of Saint John, New Brunswick, amended its charter in 1785 specifically to exclude Blacks from practicing a trade, selling goods, fishing in the harbor, or becoming freemen; these provisions stood until 1870.\nWith the outbreak of the Civil War in the U.S., many black refugees left Canada to enlist in the Union Army. While some later returned to Canada, many remained in the United States. Thousands of others returned to the American South after the war ended. The desire to reconnect with friends and family was strong, and most were hopeful about the changes emancipation and Reconstruction would bring.\nFolklore.\nSince the 1980s, claims have arisen that quilt designs were used to signal and direct enslaved people to escape routes and assistance. According to advocates of the quilt theory, ten quilt patterns were used to direct enslaved people to take particular actions. The quilts were placed one at a time on a fence as a means of nonverbal communication to alert escaping slaves. The code had a dual meaning: first to signal enslaved people to prepare to escape, and second to give clues and indicate directions on the journey.\nThe quilt design theory is disputed. The first published work documenting an oral history source was in 1999, and the first publication of this theory is believed to be a 1980 children's book. Quilt historians and scholars of pre-Civil War (1820\u20131860) America have disputed this legend. There is no contemporary evidence of any sort of quilt code, and quilt historians such as Pat Cummings and Barbara Brackman have raised serious questions about the idea. In addition, Underground Railroad historian Giles Wright has published a pamphlet debunking the quilt code.\nSimilarly, some popular, nonacademic sources claim that spirituals and other songs, such as \"Steal Away\" or \"Follow the Drinking Gourd\", contained coded information and helped individuals navigate the railroad. They have offered little evidence to support their claims. Scholars tend to believe that while the slave songs may certainly have expressed hope for deliverance from the sorrows of this world, these songs did not present literal help for runaway slaves.\nThe Underground Railroad inspired cultural works. For example, \"Song of the Free\", written in 1860 about a man fleeing slavery in Tennessee by escaping to Canada, was composed to the tune of \"Oh! Susanna\". Every stanza ends with a reference to Canada as the land \"where colored men are free\". Slavery in Upper Canada (now Ontario) was outlawed in 1793; in 1819, John Robinson, the Attorney General of Upper Canada, declared that by residing in Canada, black residents were set free, and that Canadian courts would protect their freedom. Slavery in Canada as a whole had been in rapid decline after an 1803 court ruling, and was finally abolished outright in 1834.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNational Underground Railroad Network.\nFollowing upon legislation passed in 1990 for the National Park Service to perform a special resource study of the Underground Railroad, in 1997, the 105th Congress introduced and subsequently passed H.R. 1635 \u2013 National Underground Railroad Network to Freedom Act of 1998, which President Bill Clinton signed into law that year. This act authorized the United States National Park Service to establish the National Underground Railroad Network to Freedom program to identify associated sites, as well as preserve them and popularize the Underground Railroad and stories of people involved in it. The National Park Service has designated many sites within the network, posted stories about people and places, sponsors an essay contest, and holds a national conference about the Underground Railroad in May or June each year.\nThe Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Historical Park, which includes Underground Railroad routes in three counties of Maryland's Eastern Shore and Harriet Tubman's birthplace, was created by President Barack Obama under the Antiquities Act on March 25, 2013. Its sister park, the Harriet Tubman National Historical Park in Auburn, New York, was established on January 10, 2017, and focuses on the later years of Tubman's life as well as her involvement with the Underground Railroad and the abolition movement.\nInternational Underground Railroad Month.\nThe month of September was designated International Underground Railroad Month, because September was the month Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass escaped from slavery.\nIn popular culture.\nMusic.\nUnderground Railroad was a company created by Tupac Shakur, Big D the Impossible, Shock G, Pee Wee, Jeremy, Raw Fusion and Live Squad with the purpose of promoting and helping young black women and men with creating records, allowing them to initiate and develop their musical careers.\nComics.\nIn \"Big Jim and the White Boy\", David F. Walker and Marcus Kwame Anderson's upcoming graphic novel retelling of Mark Twain's \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\", Big Jim and Huck become Underground Railroad agents as they journey through Civil War-era United States to rescue the former's enslaved family.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32191", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32191", "title": "Patriot Act", "text": "2001 United States anti-terrorism law\nThe USA PATRIOT Act (commonly known as the Patriot Act) is a landmark Act of the United States Congress, signed into law by President George W. Bush. The formal name of the statute is the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT) Act of 2001, and the commonly used short name is a contrived acronym that is embedded in the name set forth in the statute.\nThe Patriot Act was enacted following the September 11 attacks and the 2001 anthrax attacks with the stated goal of tightening U.S. national security, particularly as it related to foreign terrorism. In general, the act included three main provisions:\nThe law is extremely controversial due to its authorization of indefinite detention without trial of immigrants, and due to the permission given to law enforcement to search property and records without the owner's consent or knowledge. Since its passage, several legal challenges have been brought against the act, and federal courts have ruled that a number of provisions are unconstitutional.\nIt contains many sunset provisions beginning December 31, 2005, approximately four years after its passage. Before the sunset date, an extension was passed for four years which kept most of the law intact. In May 2011, President Barack Obama signed the PATRIOT Sunset Extensions Act of 2011, which extended three provisions. These provisions were modified and extended until 2019 by the USA Freedom Act, passed in 2015. In 2020, efforts to extend the provisions were not passed by the House of Representatives, and as such, these provisions have expired.\nHistory.\nThe Patriot Act was enacted in direct response to the September 11 attacks on the United States, and the 2001 anthrax attacks, with the stated goal of dramatically strengthening national security. On October 23, 2001, U.S. Representative Jim Sensenbrenner (R-WI) introduced House bill H.R. 3162, which incorporated provisions from a previously-sponsored House bill, and a Senate bill introduced earlier in the month. The next day, October 24, the Act passed the House by a vote of 357\u201366, with Democrats comprising the overwhelming majority of \"no\"-votes. The three Republicans voting \"no\" were Robert Ney of Ohio, Butch Otter of Idaho, and Ron Paul of Texas. On October 25, the Act passed the Senate with a vote of 98\u20131. Russ Feingold (D-WI) voted \"no\". On October 26, then US President George Bush signed the Patriot Act into law.\nOpponents of the law have criticized its provision for indefinite detention of immigrants; permission to law enforcement to search a home or business without the owner's or the occupant's consent or knowledge under certain circumstances; the expanded use of National Security Letters, which allows the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to search telephone, email, and financial records without a court order; and the expanded access of law enforcement agencies to business records, including library and financial records. Since its passage, several court challenges have been brought against the act, and federal courts have ruled that a number of provisions are unconstitutional.\nMany of the act's provisions were set to expire on December 31, 2005, approximately four years after its enactment. In the months preceding the sunset date, supporters of the act pushed to make those provisions permanent, while critics sought to revise various sections to enhance civil liberties protections. In July 2005, the U.S. Senate passed a reauthorization bill with substantial changes to several of the act's sections, while the House reauthorization bill kept most of the act's original language. The two bills were then reconciled in a conference committee criticized by senators from both the Republican and Democratic parties for ignoring civil liberty concerns.\nThe bill, which removed most of the changes from the Senate version, passed Congress on March 2, 2006, and was signed by President Bush on March 9 and 10 of that year.\nOn May 11, 2012, President Barack Obama signed the PATRIOT Sunsets Extension Act of 2011, a four-year extension of three key provisions in the Act: roving wiretaps, searches of business records, and conducting surveillance of \"lone wolves\" (individuals suspected of terrorist-related activities not linked to terrorist groups).\nAfter reauthorization bills failed to pass Congress, parts of the Patriot Act expired on June 1, 2015. The USA Freedom Act, which became law on June 2, 2015, reenacted these expired sections through 2019. However, Section 215 of the law was amended to disallow the National Security Agency (NSA) to continue its mass phone data collection program. Instead, phone companies will retain the data and the NSA can obtain information about targeted individuals with a federal search warrant.\nIn November 2019, the renewal of the Patriot Act was included in the stop-gap government funding bill. The expired provisions required renewal by March 15, 2020. The Senate passed a 77-day extension in March 2020, but the House of Representatives did not pass the legislation before departing for recess on March 27, 2020. Instead, the Patriot Act was split into two measures as a means of explaining to the public that the Patriot Act would no longer openly be in effect.\nLegislative history.\nFinal House vote:\nFinal Senate vote:\nTitles.\nTitle I: Enhancing domestic security against terrorism.\nTitle I of the Patriot Act authorizes measures to enhance the ability of domestic security services to prevent terrorism. The title established a fund for counter-terrorist activities and increased funding for the Terrorist Screening Center which is administered by the FBI. The military was authorized to provide assistance in some situations that involve weapons of mass destruction when so requested by the Attorney General. The National Electronic Crime Task Force was expanded, along with the President's authority and abilities in cases of terrorism. The title also condemned the discrimination against Arab and Muslim Americans that happened soon after the September 11 terrorist attacks. The impetus for many of the provisions came from earlier bills, for instance the condemnation of discrimination was originally proposed by Senator Tom Harkin (D-IA) in an amendment to the \"Combatting Terrorism Act of 2001\", though in a different form. It originally included \"the prayer of Cardinal Theodore McCarrick, the Archbishop of Washington in a Mass on September 12, 2001 for our Nation and the victims in the immediate aftermath of the terrorist hijackings and attacks in New York City, Washington, D.C., and Pennsylvania reminds all Americans that 'We must seek the guilty and not strike out against the innocent or we become like them who are without moral guidance or proper direction.'\" Further condemnation of racial vilification and violence is also spelled out in Title X, where there was condemnation of such activities against Sikh Americans, who were mistaken for Muslims after the September 11 terrorist attack.\nTitle II: Enhanced surveillance procedures.\nTitle II is titled \"Enhanced Surveillance Procedures\" and covers all aspects of the surveillance of suspected terrorists, those suspected of engaging in computer fraud or abuse, and agents of a foreign power who are engaged in clandestine activities. It primarily made amendments to FISA and the ECPA; furthermore, many of the most controversial aspects of the USA PATRIOT Act reside in this title. In particular, the title allows government agencies to gather \"foreign intelligence information\" from both U.S. and non-U.S. citizens and changed FISA to make gaining foreign intelligence information the significant purpose of FISA-based surveillance, where previously it had been the primary purpose. The change in definition was meant to remove a legal \"wall\" between criminal investigations and surveillance for the purposes of gathering foreign intelligence, which hampered investigations when criminal and foreign surveillance overlapped. However, that this wall even existed was found by the Federal Surveillance Court of Review to have actually been a long-held misinterpretation by government agencies. Also removed was the statutory requirement that the government prove a surveillance target under FISA is a non-U.S. citizen and agent of a foreign power, though it did require that any investigations must not be undertaken on citizens who are carrying out activities protected by the First Amendment. The title also expanded the duration of FISA physical search and surveillance orders, and gave authorities the ability to share information gathered before a federal grand jury with other agencies.\nThe scope and availability of wiretapping and surveillance orders were expanded under Title II. Wiretaps were expanded to include addressing and routing information to allow surveillance of packet switched networks\u2014the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) objected to this, arguing that it does not take into account email or web addresses, which often contain content in the address information. The Act allowed any district court judge in the United States to issue such surveillance orders and search warrants for terrorism investigations. Search warrants were also expanded, with the Act amending Title III of the \"Stored Communications Access Act\" to allow the FBI to gain access to stored voicemail through a search warrant, rather than through the more stringent wiretap laws.\nVarious provisions allowed for the disclosure of electronic communications to law enforcement agencies. Those who operate or own a \"protected computer\" can give permission for authorities to intercept communications carried out on the machine, thus bypassing the requirements of the Wiretap statute. The definition of a \"protected computer\" is defined in \u00a0https:// and broadly encompasses those computers used in interstate or foreign commerce or communication, including ones located outside the United States. The law governing obligatory and voluntary disclosure of customer communications by cable companies was altered to allow agencies to demand such communications under U.S.C. Title 18 provisions relating to the disclosure of electronic communications (chapter 119), pen registers and trap and trace devices (chapter 206) and stored communications (121), though it excluded the disclosure of cable subscriber viewing habits. Subpoenas issued to Internet Service Providers were expanded to include not only \"the name, address, local and long distance telephone toll billing records, telephone number or other subscriber number or identity, and length of service of a subscriber\" but also session times and durations, types of services used, communication device address information (e.g. IP addresses), payment method and bank account and credit card numbers. Communication providers are also allowed to disclose customer records or communications if they suspect there is a danger to \"life and limb\".\nTitle II established three very controversial provisions: \"sneak and peek\" warrants, roving wiretaps and the ability of the FBI to gain access to documents that reveal the patterns of U.S. citizens. The so-called \"sneak and peek\" law allowed for delayed notification of the execution of search warrants. The period before which the FBI must notify the recipients of the order was unspecified in the Act\u2014the FBI field manual says that it is a \"flexible standard\"\u2014and it may be extended at the court's discretion. These sneak and peek provisions were struck down by judge Ann Aiken on September 26, 2007, after a Portland attorney, Brandon Mayfield, was wrongly jailed because of the searches. The court found the searches to violate the provision that prohibits unreasonable searches in the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.\nRoving wiretaps are wiretap orders that do not need to specify all common carriers and third parties in a surveillance court order. These are seen as important by the Department of Justice because they believe that terrorists can exploit wiretap orders by rapidly changing locations and communication devices such as cell phones, while opponents see it as violating the particularity clause of the Fourth Amendment. Another highly controversial provision is one that allows the FBI to make an order \"requiring the production of any tangible things (including books, records, papers, documents, and other items) for an investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities, provided that such investigation of a United States person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the Constitution.\" Though it was not targeted directly at libraries, the American Library Association (ALA), in particular, opposed this provision. In a resolution passed on June 29, 2005, they stated that \"Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act allows the government to secretly request and obtain library records for large numbers of individuals without any reason to believe they are involved in illegal activity.\"\nThe title also covers a number of other miscellaneous provisions, including the expansion of the number of FISC judges from seven to eleven (three of which must reside within of the District of Columbia), trade Sanctions against North Korea and Taliban-controlled Afghanistan and the employment of translators by the FBI.\nAt the insistence of Republican Representative Richard Armey, the Act had a number of sunset provisions built in, which were originally set to expire on December 31, 2005. The sunset provision of the Act also took into account any ongoing foreign intelligence investigations and allowed them to continue once the sections had expired.\nThe provisions that were to expire are below.\nTitle III: Anti-money-laundering to prevent terrorism.\nTitle III of the Patriot Act, titled \"International Money Laundering Abatement and Financial Anti-Terrorism Act of 2001,\" is intended to facilitate the prevention, detection, and prosecution of international money laundering and the financing of terrorism. It primarily amends portions of the \"Money Laundering Control Act of 1986\" (MLCA) and the \"Bank Secrecy Act of 1970\" (BSA). It was divided into three subtitles. The first subtitle deals primarily with strengthening banking rules against money laundering, especially on the international stage. The second subtitle attempts to improve communication between law enforcement agencies and financial institutions, as well as expanding recordkeeping and reporting requirements. The third subtitle deals with currency smuggling and counterfeiting, including quadrupling the maximum penalty for counterfeiting foreign currency.\nThe first subtitle also tightened the recordkeeping requirements for financial institutions, making them record the aggregate amounts of transactions processed from areas of the world where money laundering is a concern to the U.S. government. It even made institutions put into place reasonable steps to identify beneficial owners of bank accounts and those who are authorized to use or route funds through payable-through accounts.\nThe U.S. Department of Treasury was charged with formulating regulations intended to foster information sharing between financial institutions to prevent money-laundering.\nAlong with expanding record keeping requirements, it put new regulations into place to make it easier for authorities to identify money laundering activities and to make it harder for money launderers to mask their identities.\nIf money laundering was uncovered, the subtitle legislated for the forfeiture of assets of those suspected of doing the money laundering.\nIn an effort to encourage institutions to take steps that would reduce money laundering, the Treasury was given authority to block mergers of bank holding companies and banks with other banks and bank holding companies that had a bad history of preventing money laundering. Similarly, mergers between insured depository institutions and non-insured depository institutions that have a bad track record in combating money-laundering could be blocked.\nRestrictions were placed on accounts and foreign banks. It prohibited shell banks that are not an affiliate of a bank that has a physical presence in the U.S. or that are not subject to supervision by a banking authority in a non-U.S. country. It also prohibits or restricts the use of certain accounts held at financial institutions.\nFinancial institutions must now undertake steps to identify the owners of any privately owned bank outside the U.S. who have a correspondent account with them, along with the interests of each of the owners in the bank. It is expected that additional scrutiny will be applied by the U.S. institution to such banks to make sure they are not engaging in money laundering. Banks must identify all the nominal and beneficial owners of any private bank account opened and maintained in the U.S. by non-U.S. citizens. There is also an expectation that they must undertake enhanced scrutiny of the account if it is owned by, or is being maintained on behalf of, any senior political figure where there is reasonable suspicion of corruption.\nAny deposits made from within the U.S. into foreign banks are now deemed to have been deposited into any interbank account the foreign bank may have in the U.S. Thus any restraining order, seizure warrant or arrest warrant may be made against the funds in the interbank account held at a U.S. financial institution, up to the amount deposited in the account at the foreign bank.\nRestrictions were placed on the use of internal bank concentration accounts because such accounts do not provide an effective audit trail for transactions, and this may be used to facilitate money laundering. Financial institutions are prohibited from allowing clients to specifically direct them to move funds into, out of, or through a concentration account, and they are also prohibited from informing their clients about the existence of such accounts. Financial institutions are not allowed to provide any information to clients that may identify such internal accounts.\nFinancial institutions are required to document and follow methods of identifying where the funds are for each customer in a concentration account that co-mingles funds belonging to one or more customers.\nThe definition of money laundering was expanded to include making a financial transaction in the U.S. in order to commit a violent crime; the bribery of public officials and fraudulent dealing with public funds; the smuggling or illegal export of controlled munition and the importation or bringing in of any firearm or ammunition not authorized by the U.S. Attorney General and the smuggling of any item controlled under the Export Administration Regulations.\nIt also includes any offense where the U.S. would be obligated under a mutual treaty with a foreign nation to extradite a person, or where the U.S. would need to submit a case against a person for prosecution because of the treaty; the import of falsely classified goods; computer crime; and any felony violation of the \"Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938\".\nIt also allows the forfeiture of any property within the jurisdiction of the United States that was gained as the result of an offense against a foreign nation that involves the manufacture, importation, sale, or distribution of a controlled substance.\nForeign nations may now seek to have a forfeiture or judgment notification enforced by a district court of the United States.\nThis is done through new legislation that specifies how the U.S. government may apply for a restraining order to preserve the availability of property which is subject to a foreign forfeiture or confiscation judgement.\nIn taking into consideration such an application, emphasis is placed on the ability of a foreign court to follow due process. The Act also requires the Secretary of Treasury to take all reasonable steps to encourage foreign governments make it a requirement to include the name of the originator in wire transfer instructions sent to the United States and other countries, with the information to remain with the transfer from its origination until the point of disbursement.\nThe Secretary was also ordered to encourage international cooperation in investigations of money laundering, financial crimes, and the finances of terrorist groups.\nThe Act also introduced criminal penalties for corrupt officialdom. An official or employee of the government who acts corruptly\u2014as well as the person who induces the corrupt act\u2014in the carrying out of their official duties will be fined by an amount that is not more than three times the monetary equivalent of the bribe in question. Alternatively they may be imprisoned for not more than 15 years, or they may be fined and imprisoned. Penalties apply to financial institutions who do not comply with an order to terminate any corresponding accounts within 10 days of being so ordered by the Attorney General or the Secretary of Treasury. The financial institution can be fined $US10,000 for each day the account remains open after the 10-day limit has expired.\nThe second annotation made a number of modifications to the BSA in an attempt to make it harder for money launderers to operate and easier for law enforcement and regulatory agencies to police money laundering operations. One amendment made to the BSA was to allow the designated officer or agency who receives suspicious activity reports to notify U.S. intelligence agencies.\nA number of amendments were made to address issues related to record keeping and financial reporting. One measure was a new requirement that anyone who does business file a report for any coin and foreign currency receipts that are over US$10,000 and made it illegal to structure transactions in a manner that evades the BSA's reporting requirements.\nTo make it easier for authorities to regulate and investigate anti-money laundering operations Money Services Businesses (MSBs)\u2014those who operate informal value transfer systems outside of the mainstream financial system\u2014were included in the definition of a financial institution. The BSA was amended to make it mandatory to report suspicious transactions and an attempt was made to make such reporting easier for financial institutions.\nFinCEN was made a bureau of the United States Department of Treasury and the creation of a secure network to be used by financial institutions to report suspicious transactions and to provide alerts of relevant suspicious activities was ordered. Along with these reporting requirements, a considerable number of provisions relate to the prevention and prosecution of money-laundering. Financial institutions were ordered to establish anti-money laundering programs and the BSA was amended to better define anti-money laundering strategy. Also increased were civil and criminal penalties for money laundering and the introduction of penalties for violations of geographic targeting orders and certain record-keeping requirements. A number of other amendments to the BSA were made through subtitle B, including granting the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System power to authorize personnel to act as law enforcement officers to protect the premises, grounds, property and personnel of any U.S. National reserve bank and allowing the Board to delegate this authority to U.S. Federal reserve bank. Another measure instructed United States Executive Directors of international financial institutions to use their voice and vote to support any country that has taken action to support the U.S.'s war on terrorism. Executive Directors are now required to provide ongoing auditing of disbursements made from their institutions to ensure that no funds are paid to persons who commit, threaten to commit, or support terrorism.\nThe third subtitle deals with currency crimes. Largely because of the effectiveness of the BSA, money launders had been avoiding traditional financial institutions to launder money and were using cash-based businesses to avoid them. A new effort was made to stop the laundering of money through bulk currency movements, mainly focusing on the confiscation of criminal proceeds and the increase in penalties for money laundering. Congress found that a criminal offense of merely evading the reporting of money transfers was insufficient and decided that it would be better if the smuggling of the bulk currency itself was the offense. Therefore, the BSA was amended to make it a criminal offense to evade currency reporting by concealing more than US$10,000 on any person or through any luggage, merchandise or other container that moves into or out of the U.S. The penalty for such an offense is up to 5 years' imprisonment and the forfeiture of any property up to the amount that was being smuggled. It also made the civil and criminal penalty violations of currency reporting cases be the forfeiture of all a defendant's property that was involved in the offense, and any property traceable to the defendant. The Act prohibits and penalizes those who run unlicensed money transmitting businesses. In 2005, this provision of the USA PATRIOT Act was used to prosecute Yehuda Abraham for helping to arrange money transfers for British arms dealer Hemant Lakhani, who was arrested in August 2003 after being caught in a government sting. Lakhani had tried to sell a missile to an FBI agent posing as a Somali militant. The definition of counterfeiting was expanded to encompass analog, digital or electronic image reproductions, and it was made an offense to own such a reproduction device. Penalties were increased to 20 years' imprisonment. Money laundering \"unlawful activities\" was expanded to include the provision of material support or resources to designated foreign terrorist organizations. The Act specifies that anyone who commits or conspires to undertake a fraudulent activity outside the jurisdiction of the United States, and which would be an offense in the U.S., will be prosecuted under \u00a0https://, which deals with fraud and related activity in connection with access devices.\nTitle IV: Border security.\nTitle IV of the Patriot Act amends the \"Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952\" to give more law enforcement and investigative power to the U.S. Attorney General and to the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). The Attorney General was authorized to waive any cap on the number of full-time employees (FTEs) assigned to the INS on the Northern border of the United States. Enough funds were set aside to triple the maximum number of U.S. Border Patrol personnel, Customs Service personnel and INS inspectors along with an additional US$50,000,000 funding for the INS and the U.S. Customs Service to improve technology for monitoring the Northern Border and acquiring additional equipment at the Canadian northern border. The INS was also given the authority to authorize overtime payments of up to an extra US$30,000 a year to INS employees. Access was given to the U.S. State Department and the INS to criminal background information contained in the National Crime Information Center's Interstate Identification Index (NCIC-III), https:// and any other files maintained by the National Crime Information Center to determine whether visa applicants and applicants could be admitted to the U.S. The U.S. Department of State was required to form final regulations governing the procedures for taking fingerprints and the conditions with which the department was allowed to use this information. Additionally, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) was ordered to develop a technology standard to verify the identity of persons applying for a United States visa. The reason was to make the standard the technology basis for a cross-agency, the cross-platform electronic system used for conducting background checks, confirming identities and ensuring that people have not received visas under different names. This report was released on November 13, 2002; however, according to NIST, this was later \"determined that the fingerprint system used was not as accurate as current state-of-the-art fingerprint systems and is approximately equivalent to commercial fingerprint systems available in 1998.\" This report was later superseded by section 303(a) of the \"Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry Reform Act of 2002\".\nUnder Subtitle B, various definitions relating to terrorism were altered and expanded. The INA was retroactively amended to disallow aliens who are part of or representatives of a foreign organization or any group who endorses acts of terrorism from entering the U.S. This restriction also included the family of such aliens. The definition of \"terrorist activity\" was strengthened to include actions involving the use of any dangerous device (and not just explosives and firearms). To \"engage in terrorist activity\" is defined as committing, inciting to commit or planning and preparing to undertake an act of terrorism. Included in this definition is the gathering of intelligence information on potential terrorist targets, the solicitation of funds for a terrorist organization or the solicitation of others to undertake acts of terrorism. Those who provide knowing assistance to a person who is planning to perform such activities are defined as undertaking terrorist activities. Such assistance includes affording material support, including a safe house, transportation, communications, funds, transfer of funds or other material financial benefit, false documentation or identification, weapons (including chemical, biological, or radiological weapons), explosives, or training to perform the terrorist act. The INA criteria for making a decision to designate an organization as a terrorist organization was amended to include the definition of a terrorist act. Though the amendments to these definitions are retroactive, it does not mean that it can be applied to members who joined an organization, but since left, before it was designated to be a terrorist organization under \u00a0https:// by the Secretary of State.\nThe Act amended the INA to add new provisions enforcing mandatory detention laws. These apply to any alien who is engaged in terrorism, or who is engaged in an activity that endangers U.S. national security. It also applies to those who are inadmissible or who must be deported because it is certified they are attempting to enter to undertake illegal espionage; are exporting goods, technology, or sensitive information illegally; or are attempting to control or overthrow the government; or have, or will have, engaged in terrorist activities. The Attorney General or the Attorney General's deputy may maintain custody of such aliens until they are removed from the U.S. unless it is no longer deemed they should be removed, in which case they are released. The alien can be detained for up to 90 days but can be held up to six months after it is deemed that they are a national security threat. However, the alien must be charged with a crime or removal proceedings start no longer than seven days after the alien's detention, otherwise the alien will be released. However, such detentions must be reviewed every six months by the Attorney General, who can then decide to revoke it, unless prevented from doing so by law. Every six months the alien may apply, in writing, for the certification to be reconsidered. Judicial review of any action or decision relating to this section, including judicial review of the merits of a certification, can be held under habeas corpus proceedings. Such proceedings can be initiated by an application filed with the United States Supreme Court, by any justice of the Supreme Court, by any circuit judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, or by any district court otherwise having jurisdiction to entertain the application. The final order is subject to appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Provisions were also made for a report to be required every six months of such decisions from the U.S. Attorney General to the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate.\nA sense of Congress was given that the U.S. Secretary of State should expedite the full implementation of the integrated entry and exit data system for airports, seaports, and land border ports of entry specified in the \"Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996\" (IIRIRA). They also found that the U.S. Attorney General should immediately start the Integrated Entry and Exit Data System Task Force specified in section 3 of the \"Immigration and Naturalization Service Data Management Improvement Act of 2000\". Congress wanted the primary focus of development of the entry-exit data system was to be on the utilization of biometric technology and the development of tamper-resistant documents readable at ports of entry. They also wanted the system to be able to interface with existing law enforcement databases. The Attorney General was ordered to implement and expand the foreign student monitoring program that was established under section 641(a) of the IIRIRA. which records the date and port of entry of each foreign student. The program was expanded to include other approved educational institutions, including air flight schools, language training schools or vocational schools that are approved by the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of Education and the Secretary of State. US$36,800,000 was appropriated for the Department of Justice to spend on implementing the program.\nThe Secretary of State was ordered to audit and report back to Congress on the Visa waiver program specified under \u00a0https:// for each fiscal year until September 30, 2007. The Secretary was also ordered to check for the implementation of precautionary measures to prevent the counterfeiting and theft of passports as well as ascertain that countries designated under the visa waiver program have established a program to develop tamper-resistant passports. The Secretary was also ordered to report back to Congress on whether consulate shopping was a problem.\nThe last subtitle, which was introduced by Senators John Conyers and Patrick Leahy, allows for the preservation of immigration benefits for victims of terrorism, and the families of victims of terrorism. They recognized that some families, through no fault of their own, would either be ineligible for permanent residence in the United States because of being unable to make important deadlines because of the September 11 terrorist attacks, or had become ineligible to apply for special immigration status because their loved one died in the attacks.\nTitle V: Removing obstacles to investigating terrorism.\nTitle V allows the U.S. Attorney General to pay rewards pursuant of advertisements for assistance to the Department of Justice to combat terrorism and prevent terrorist acts, though amounts over $US250,000 may not be made or offered without the personal approval of the Attorney General or President, and once the award is approved the Attorney General must give written notice to the Chairman and ranking minority members of the Committee on Appropriations and the Judiciary of the Senate and of the House of Representatives. The \"State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956\" was amended to allow the U.S. State Department to offer rewards, in consultation with the Attorney General, for the full or significant dismantling of any terrorist organization and to identify any key leaders of terrorist organizations. The U.S. Secretary of State was given authority to pay greater than $US5\u00a0million if he so determines it would prevent terrorist actions against the United States and Canada. The \"DNA Analysis Backlog Elimination Act\" was amended to include terrorism or crimes of violence in the list of qualifying Federal offenses. Another perceived obstacle was to allow federal agencies to share information with federal law enforcement agencies. Thus, the act now allows federal officers who acquire information through electronic surveillance or physical searches to consult with federal law enforcement officers to coordinate efforts to investigate or protect against potential or actual attacks, sabotage or international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities by an intelligence service or network of a foreign power.\nU.S. Secret Service jurisdiction was extended to investigate computer fraud, access device frauds, false identification documents or devices, or any fraudulent activities against U.S. financial institutions. The \"General Education Provisions Act\" was amended to allow the U.S. Attorney General or Assistant Attorney General to collect and retain educational records relevant to an authorized investigation or prosecution of an offense that is defined as a Federal crime of terrorism and which an educational agency or institution possesses. The Attorney General or Assistant Attorney General must \"certify that there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the education records are likely to contain information [that a Federal crime of terrorism may be being committed].\" An education institution that produces education records in response to such a request is given legal immunity from any liability that rises from such a production of records.\nOne of the most controversial aspects of the USA PATRIOT Act is in Title V, and relates to National Security Letters (NSLs). An NSL is a form of administrative subpoena used by the FBI, and reportedly by other U.S. government agencies including the CIA and the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD). It is a demand letter issued to a particular entity or organization to turn over various records and data pertaining to individuals. They require no probable cause or judicial oversight and also contain a gag order, preventing the recipient of the letter from disclosing that the letter was ever issued. Title V allowed the use of NSLs to be made by a Special Agent in charge of a Bureau field office, where previously only the director or the deputy assistant director of the FBI were able to certify such requests. This provision of the Act was challenged by the ACLU on behalf of an unknown party against the U.S. government on the grounds that NSLs violate the First and Fourth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution because there is no way to legally oppose an NSL subpoena in court, and that it was unconstitutional not to allow a client to inform their Attorney as to the order because of the gag provision of the letters. The court's judgement found in favour of the ACLU's case, and they declared the law unconstitutional. Later, the USA PATRIOT Act was reauthorized and amendments were made to specify a process of judicial review of NSLs and to allow the recipient of an NSL to disclose receipt of the letter to an attorney or others necessary to comply with or challenge the order.\nHowever, in 2007, the U.S. District Court struck down even the reauthorized NSLs because the gag power was unconstitutional as courts could still not engage in a meaningful judicial review of these gags. On August 28, 2015, Judge Victor Marrero of the federal district court in Manhattan ruled the gag order of Nicholas Merrill was unjustified. In his decision, Judge Marrero described the FBI's position as, \"extreme and overly broad,\" affirming that \"courts cannot, consistent with the First Amendment, simply accept the Government's assertions that disclosure would implicate and create a risk.\" He also found that the FBI's gag order on Mr. Merrill \"implicates serious issues, both with respect to the First Amendment and accountability of the government to the people.\" Initially, the ruling was released in redaction by Judge Marrero. The FBI was given 90 days to pursue any other alternative course of action but elected not to do so. Upon release of the unredacted ruling on November 30, 2015, it was revealed for the first time the extent to which the FBI's NSL accompanied by a gag order sought to collect information. Through the court documents, it was revealed for the first time that through an NSL, the FBI believes it can legally obtain information including an individual's complete web browsing history, the IP addresses of everyone a person has corresponded with, and all the records of all online purchases within the last 180 days. The FBI also claims via the extension of an NSL, it can obtain cell site location information. In the landmark case of Nicholas Merrill the FBI in specific sought to seek the following information on an account: DSL account information, radius log, subscriber name and related subscriber information, account number, date the account opened or closed, addresses associated with the account, subscriber day/evening telephone numbers, screen names or other on-line names associated with the account, order forms, records relating to merchandise orders/shipping information for the last 180 days, all billing related to the account, internet service provider (ISP), all email addresses associated with the account, internet protocol address assigned to the account, all website information registered to the account, uniform resource locator address assigned to the account, any other information which you consider to be an electronic communication transactional record. This was the first time it was revealed the extent to which an NSL under the Patriot Act could request communication information.\nTitle VI: Victims and families of victims of terrorism.\nTitle VI amended the \"Victims of Crime Act of 1984\" (VOCA) to change how the U.S. Victims of Crime Fund was managed and funded, improving the speedy provision of aid to families of public safety officers by expedited payments to officers or the families of officers injured or killed in the line of duty. Payments must be made no later than 30 days later. The Assistant Attorney General was given expanded authority under Section 614 of the USA PATRIOT Act to make grants to any organization that administers any Office of Justice Programs, which includes the Public Safety Officers Benefits Program. Further changes to the Victims of Crime Fund increased the amount of money in the Fund and changed the way that funds were distributed. The amount available for grants made through the Crime Victim Fund to eligible crime victim compensation programs were increased from 40 percent to 60 percent of the total in the Fund. A program can provide compensation to U.S. citizens who were adversely affected overseas. Means testing was also waived for those who apply for compensation. Under VOCA, the director may make an annual grant from the Crime Victims Fund to support crime victim assistance programs. An amendment was made to VOCA to include offers of assistance to crime victims in Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or any other U.S. territory. VOCA also provides for compensation and assistance to victims of terrorism or mass violence. This was amended to allow the director to make supplemental grants to States for eligible crime victim compensation and assistance programs, and to victim service organizations, public agencies (including Federal, State, or local governments) and non-governmental organizations that provide assistance to victims of crime. The funds could be used to provide emergency relief, including crisis response efforts, assistance, compensation, training and technical assistance for investigations and prosecutions of terrorism.\nTitle VII: Increased information sharing for critical infrastructure protection.\nTitle VII has one section. The purpose of this title is to increase the ability of U.S. law enforcement to counter terrorist activity that crosses jurisdictional boundaries. It does this by amending the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to include terrorism as a criminal activity.\nTitle VIII: Terrorism criminal law.\nTitle VIII alters the definitions of terrorism and establishes or re-defines rules with which to deal with it. It redefined the term \"domestic terrorism\" to broadly include mass destruction as well as assassination or kidnapping as a terrorist activity. The definition also encompasses activities that are \"dangerous to human life that are a violation of the criminal laws of the United States or of any State\" and are intended to \"intimidate or coerce a civilian population,\" \"influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion,\" or are undertaken \"to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping\" while in the jurisdiction of the United States.\nTerrorism is also included in the definition of racketeering.\nTerms relating to cyber-terrorism are also redefined, including the term \"protected computer,\" \"damage,\" \"conviction,\" \"person,\" and \"loss.\"\nNew penalties were created to convict those who attack mass transportation systems. If the offender committed such an attack while no passenger was on board, they are fined and imprisoned for a maximum of 20 years. However, if the activity was undertaken while the mass transportation vehicle or ferry was carrying a passenger at the time of the offense, or the offense resulted in the death of any person, then the punishment is a fine and life imprisonment.\nThe title amends the biological weapons statute to define the use of a biological agent, toxin, or delivery system as a weapon, other than when it is used for \"prophylactic, protective, bona fide research, or other peaceful purposes.\" Penalties for anyone who cannot prove reasonably that they are using a biological agent, toxin or delivery system for these purposes are 10 years' imprisonment, a fine or both.\nA number of measures were introduced in an attempt to prevent and penalize activities that are deemed to support terrorism. It was made a crime to harbor or conceal terrorists, and those who do are subject to a fine or imprisonment of up to 10 years, or both.\nU.S. forfeiture law was also amended to allow authorities to seize all foreign and domestic assets from any group or individual that is caught planning to commit acts of terrorism against the U.S. or U.S. citizens. Assets may also be seized if they have been acquired or maintained by an individual or organization for the purposes of further terrorist activities.\nOne section of the Act (section 805) prohibited \"material support\" for terrorists, and in particular included \"expert advice or assistance.\"\nIn 2004, after the Humanitarian Law Project filed a civil action against the U.S. government, a Federal District Court struck this down as unconstitutionally vague; but in 2010 the Supreme Court upheld it.\nCongress later improved the law by defining the definitions of the \"material support or resources,\" \"training,\" and \"expert advise or resources.\"\nCyberterrorism was dealt with in various ways. Penalties apply to those who either damage or gain unauthorized access to a protected computer and then commit a number of offenses. These offenses include causing a person to lose an aggregate amount greater than US$5,000, as well as adversely affecting someone's medical examination, diagnosis or treatment. It also encompasses actions that cause a person to be injured, a threat to public health or safety, or damage to a governmental computer that is used as a tool to administer justice, national defense or national security. Also prohibited was extortion undertaken via a protected computer. The penalty for attempting to damage protected computers through the use of viruses or other software mechanism was set to imprisonment for up to 10 years, while the penalty for unauthorized access and subsequent damage to a protected computer was increased to more than five years' imprisonment. However, should the offense occur a second time, the penalty increases up to 20 years' imprisonment.\nThe act also specified the development and support of cybersecurity forensic capabilities. It directs the Attorney General to establish regional computer forensic laboratories that have the capability of performing forensic examinations of intercepted computer evidence relating to criminal activity and cyberterrorism, and that have the capability of training and educating Federal, State, and local law enforcement personnel and prosecutors in computer crime, and to \"facilitate and promote the sharing of Federal law enforcement expertise and information about the investigation, analysis, and prosecution of computer-related crime with State and local law enforcement personnel and prosecutors, including the use of multijurisdictional task forces.\" The sum of $50,000,000 was authorized for establishing such labs.\nTitle IX: Improved intelligence.\nTitle IX amends the \"National Security Act of 1947\" to require the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) to establish requirements and priorities for foreign intelligence collected under FISA and to provide assistance to the U.S. Attorney General to ensure that information derived from electronic surveillance or physical searches is disseminated for efficient and effective foreign intelligence purposes. With the exception of information that might jeopardize an ongoing law enforcement investigation, it was made a requirement that the Attorney General, or the head of any other department or agency of the Federal Government with law enforcement responsibilities, disclose to the director any foreign intelligence acquired by the U.S. Department of Justice. The U.S. Attorney General and Director of Central Intelligence both were directed to develop procedures for the Attorney General to follow in order to inform the director, in a timely manner, of any intention of investigating criminal activity of a foreign intelligence source or potential foreign intelligence source based on the intelligence tip-off of a member of the intelligence community. The Attorney General was also directed to develop procedures on how to best administer these matters. International terrorist activities were made to fall within the scope of foreign intelligence under the \"National Security Act\".\nA number of reports were commissioned relating to various intelligence-related government centers. One was commissioned into the best way of setting up the National Virtual Translation Center, with the goal of developing automated translation facilities to assist with the timely and accurate translation of foreign intelligence information for elements of the U.S. intelligence community. The USA PATRIOT Act required this to be provided on February 1, 2002; however, the report, entitled \"Director of Central Intelligence Report on the National Virtual Translation Center: A Concept Plan to Enhance the Intelligence Community's Foreign Language Capabilities, April 29, 2002\" was received more than two months late, which the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence reported was \"a delay which, in addition to contravening the explicit words of the statute, deprived the Committee of timely and valuable input into its efforts to craft this legislation.\" Another report was commissioned on the feasibility and desirability of reconfiguring the Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center and the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the Department of the Treasury. It was due by February 1, 2002; however, it was never written. The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence later complained that \"[t]he Director of Central Intelligence and the Secretary of the Treasury failed to provide a report, this time in direct contravention of a section of the USA PATRIOT Act\" and they further directed \"that the statutorily-directed report be completed immediately, and that it should include a section describing the circumstances which led to the Director's failure to comply with lawful reporting requirements.\"\nOther measures allowed certain reports on intelligence and intelligence-related matters to be deferred until at least February 1, 2002, if the official involved certified that preparation and submission on February 1, 2002, would impede the work of officers or employees engaged in counterterrorism activities. Any such deferral required congressional notification before it was authorized. The Attorney General was charged with training officials in identifying and utilizing foreign intelligence information properly in the course of their duties. The government officials include those in the Federal Government who do not normally encounter or disseminate foreign intelligence in the performance of their duties, and State and local government officials who encounter, or potentially may encounter in the course of a terrorist event, foreign intelligence in the performance of their duties. A sense of Congress was expressed that officers and employees of the intelligence community should be encouraged to make every effort to establish and maintain intelligence relationships with any person, entity, or group while they conduct lawful intelligence activities.\nTitle X: Miscellaneous.\nTitle X created or altered a number of miscellaneous laws that did not fit into any other section of the USA PATRIOT Act. Hazmat licenses were limited to drivers who pass background checks and who can demonstrate they can handle the materials.\nThe Inspector General of the Department of Justice was directed to appoint an official to monitor, review and report back to Congress all allegations of civil rights abuses against the DoJ. It amended the definition of \"electronic surveillance\" to exclude the interception of communications done through or from a protected computer where the owner allows the interception, or is lawfully involved in an investigation.\nMoney laundering cases may now be brought in the district where the money laundering was committed or where a money laundering transfer started from.\nAliens who committed money laundering were also prohibited from entering the U.S.\nGrants were provided to first responders to assist them in responding to and preventing terrorism. US$5,000,000 was authorized to be provided to the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to train police in South and East Asia.\nThe Attorney General was directed to commission a study on the feasibility of using biometric identifiers to identify people as they attempt to enter the United States, and which would be connected to the FBI's database to flag suspected criminals. Another study was also commissioned to determine the feasibility of providing airlines names of suspected terrorists before they boarded flights. The Department of Defense was given temporary authority to use their funding for private contracts for security purposes.\nThe last title also created a new Act called the \"Crimes Against Charitable Americans Act\" which amended the \"Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act\" to require telemarketers who call on behalf of charities to disclose the purpose and other information, including the name and mailing address of the charity the telemarketer is representing.\nIt also increased the penalties from one year's imprisonment to five years' imprisonment for those committing fraud by impersonating a Red Cross member.\nControversy.\nThe Patriot Act has generated a great deal of controversy since its enactment.\nOpponents of the Act have been quite vocal in asserting that it was passed opportunistically after the September 11 attacks, believing that there would have been little debate. They view the Act as one that was hurried through the Senate with little change before it was passed (senators Patrick Leahy (D-VT) and Russ Feingold (D-WI) proposed amendments to modify the final revision).\nSami Al-Arian.\nSami Al-Arian was a Palestinian-American tenured computer engineering professor at the University of South Florida, who also actively promoted dialogue between the West and the Middle East, especially about the plight of Palestinians. \nHe was indicted in February 2003 on 17 counts under the Patriot Act. A jury acquitted him on 8 counts and deadlocked on the remaining 9 counts. He later struck a plea bargain and admitted to one of the remaining charges in exchange for being released and deported by April 2007. \nHowever, instead of being released, he was held under house arrest in Northern Virginia from 2008 until 2014 when federal prosecutors filed a motion to dismiss charges against him. He was deported to Turkey on February 4, 2015.\nImmigration.\nOne controversial aspect of the Patriot Act is the immigration provisions that allow for the indefinite detention of any alien who the Attorney General believes may cause a terrorist act. \nBefore the Patriot Act was passed, Anita Ramasastry, an associate professor of law and a director of the Shidler Center for Law, Commerce, &amp; Technology at the University of Washington School of Law in Seattle, Washington, accused the Act of depriving basic rights for immigrants to America, including legal permanent residents. \nShe warned that \"Indefinite detention upon secret evidence\u2014which the Patriot Act allows\u2014sounds more like Taliban justice than ours. Our claim that we are attempting to build an international coalition against terrorism will be severely undermined if we pass legislation allowing even citizens of our allies to be incarcerated without basic U.S. guarantees of fairness and justice.\"\nMany other parties have also been strongly critical of the provision. Russell Feingold, in a Senate floor statement, claimed that the provision \"falls short of meeting even basic constitutional standards of due process and fairness [as it] continues to allow the Attorney General to detain persons based on mere suspicion\".\nThe University of California passed a resolution condemning (among other things) the indefinite detention provisions of the Act, while the ACLU has accused the Act of giving the Attorney General \"unprecedented new power to determine the fate of immigrants\u00a0... Worse, if the foreigner does not have a country that will accept them, they can be detained indefinitely without trial.\"\nIllegal Money Transfers.\nThe Patriot Act\u2019s prohibitions against illegal money transfers were used against major credit card companies in 2003. \nLisa and Andrew Harding lost over $100,000 at illegal gambling websites between 2002-2003. Both Hardings were later named in a lawsuit for failure to pay their credit card bills. The Hardings subsequently filed a countersuit against Visa Inc. and its USA Division, Discover Financial and Mastercard International, alleging that the companies violated the Patriot Act by facilitating the illegal transfers to the gambling sites. \nDiscover Card and Visa eventually agreed to relieve some of the accrued debt.\nFahrenheit 9/11 Film.\nThe sheer magnitude of the Act itself was noted by Michael Moore in his controversial film \"Fahrenheit 9/11\". In one of the scenes of the movie, he records Congressperson Jim McDermott (D-WA) alleging that no Senator had read the bill and John Conyers, Jr. (D-MI) as saying, \"We don't read most of the bills. Do you really know what that would entail if we read every bill that we passed?\" Congressperson Conyers answers his own question, saying that if they did read every bill, it would \"slow down the legislative process\". \nAs a dramatic device, Moore then hired an ice-cream van and drove around Washington, D.C., with a loudspeaker, reading out the Act to puzzled passers-by, including a few senators.\nMoore was not the only commentator to notice that not many people had read the Act. When Dahlia Lithwick and Julia Turne for \"Slate\" asked, \"How bad is PATRIOT, anyway?\", they decided that it was \"hard to tell\" and stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ACLU, in a new fact sheet challenging the DOJ Web site, wants you to believe that the act threatens our most basic civil liberties. Ashcroft and his roadies call the changes in law \"modest and incremental.\" Since almost nobody has read the legislation, much of what we think we know about it comes third-hand and spun. Both advocates and opponents are guilty of fear-mongering and distortion in some instances.\nSusan Lindauer.\nOne prime example of how the Patriot Act has stirred controversy is the case of Susan Lindauer. \nLindauer is a former Congressional staffer and antiwar activist who was charged under the Patriot Act with \"acting as an unregistered agent of a foreign government,\" then ruled by a court mentally unfit to stand trial. Lindauer has emphatically denied both on many occasions, saying that she in fact had been a CIA agent serving as a link between the U.S. and Iraqi governments. \nIn 2010 she wrote a book called \"Extreme Prejudice: The Terrifying Story of the Patriot Act and the Cover-Ups of 9/11 and Iraq\" to that effect. The charges were dropped in 2009.\nBrandon Mayfield.\nIn 2004, FBI agents used this provision to search and secretly examine the home of Brandon Mayfield, who was wrongfully jailed for two weeks on suspicion of involvement in the Madrid train bombings. \nWhile the U.S. Government did publicly apologize to Mayfield and his family, Mayfield took it further through the courts. \nOn September 26, 2007, Judge Ann Aiken found the law was, in fact, unconstitutional as the search was an unreasonable imposition on Mayfield and thus violated the Fourth Amendment.\nNational Security Letters.\nPerhaps one of the biggest controversies involved the use of National Security Letters (NSLs) by the FBI. Because they allow the FBI to search telephone, email, and financial records without a court order, they were criticized by many parties, including the American Civil Liberties Union. \nAlthough FBI officials have a series of internal \"checks and balances\" that must be met before the issue of an NSL, Federal Judge Victor Marrero ruled the NSL provisions unconstitutional. \nIn November 2005, \"BusinessWeek\" reported that the FBI had issued tens of thousands of NSLs and had obtained one million financial, credit, employment, and in some cases, health records from the customers of targeted Las Vegas businesses. Selected businesses included casinos, storage warehouses and car rental agencies. \nAn anonymous Justice official claimed that such requests were permitted under section 505 of the Patriot Act and despite the volume of requests insisted \"We are not inclined to ask courts to endorse fishing expeditions\". \nBefore this was revealed, however, the ACLU challenged the constitutionality of NSLs in court. In April 2004, they filed suit against the government on behalf of an unknown internet service provider who had been issued an NSL, for reasons unknown. In \"ACLU v. DoJ\", the ACLU argued that the NSL violated the First and Fourth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution because the Patriot Act failed to spell out any legal process whereby a telephone or Internet company could try to oppose an NSL subpoena in court. \nThe court agreed, and found that because the recipient of the subpoena could not challenge it in court it was unconstitutional. Congress later tried to remedy this in a reauthorization Act, but because they did not remove the non-disclosure provision a Federal court again found NSLs to be unconstitutional because they prevented courts from engaging in meaningful judicial review.\nLibraries.\nAnother provision of the Patriot Act has caused a great deal of consternation among librarians. \nSection 215 allows the FBI to apply for an order to produce materials that assist in an investigation undertaken to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities. Among the \"tangible things\" that could be targeted, it includes \"books, records, papers, documents, and other items\".\nSupporters of the provision point out that these records are held by third parties, and therefore are exempt from a citizen's reasonable expectations of privacy and also maintain that the FBI has not abused the provision. As proof, then Attorney General John Ashcroft released information in 2003 that showed that section 215 orders had never been used.\nHowever, the American Library Association strongly objected to the provision, believing that library records are fundamentally different from ordinary business records, and that the provision would have a chilling effect on free speech. The association became so concerned that it adopted a resolution condemning the Patriot Act and urging members to defend free speech and protect patrons' privacy.\nThe association urged librarians to seek legal advice before complying with a search order, and advised its members to keep records only for as long as was legally required. \nConsequently, reports started filtering in that librarians were shredding records to avoid having to comply with such orders.\nIn 2005, Library Connection, a nonprofit consortium of 27 libraries in Connecticut, known as the Connecticut Four worked with the ACLU to lift a gag order for library records, challenging the government's power under Section 505 to silence four citizens who wished to contribute to public debate on the PATRIOT Act. This case became known as Doe v. Gonzales. \nIn May 2006, the government finally gave up its legal battle to maintain the gag order. In a summary of the actions of the Connecticut Four and their challenge to the Patriot Act, Jones (2009: 223) notes: \"Librarians need to understand their country's legal balance between the protection of freedom of expression and the protection of national security. Many librarians believe that the interests of national security, important as they are, have become an excuse for chilling the freedom to read.\"\nWiretapping.\nThe Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) has criticized the law as unconstitutional, especially when \"the private communications of law-abiding American citizens might be intercepted incidentally\", while the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) held that the lower standard applied to wiretaps \"gives the FBI a 'blank check' to violate the communications privacy of countless innocent Americans\".\nOthers do not find the roving wiretap legislation to be as concerning. Professor David D. Cole of the Georgetown University Law Center, a critic of many of the provisions of the Act, found that though they come at a cost to privacy are a sensible measure while Paul Rosenzweig, a Senior Legal Research Fellow in the Center for Legal and Judicial Studies at The Heritage Foundation, argues that roving wiretaps are just a response to rapidly changing communication technology that is not necessarily fixed to a specific location or device.\nExpanded Court Jurisdiction.\nThe Patriot Act's expansion of court jurisdiction to allow the nationwide service of search warrants proved controversial for the EFF. \nThey believe that agencies will be able to \"'shop' for judges that have demonstrated a strong bias toward law enforcement with regard to search warrants, using only those judges least likely to say no\u2014even if the warrant doesn't satisfy the strict requirements of the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution\", and that it reduces the likelihood that smaller ISPs or phone companies will try to protect the privacy of their clients by challenging the warrant in court\u2014their reasoning is that \"a small San Francisco ISP served with such a warrant is unlikely to have the resources to appear before the New York court that issued it.\" \nThey believe that this is bad because only the communications provider will be able to challenge the warrant as only they will know about it\u2014many warrants are issued \"ex parte\", which means that the target of the order is not present when the order is issued.\nSneak and Peek Searches.\nFor a time, the Patriot Act allowed for agents to undertake \"sneak and peek\" searches.\nCritics such as EPIC and the ACLU strongly criticized the law for violating the Fourth Amendment, with the ACLU going so far as to release an advertisement condemning it and calling for it to be repealed.\nFreedom of Association.\nLaws governing the material support of terrorism proved contentious. It was criticized by the EFF for infringement of freedom of association. \nThe EFF argues that had this law been enacted during Apartheid, U.S. citizens would not have been able to support the African National Congress (ANC) as the EFF believes the ANC would have been classed as a terrorist organization. They also used the example of a humanitarian social worker being unable to train Hamas members how to care for civilian children orphaned in the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians, a lawyer being unable to teach IRA members about international law, and peace workers being unable to offer training in effective peace negotiations or how to petition the United Nations regarding human rights abuses.\nAnother group, the Humanitarian Law Project, also objected to the provision prohibiting \"expert advise and assistance\" to terrorists and filed a suit against the U.S. government to have it declared unconstitutional. In 2004 a Federal District Court struck the provision down as unconstitutionally vague, but in 2010 the Supreme Court reversed that decision.\nBritish Columbia.\nAnother controversial aspect of the Patriot Act is its effect on the privacy of Canadians living in the province of British Columbia (B.C.). \nBritish Columbia's privacy commissioner raises concerns that the Patriot Act will allow the United States government to access Canadians' private information, such as personal medical records, that are outsourced to American companies. Although the government of B.C. has taken measures to prevent United States authorities from obtaining information, the widespread powers of the Patriot Act could overcome legislation that is passed in Canada. \nB.C. Privacy Commissioner David Loukidelis stated in a report on the consequences of the Patriot Act, \"once information is sent across borders, it's difficult, if not impossible, to control\".\nIn an effort to maintain their privacy, British Columbia placed amendments on the \"Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act\" (FOIPPA), which was enacted as law on October 21, 2004. \nThese amendments aim to place more firm limitations on \"storing, accessing, and disclosing of B.C. public sector data by service providers.\" These laws only pertain to public sector data and do not cover trans-border or private sector data in Canada. The public sector establishments include an estimated 2,000 \"government ministries, hospitals, boards of health, universities and colleges, school boards, municipal governments and certain Crown corporations and agencies.\" \nIn response to these laws, many companies are now specifically opting to host their sensitive data outside the United States.\nNova Scotia.\nLegal action has been taken in Nova Scotia to protect the province from the Patriot Act's data collecting methods. \nOn November 15, 2007, the government of Nova Scotia passed legislation aimed to protect Nova Scotians' personal information from being brought forward by the Patriot Act. The act was entitled \"The new \"Personal Information International Disclosure Protection Act\"\". \nThe goal of the act is to establish requirements to protect personal information from being revealed, as well as punishments for failing to do so. Justice Minister Murray Scott stated, \"This legislation will help ensure that Nova Scotians' personal information will be protected. The act outlines the responsibilities of public bodies, municipalities and service providers and the consequences if these responsibilities are not fulfilled.\" \nIn the 1980s, the Bank of Nova Scotia was the center of an early, pre-Internet data-access case that led to the disclosure of banking records.\nVoicemail.\nThe Act also allows access to voicemail through a search warrant rather than through a title III wiretap order. \nJames Dempsey, of the CDT, believes that it unnecessarily overlooks the importance of notice under the Fourth Amendment and under a Title III wiretap, and the EFF criticizes the provision's lack of notice. \nHowever, the EFF's criticism is more extensive\u2014they believe that the amendment \"is in possible violation of the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution\" because previously if the FBI listened to voicemail illegally, it could not use the messages in evidence against the defendant. \nOthers disagree with these assessments. Legal Scholar Orin Kerr believes that the ECPA \"adopted a rather strange rule to regulate voicemail stored with service providers\" because \"under ECPA, if the government knew that there was one copy of an unopened private message in a person's bedroom and another copy on their remotely stored voicemail, it was illegal for the FBI to simply obtain the voicemail; the law actually compelled the police to invade the home and rifle through people's bedrooms so as not to disturb the more private voicemail.\" \nIn Professor Kerr's opinion, this made little sense and the amendment that was made by the Patriot Act was reasonable and sensible.\nUnited States v. Antoine Jones.\nAnother example of controversy in the Patriot Act is the 2012 court case \"United States v. Antoine Jones\". \nA nightclub owner was linked to a drug trafficking stash house via a law enforcement GPS tracking device attached to his car. It was placed there without a warrant, which caused a serious conviction obstacle for federal prosecutors in court. The case eventually reached the U.S. Supreme Court, where the conviction was overturned. \nThe court found that installing a tracking device for the purpose of long-term monitoring - caused by legislation like the Patriot Act - constituted a search that violated the defendant's constitutional rights.\nNSA Call Record Collection.\nAfter suspected abuses of the Patriot Act were brought to light in June 2013 with articles about collection of American call records by the NSA and the PRISM program (see 2013 mass surveillance disclosures), Representative Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican of Wisconsin, who introduced the Patriot Act in 2001, said that the National Security Agency overstepped its bounds. \nHe released a statement saying \"While I believe the Patriot Act appropriately balanced national security concerns and civil rights, I have always worried about potential abuses.\" He added: \"Seizing phone records of millions of innocent people is excessive and un-American.\"\nReauthorizations.\nThe USA PATRIOT Act was reauthorized by three bills. The first, the \"USA PATRIOT and Terrorism Prevention Reauthorization Act of 2005\", was passed by Congress in July 2005. This bill reauthorized some, but not all, provisions of the original \"USA PATRIOT Act\", as well as the newer \"Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004\". It created new provisions relating to the death penalty for terrorists, enhancing security at seaports, new measures to combat the financing of terrorism, new powers for the Secret Service, anti-methamphetamine initiatives and a number of other miscellaneous provisions. The second reauthorization act, the \"USA PATRIOT Act Additional Reauthorizing Amendments Act of 2006\", amended the first and was passed in February 2006.\nThe first act reauthorized all but two Title II provisions. Two sections were changed to sunset on December 31, 2009: section 206\u2014the roving wiretap provision\u2014and section 215, which allowed access to business records under FISA. Section 215 was amended further to give greater judicial oversight and review. Such orders were also restricted to be authorized by only the FBI Director, the FBI Deputy Director, or the Executive Assistant Director for National Security, and minimization procedures were specified to limit the dissemination and collection of such information. Section 215 also had a \"gag\" provision, which was changed to allow the defendant to contact their attorney. However, the change meant that the defendant was also required to tell the FBI who they were disclosing the order to; this requirement was removed by the \"USA PATRIOT Act Additional Reauthorizing Amendments Act\".\nOn Saturday, February 27, 2010, President Barack Obama signed into law legislation that would temporarily extend, for one year, three controversial provisions of the Patriot Act that had been set to expire:\nIn a vote on February 8, 2011, the House of Representatives considered a further extension of the Act through the end of 2011. House leadership moved the extension bill under suspension of the rules, which is intended for noncontroversial legislation and requires two-thirds majority to pass. After the vote, the extension bill did not pass; 277 members voted in favor, which was less than the 290 votes needed to pass the bill under suspension of the rules. Without an extension, the Act was set to expire on February 28, 2011. However, it eventually passed, 275\u2013144. The FISA Sunsets Extension Act of 2011 was signed into law February 25, 2011.\nOn May 26, 2011, President Barack Obama used an Autopen to sign the PATRIOT Sunsets Extension Act of 2011, a four-year extension of three key provisions in the USA PATRIOT Act while he was in France: roving wiretaps, searches of business records (the \"library records provision\"), and conducting surveillance of \"lone wolves\"\u2014individuals suspected of terrorist-related activities not linked to terrorist groups. Republican leaders questioned if the use of the Autopen met the constitutional requirements for signing a bill into law.\nAs NSL provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act had been struck by the courts the reauthorization Act amended the law in an attempt to make them lawful. It provided for judicial review and the legal right of a recipient to challenge the validity of the letter. The reauthorization act still allowed NSLs to be closed and all evidence to be presented \"in camera\" and \"ex parte\". Gag provisions were maintained but were not automatic. They only occurred when the deputy assistant director of the FBI or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office certified that disclosure would result in \"a danger to the national security of the United States, interference with a criminal, counterterrorism, or counterintelligence investigation, interference with diplomatic relations, or danger to the life or physical safety of any person\". However, should there be no non-disclosure order, the defendant can disclose the fact of the NSL to anyone who can render them assistance in carrying out the letter, or to an attorney for legal advice. Again, however, the recipient was ordered to inform the FBI of such a disclosure. Because of the concern over the chilling effects of such a requirement, the \"Additional Reauthorization Amendments Act\" removed the requirement to inform the FBI that the recipient spoke about the NSL to their Attorney. Later, the \"Additional Reauthorization Amendments Act\" excluded libraries from receiving NSLs, except where they provide electronic communications services. The reauthorization Act also ordered the Attorney General submit a report semi-annually to the House and Senate Judiciary Committees, the House and Senate Intelligence Committees and the House Committee on Financial Services and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs on all NSL request made under the \"Fair Credit Reporting Act\".\nChanges were made to the roving wiretap provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act. Applications and orders for such wiretaps must describe the specific target of the electronic surveillance if the identity of the target is not known. If the nature and location of each of the facilities or places targeted for surveillance is not known, then after 10 days the agency must provide notice to the court. The notice must include the nature and location of each new facility or place at which the electronic surveillance was directed. It must also describe the facts and circumstances relied upon by the applicant to justify the applicant's belief that each new surveillance place or facility under surveillance is or was being used by the target of the surveillance. The applicant must also provide a statement detailing any proposed minimization procedures that differ from those contained in the original application or order, that may be necessitated by a change in the facility or place at which the electronic surveillance is directed. Applicants must detail the total number of electronic surveillances that have been or are being conducted under the authority of the order.\nSection 213 of the USA PATRIOT Act was modified. Previously it stated that delayed notifications would be made to recipients of \"sneak and peek\" searches in a \"reasonable period\". This was seen as unreasonable, as it was undefined and could potentially be used indefinitely. Thus, the reauthorization act changed this to a period not exceeding 30 days after the date of the execution of the search warrant. Courts were given the opportunity to extend this period if they were provided good cause to do so. Section 213 states that delayed notifications could be issued if there is \"reasonable cause to believe that providing immediate notification of the execution of the warrant may have an adverse result\". This was criticized, particularly by the ACLU, for allowing potential abuse by law enforcement agencies and was later amended to prevent a delayed notification \"if the adverse results consist only of unduly delaying a trial\". In September 2007 an Oregon US District Court struck down the Sneak and Peak provisions of the USA PATRIOT ACT, but in December 2009 the Ninth Circuit overturned this decision.\nThe reauthorization act also legislates increased congressional oversight for emergency disclosures by communication providers undertaken under section 212 of the USA PATRIOT Act. The duration of FISA surveillance and physical search orders were increased. Surveillance performed against \"lone wolf terrorists\" under section 207 of the USA PATRIOT Act were increased to 120 days for an initial order, while pen registers and trap and trace device extensions under FISA were increased from 90 days to a year. The reauthorization act also increased congressional oversight, requiring a semi-annual report into physical searches and the use of pen registers and trap and trace devices under FISA. The \"lone wolf terrorist\" provision (Section 207) was a sunset provision that also was to have expired; however, this was enhanced by the \"Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004\". The reauthorization act extended the expiration date to December 31, 2009. The amendment to material support law done in the \"Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act\" was also made permanent. The definition of terrorism was further expanded to include receiving military-type training from a foreign terrorist organization and narcoterrorism. Other provisions of the reauthorization act was to merge the law outlawing train wrecking (\u00a0https://) and the law outlawing attacks on mass transportation systems (\u00a0https://) into a new section of Title 18 of the U.S. Code (\u00a0https://) and also to criminalize the act of planning a terrorist attack against a mass transport system. Forfeiture law was further changed and now assets within U.S. jurisdiction will be seized for illegally trafficking in nuclear, chemical, biological or radiological weapons technology or material, if such offense is punishable under foreign law by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year. Alternatively, this applies if similar punishment would be so punishable if committed within the U.S. A sense of Congress was further expressed that victims of terrorism should be entitled to the forfeited assets of terrorists.\nThe Trump administration delivered a letter to Congress in August 2019 urging them to make permanent three surveillance provisions of the Patriot Act. The provisions included section 215, which enables domestic call-record collection as well as the collection of other types of business records.\nIn November 2019, the House approved a three-month extension of the Patriot Act which would have expired on December 15, 2019. It was included as part of a bigger stop-gap spending bill aimed at preventing government shutdown which was approved by a vote of 231\u2013192. The vote was mostly along party lines with Democrats voting in favor and Republicans voting against. Republican opposition was largely due to the bill's failure to include $5 billion for border security. Ten Democrats voted against the bill. This group included a number of progressive Democrats who urged their colleagues to oppose the bill over the measure to extend surveillance. Representative Justin Amash (Independent) submitted an amendment to remove the Patriot Act provisions, but it was defeated by the House Rules committee.\nOn March 10, 2020, Jerry Nadler proposed a bill to reauthorize the Patriot Act, and it was then approved by the majority of US House of Representatives after 152 Democrats joined the GOP in supporting the extension. The surveillance powers of the Patriot Act needed renewal by March 15, 2020, and after it expired, the U.S. Senate approved an amended version of the bill. After President Donald Trump threatened to veto the bill, the House of Representatives issued an indefinite postponement of the vote to pass the Senate version of the bill; as of \u00a02020[ [update]], the Patriot Act remains expired.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32193", "revid": "5876785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32193", "title": "Unreal (1998 video game)", "text": "First-person shooter game\nUnreal is a 1998 first-person shooter game developed by Epic MegaGames and Digital Extremes and published by GT Interactive for Microsoft Windows. It was powered by Unreal Engine, an original game engine. The game reached sales of 1.5 million units by 2002.\nSince the release of \"Unreal\", the franchise has had one and a second series based on the \"Unreal\" universe referred to as the \"Unreal Tournament\" series. One official bonus pack, the Epic-released Fusion Map Pack, can be downloaded free of charge. Unreal Mission Pack I: Return to Na Pali, developed by Legend Entertainment, was released in June 1999, and added 17 new missions to the single-player campaign of \"Unreal\". \"Unreal\" and \"Return to Na Pali\" would later be bundled together as Unreal Gold. Additionally, the games were updated to run on the Unreal Tournament version of the game engine.\n\"Unreal\" became free to download in November 2024.\nPlot.\nThe player takes on the role of Prisoner 849, aboard the prison spacecraft \"Vortex Rikers\". During transport to a moon-based prison, the ship is pulled to an uncharted planet, before reaching its destination. The ship crash-lands on the lip of a canyon on the planet Na Pali, home of the Nali, a primitive tribal race of four-armed humanoids. The Nali and their planet have been subjugated by the Skaarj, a race of savage yet technologically advanced reptilian humanoids, who also have an army of genetically engineered Brutes and an enslaved race of warriors, known as the Krall. Skaarj troops board the downed \"Vortex Rikers\" and kill the remaining survivors, except for Prisoner 849, who manages to find a weapon and escape from the ship.\nThe planet Na Pali is rich in \"Tarydium\", a mineral that is found as light blue crystals, possessing a high energy yield and are the reason the Skaarj have invaded. The Vortex Rikers had crashed near one of the many mines and processing facilities that the Skaarj have built. Prisoner 849 travels through the mines, meeting Nali slaves along the way and eventually reaching the ruins of Nali temples, villages and cities, where the extent of the Nali's suffering and exploitation become clear. The player passes through a water temple and a massive arena, where the player must kill a giant beast called a Titan.\nThroughout the game, the player stumbles upon the remains of other humans, often with electronic journals that detail their last days and hint toward the cause of their demise. Usually, these tales are of desperate struggles to hide from the Skaarj, or other bloodthirsty inhabitants of the planet. The player never meets another live human, aside from a wounded crew member on the bridge of the prison ship, who gasps and dies immediately. Prisoner 849 is likely the only human alive on the planet Na Pali throughout the duration of the game.\nPrisoner 849 continues to make their way through a series of alien installations, a second crashed human spaceship and ancient Nali temples infested with Skaarj troops and their minions, before eventually arriving at the Nali Castle. Inside the castle, the prisoner locates a teleporter that leads to the Skaarj Mothership. The mothership proves to be a vast labyrinth, but Prisoner 849 manages to find and destroy the ship's reactor, whilst fighting their way through hordes of Skaarj. The reactor's destruction plunges the vessel into darkness and after navigating the ship's corridors in the dark, the player finally arrives at the Skaarj Queen's chamber, where they fight and ultimately, kill the Queen. Prisoner 849 jumps into the Queen's personal escape pod as the mothership disintegrates. Although the prisoner survives the horrors of Na Pali, their escape pod is left to drift in space, with only a slim hope of being found.\nExpansion plot.\nThe expansion, Return to Na Pali, developed by Legend Entertainment, picks up not long after \"Unreal\"'s ending; Prisoner 849 is found by a human warship, the UMS \"Bodega Bay\". The Unified Military Services (UMS) conscript the prisoner into service, upon learning their identity, forcing Prisoner 849 to return to Na Pali in order to locate the downed ship UMS \"Prometheus\". There, the prisoner is ordered to retrieve some weapons research. In return, the prisoner will receive a full pardon and transportation back to Earth, though the real plan is revealed to be maintaining the secrecy of the mission, by killing the prisoner immediately after the information is secured.\nUpon arriving at the \"Prometheus\", Prisoner 849 finds the secret weapons log, but soon after, they find a working radio communicator nearby. The prisoner listens to a recently recorded and archived conversation between the \"Bodega Bay\" and a nearby space station, the UMS \"Starlight\", exposing the military's treachery. As Prisoner 849 transmits the research log, a squad of marines beam on board \"Prometheus\", intending to eliminate the prisoner who manages to escape into a nearby mine system.\nOnce again, Prisoner 849 is forced to traverse a series of alien facilities and Nali temples, in an attempt to locate another way off the planet. Eventually, the prisoner ends up at another Nali Castle, where a small space shuttle is stored. After fighting through Skaarj, Krall and other monsters, the prisoner battles the final opponent, a Skaarj Warlord, before killing it and managing to take off in the spacecraft. \"Bodega Bay\", however, is waiting in orbit and launches a missile at the prisoner's ship. The prisoner outmanoeuvres the missile, and leads it back to \"Bodega Bay\" on a collision course. The large ship is disabled by the ensuing blast, and Prisoner 849 escapes into space.\nDevelopment.\n\"Unreal\" was jointly developed by Epic MegaGames and Digital Extremes and mostly funded with the proceeds from \"Epic Pinball\", Epic's best selling shareware game. In the February 1997 issue of \"Next Generation\", lead designer James Schmalz recalled how it started:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I made the terrain first. A \"Magic Carpet\"-type terrain ... I was experimenting with a cavern-set, robot-type game, and I progressed to the continuous mesh technique that we have now, so I changed it from caverns to outdoors. By then I had these polygon creatures, like this dragon flying around \u2013 that was the first good polygon creature we made up. From there we added buildings, and [lead programmer] Tim [Sweeney] got into making this editor for doing the buildings \u2013 after that, it took off ... So I started focusing on the creatures and the artwork, and Tim took over the engine. [Co-designer] Cliff [Bleszinski] came on ... Because the editor was making it so easy to put together the structures, we had the tool to make the indoor areas, so there was less focus on the outdoor stuff.\nWhile the team still had only the outdoor terrain and the dragon in place, Intel invited Epic MegaGames to demonstrate \"Unreal\" to them. Following the demonstration, Intel told them about their upcoming MMX instruction set. Sweeney was immediately excited by the possibilities MMX presented, and put together a working MMX version of the rendering code before Epic had even received a chip with MMX.\nOriginally, \"Unreal\" was going to feature a large status bar and centered weapons, similar to \"Doom\" and \"Quake\". As development progressed, various levels were cut from development. A few of these levels reappeared in the \"Return to Na Pali\" expansion pack. A number of enemies from early versions are present in the released software, but with modifications and improvements to their appearance. One monster that didn't make the cut was a dragon. One of the weapons shown in early screenshots was the \"Quadshot\" \u2013 a four-barreled shotgun; the model remains in-game, while there is no code for the weapon to function (several user-made modifications bring the weapon back in the game). Another weapon shown was a different pistol, but this may have just been an early version of the Automag. At one point, the rifle could fire three shots at once, which is wrongly stated as the alternate fire in the \"Unreal\" manual that comes with \"Unreal Anthology\".\nInitially the game's player character was to be female, but as the number of games with female playable characters increased, the team decided to allow the player to select from a male character and a female character.\nIn late 1996 GT Interactive secured exclusive global publishing rights to \"Unreal\".\nWith the game still in development, Epic MegaGames started work on a port for the Nintendo 64DD. Mark Rein revealed that while a port for the standalone Nintendo 64 was possible, the limited storage space of the cartridge format would have necessitated heavy compromises to the details on the monsters and the number of unique textures. A Dreamcast port was also planned, and was in fact demoed for the system's capabilities early on its lifecycle, but was canceled when GT Interactive entered financial struggles (one of the reasons they would be purchased by Infogrames in 1999), and a port of \"Unreal Tournament\" would take its place in 2001.\nSince \"Unreal\" came packaged with its own scripting language called UnrealScript, it soon developed a large community on the Internet which was able to add new modifications, or mods, in order to change or enhance gameplay. This feature greatly added to the overall longevity of the product and provided an incentive for new development. A map editor and overall complete modification program called UnrealEd also came with the package.\n\"Unreal\"'s method of creating maps differs in major ways from that of \"Quake\". The bundled UnrealEd map editor uses the \"Unreal\" engine to render scenes exactly as they appear in-game, as opposed to external editors like Worldcraft attempting to recreate it with different methods. Whereas \"Quake\" maps are compiled from a variety of different components, \"Unreal\" maps are inherently editable on the fly. This allows anybody to edit any map that is created, including the maps included with the game.\nGraphics.\nThe \"Unreal\" engine brought a host of graphical improvements rarely seen at that time. \"Unreal\"'s software renderer allowed software features as rich as the hardware renderers of the time, including colored lighting and even a limited form of texture filtering referred to by Sweeney as an ordered \"texture coordinate space\" dither. Early pre-release versions of \"Unreal\" were based entirely on software rendering.\n\"Unreal\" was one of the first games to utilize detail texturing. This type of multiple texturing enhances the surfaces of objects with a second texture that shows material detail. When the player stands within a small distance from most surfaces, the detail texture will fade in and make the surface appear much more complex (high-resolution) instead of becoming increasingly blurry. Notable surfaces with these special detail textures included computer monitors, pitted metal surfaces aboard the prison ship, golden metal doors, and stone surfaces within Nali temples. This extra texture layer was not applied to character models. The resulting simulation of material detail on game objects was intended to aid the player's suspension of disbelief. For many years after \"Unreal\"'s release (and \"Unreal Tournament\"'s release), detail texturing only worked well with the S3 MeTaL and Glide renderer. It was, in fact, disabled in the Direct3D renderer by default (but could be re-enabled in the \"Unreal.ini\" file) due to performance and quality issues caused by the driver, while it was present even on hardware many times more powerful than the original S3 Savage3D and 3Dfx Voodoo Graphics.\nBecause of \"Unreal\"'s long development time, the course of development occurred during the emergence and rapid progression of hardware 3D accelerators. Along with the advanced software 3D renderer, \"Unreal\" was built to take advantage of the 3Dfx Glide API, which emerged as the dominant interface towards the end of the game's development. When \"Unreal\" was finally released, Microsoft's Direct3D API was growing rapidly in popularity and Epic was fairly quick to develop a renderer for their game engine. Direct3D renderer, however, released initially to support the new Matrox G200, was less capable and slower than the Glide support, especially in the beginning when it was unstable, slow, and had many graphics quality issues. \"Unreal\" also had official OpenGL support.\nAudio.\nWhile many game companies went from FM synthesis or General MIDI in the early 1990s to enhanced CD audio and pre-rendered audio, many of the Epic Games used the less common system of module music, composed with a tracker, which used stored PCM sound samples of musical instruments, that would be then played in runtime based on sequencing instructions in the file, to produce music. Epic had been using this technology for other games such as \"Jazz Jackrabbit\" and \"\", which allowed relatively rich music to be stored in files usually smaller than one megabyte. As a module file could be started from different points in its duration and contain multiple different music loops, this technology allowed easy implementation of dynamic music for mood changes in \"Unreal\". The \"Unreal\" soundtrack was written by MOD music authors Alexander Brandon and Michiel van den Bos with a few selected tracks by Dan Gardop\u00e9e and Andrew Sega (Straylight Productions). \"Unreal\"'s music engine also supports CD audio tracks. The game also made use of the Aureal 3D technology.\nCommunity patch support.\nIn July 2000 the official support ended with patch 226f by Epic MegaGames. Therefore, with the awareness and permission of Epic, the fan community started the \"OldUnreal\" Community patch project based on the original source code in 2008. The patches have come to include features such as support for new graphics APIs like DirectX 9, an updated OpenGL renderer, an OpenAL sound renderer and fixes for many incompatibilities with modern operating systems and hardware. The latest patch iteration, 227j, was released on June 23, 2022, and as of November 2025 work on the next version, 227k, is ongoing.\nMac OS.\nThe Mac version was released in parallel with the PC version. It supported RAVE hardware acceleration as well as 3DFX's Voodoo, built-in software rendering and, later on, OpenGL rendering. RAVE acceleration support allowed the game to support hardware 3D acceleration with just about every Mac that included it. It also supported Apple's Game Sprockets.\nThe last update for the Mac OS port was version 224b, which breaks network compatibility between it and the PC version, as well as lacking support for some user-created content made for 225 and 226f. Westlake Interactive, the company responsible for the port, claimed that previous patches were produced voluntarily in their free time, beyond their contractual obligations. They also stated that they did not receive the code for the 225 patch and that it had become unavailable due to Epic moving on to develop version 226.\nLinux.\nAn unofficial content port of the single-player maps to Linux was created by several users of icculus.org, which allowed the \"Unreal\" single-player game content to be run as a modification for \"Unreal Tournament\". The online retailer Tux Games at one point sold a box set including the Linux version. The 227 community patch contains a full Linux port for Unreal.\nSega Saturn.\nIn 2023, one fan has ported the entire first two levels of the game to the Sega Saturn as a tech demo, with plans to port more portions of the game down the line.\nBooks.\nTwo novels titled \"Hard Crash\" and \"Prophet's Power\" were published, expanding on the premise and story first introduced in \"Unreal\". \"Prophet's Power\", numbered as the second book in the series, is actually a prequel to the first, \"Hard Crash\", thus it is harder for readers to understand what happened in the story. A book called \"Escape to Na Pali: A Journey to the Unreal\" was published on June 23, 2014, written by Kaitlin Tremblay and Alan Williamson.\nReception.\nSales.\nIn the United States, \"Unreal\" debuted in third place on PC Data's computer game sales chart for the week ending May 23, 1998, at an average retail price (ARP) of $50. It climbed to first place the following week, while its ARP dropped to $40. Finishing May as the country's second-highest computer game seller of the month, behind \"StarCraft\", \"Unreal\" proceeded to alternate with \"StarCraft\" between positions 1 and 2 on the weekly charts through the May 31 \u2013 June 27 period. Jason Ocampo of \"Computer Games Strategy Plus\" characterized the games' competition for first place as a \"tug-of-war\". \"Unreal\" ultimately held at #2 behind \"StarCraft\" on the monthly chart for June as a whole, and became the United States' 15th-best-selling computer game of 1998's first half.\n\"Unreal\" maintained a position in PC Data's weekly top 10 from June 28 through August 1. It continued its streak at second place for July overall, and totaled sales in excess of 120,000 copies in the United States by the end of that month, according to PC Data. \"IGN\" described this performance as \"a huge hit\". In early August, GT Interactive reported that global sales of \"Unreal\" had topped 500,000 copies, which contributed to growth at the publisher. The game went on to appear in PC Data's weekly top 10 from August 2 through the week ending September 12, when it fell to #10, and in the monthly top 10 for both August and September. After falling to 19th place for October in total, it exited the monthly top 20. Ultimately, PC Data declared \"Unreal\" the United States' 11th-best-selling computer game during the January\u2013November 1998 period.\nIn the United States, \"Unreal\" finished 1998 as the year's 13th-biggest computer game seller, with sales of 291,300 units and revenues of $10.96 million. Its ARP for the year was $38. According to \"GameDaily\", the game's sales in the United States reached 350,000 units by January 1999. Worldwide sales surpassed one million units by September 1999, and reached 1.5 million copies by November 2002.\nCritical response.\n\"Unreal\" received positive reviews upon release. Critics praised the graphics, gameplay, music, atmosphere, enemy behavior, and bot support in multiplayer mode, but criticized the lag-ridden online multiplayer mode.\n\"Macworld\"'s Michael Gowan wrote: \"This 3-D shoot-'em-up reinvigorates a tired genre. Plot, atmosphere, and exploration mix with ferocious enemies to make this game stand out from the pack\".\n\"Next Generation\" gave five stars out of five for the PC version of the game, and called it the best action game for the platform. In 2018 \"CNET\" praised the game at its 20th anniversary.\nAccolades.\nIn 1998, \"PC Gamer US\" declared \"Unreal\" the 13th-best computer game ever released.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32196", "revid": "24859987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32196", "title": "U-2", "text": ""}
{"id": "32197", "revid": "50955950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32197", "title": "USS Monitor", "text": "First ironclad of the US Navy, 1861\u20131862\nUSS \"Monitor\" was an ironclad warship built for the United States Navy during the American Civil War and completed in early 1862, becoming the first such ship commissioned by the Navy. \"Monitor\" played a central role in the Battle of Hampton Roads on 9 March under the command of Lieutenant John L. Worden, where she fought the casemate ironclad (built on the hull of the scuttled steam frigate ) to a stalemate. The design of the ship was distinguished by its revolving turret, which was designed by American inventor Theodore Timby; it was quickly duplicated and established the monitor class and type of armored warship built for the American Navy over the next several decades.\nThe remainder of the ship was designed by Swedish-born engineer and inventor John Ericsson, and built in 101 days in Brooklyn, New York, on the East River beginning in late 1861. \"Monitor\" presented a new concept in ship design and employed a variety of new inventions and innovations in ship building that caught the attention of the world. The impetus to build \"Monitor\" was prompted by the news that the Confederates had raised the scuttled \"Merrimack\" and were building an iron-plated armored vessel named the \"Virginia\" on her hull in the old Federal naval shipyard at Gosport, near Norfolk, that could effectively engage the Union ships blockading Hampton Roads harbor and the James River leading northwest to Richmond (capital of the Confederacy). They could ultimately advance unchallenged on Washington, D.C., up the Potomac River and other seacoast cities. Before \"Monitor\" could reach Hampton Roads, the Confederate ironclad had already destroyed the sail frigates and and had run the steam frigate aground. That night, \"Monitor\" arrived and, just as \"Virginia\" set to finish off \"Minnesota\" and \"St. Lawrence\" on the second day, the new Union ironclad confronted the Confederate ship, preventing her from wreaking further destruction on the wooden Union ships. A four-hour battle ensued, each ship pounding the other with close-range cannon fire, although neither ship could destroy or seriously damage the other. This was the first battle fought between armored warships and marked a turning point in naval warfare.\nThe Confederates were forced to scuttle and destroy \"Virginia\" as they withdrew in early May 1862 from Norfolk and its naval shipyard, while \"Monitor\" sailed up the James River to support the Union Army during the Peninsula Campaign under General-in-Chief George B. McClellan. The ship participated in the Battle of Drewry's Bluff later that month, and remained in the area giving support to General McClellan's forces on land until she was ordered to join the Union Navy blockaders off North Carolina in December. On her way there, she foundered while under tow during a storm off Cape Hatteras on the last day of the year. \"Monitor\"'s wreck was discovered in 1973 and has been partially salvaged. Her guns, gun turret, engine, and other relics are on display at the Mariners' Museum in Newport News, Virginia, a few miles from the site of her most important military action.\nConception.\nWhile the concept of ships protected by armor existed before the advent of the ironclad \"Monitor\", the need for iron plating on ship arose only after the explosive shell-firing Paixhans gun was introduced to naval warfare in the 1820s. The use of heavy iron plating on the sides of warships was not practical until steam propulsion matured enough to carry its great weight. Developments in gun technology had progressed by the 1840s so that no practical thickness of wood could withstand the power of a shell. In response, the United States began construction in 1854 of a steam-powered ironclad warship, \"Stevens Battery\", but work was delayed and the designer, Robert Stevens, died in 1856, stalling further work. Since there was no pressing need for such a ship at the time, there was little demand to continue work on the unfinished vessel. It was France that introduced the first operational armored ships as well as the first shell guns and rifled cannons. Experience during the Crimean War of 1854\u20131855 showed that armored ships could withstand repeated hits without significant damage when French ironclad floating batteries defeated Russian coastal fortifications during the Battle of Kinburn. Ericsson claimed to have sent the French Emperor Napol\u00e9on III a proposal for a monitor-type design, with a gun turret, in September 1854, but no record of any such submission could be found in the archives of the French Ministry of the Navy (\"Ministre de la Marine\") when they were searched by naval historian James Phinney Baxter III. The French followed those ships with the first ocean-going ironclad, the armored frigate in 1859, and the British responded with .\nThe Union Navy's attitude towards ironclads changed quickly when it was learned that the Confederates were converting the captured to an ironclad at the naval shipyard in Norfolk, Virginia. Subsequently, the urgency of \"Monitor\"'s completion and deployment to Hampton Roads was driven by fears of what the Confederate ironclad, now renamed \"Virginia\", would be capable of doing, not only to Union ships but to cities along the coast and riverfronts. Northern newspapers published daily accounts of the Confederates' progress in converting the \"Merrimack\" to an ironclad; this prompted the Union Navy to complete and deploy \"Monitor\" as soon as possible.\nWord of \"Merrimack\"'s reconstruction and conversion was confirmed in the North in late February 1862 when Mary Louvestre of Norfolk, a freed slave who worked as a housekeeper for one of the Confederate engineers working on \"Merrimack\", made her way through Confederate lines with news that the Confederates were building an ironclad warship. Concealed in her dress was a message from a Union sympathizer who worked in the Navy Yard warning that the former \"Merrimack\", renamed \"Virginia\" by the Confederates, was nearing completion. Upon her arrival in Washington Louvestre managed to meet with Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles and informed him that the Confederates were nearing the completion of their ironclad, which surprised Welles. Convinced by the papers Louvestre was carrying, he had production of \"Monitor\" sped up. Welles later recorded in his memoirs that \"Mrs. Louvestre encountered no small risk in bringing this information\u00a0...\".\nApproval.\nAfter the United States received word of the construction of \"Virginia\", Congress appropriated $1.5 million on 3 August 1861 to build one or more armored steamships. It also ordered the creation of a board to inquire into the various designs proposed for armored ships. The Union Navy advertised for proposals for \"iron-clad steam vessels of war\" on 7 August and Welles appointed three senior officers as the Ironclad Board the following day. Their task was to \"examine plans for the completion of iron-clad vessels\" and consider its costs.\nEricsson originally made no submission to the board, but became involved when Cornelius Bushnell, the sponsor of the proposal that became the armored sloop , needed to have his design reviewed by a naval constructor. The board required a guarantee from Bushnell that his ship would float despite the weight of its armor and Cornelius H. DeLamater of New York City recommended that Bushnell consult with his friend Ericsson. The two first met on 9 September and again on the following day, after Ericsson had time to evaluate \"Galena\"'s design. During this second meeting, Ericsson showed Bushnell a model of his own design, the future \"Monitor\", derived from his 1854 design. Bushnell got Ericsson's permission to show the model to Welles, who told Bushnell to show it to the board. Upon review of Ericsson's unusual design, the board was skeptical, concerned that such a vessel would not float, especially in rough seas, and rejected the proposal of a completely iron laden ship. President Lincoln, who had also examined the design, overruled them. Ericsson assured the board his ship would float exclaiming, \"The sea shall ride over her and she shall live in it like a duck\". On 15 September, after further deliberations, the board accepted Ericsson's proposal. The Ironclad Board evaluated 17 different designs, but recommended only three for procurement on 16 September, including Ericsson's \"Monitor\" design.\nThe three ironclad ships selected differed substantially in design and degree of risk. \"Monitor\" was the most innovative design by virtue of its low freeboard, shallow-draft iron hull, and total dependence on steam power. The riskiest element of its design was its rotating gun turret, something that had not previously been tested by any navy. Ericsson's guarantee of delivery in 100 days proved to be decisive in choosing his design despite the risk involved.\nDesign and description.\n\"Monitor\" was an unusual vessel in almost every respect and was sometimes sarcastically described by the press and other critics as \"Ericsson's folly\", \"cheesebox on a raft\" and the \"Yankee cheesebox\". The most prominent feature on the vessel was a large cylindrical gun turret mounted amidships above the low-freeboard upper hull, also called the \"raft\". This extended well past the sides of the lower, more traditionally shaped hull. A small armored pilot house was fitted on the upper deck towards the bow, however, its position prevented \"Monitor\" from firing her guns straight forward. One of Ericsson's prime goals in designing the ship was to present the smallest possible target to enemy gunfire. The ship was long overall, had a beam of and had a maximum draft of . \"Monitor\" had a tonnage of 776 tons burthen and displaced . Her crew consisted of 49 officers and enlisted men.\nThe ship was powered by a two-cylinder horizontal vibrating-lever steam engine, also designed by Ericsson, which drove a propeller, whose shaft was nine inches in diameter. The engine used steam generated by two horizontal fire-tube boilers at a maximum pressure of . The engine was designed to give the ship a top speed of , but \"Monitor\" was slower in service. The engine had a bore of and a stroke of . The ship carried of coal. Ventilation for the vessel was supplied by two centrifugal blowers near the stern, each of which was powered by a steam engine. One fan circulated air throughout the ship, but the other one forced air through the boilers, which depended on this forced draught. Leather belts connected the blowers to their engines and they would stretch when wet, often disabling the fans and boilers. The ship's pumps were steam operated and water would accumulate in the ship if the pumps could not get enough steam to work.\n\"Monitor\"'s turret measured in diameter and high, constructed with of armor (11 inches in front at the gun ports) rendering the overall vessel somewhat top heavy. Its rounded shape helped to deflect cannon shot. A pair of steam-powered donkey engines rotated the turret through a set of gears; a full rotation was made in 22.5 seconds during testing on 9 February 1862. Fine control of the turret proved to be difficult; as there was no brake the steam engines would have to be placed in reverse if the turret overshot its mark, or another full rotation would have to be made. The only way to see out of the turret was through the gun ports; when the guns were not in use, or withdrawn for reloading during battle, heavy iron port stoppers would swing down into place to close the gunports. Including the guns, the turret weighed approximately ; the entire weight rested on an iron spindle that had to be jacked up using a wedge before the turret could rotate. The spindle was in diameter which gave it ten times the strength needed in preventing the turret from sliding sideways. When not in use, the turret rested on a brass ring on the deck that was intended to form a watertight seal. In service, however, this proved to leak heavily, despite caulking by the crew. The gap between the turret and the deck proved to be a problem as debris and shell fragments entered the gap and jammed the turrets of several s, which used the same turret design, during the First Battle of Charleston Harbor in April 1863. Direct hits on the turret with heavy shot could bend the spindle, which could also jam the turret. To gain access to the turret from below, or to hoist up powder and shot during battle, the turret had to rotate to face starboard, which would line up the entry hatch in the floor of the turret with an opening in the deck below. The roof of the turret was lightly built to facilitate any needed exchange of the ship's guns and to improve ventilation, with only gravity holding the roof plates in place.\nThe turret was intended to mount a pair of smoothbore Dahlgren guns, but they were not ready in time and guns were substituted, weighing approximately each. \"Monitor\"'s guns used the standard propellant charge of specified by the 1860 ordnance for targets \"distant\", \"near\", and \"ordinary\", established by the gun's designer Dahlgren himself. They could fire a round shot or shell up to a range of at an elevation of +15\u00b0.\nThe top of the armored deck was only about above the waterline. It was protected by two layers of wrought iron armor. The sides of the \"raft\" consisted of three to five layers of iron plates, backed by about of pine and oak. Three of the plates extended the full height of the side, but the two innermost plates did not extend all the way down. Ericsson originally intended to use either six 1-inch plates or a single outer plate backed by three plates, but the thicker plate required too much time to roll. The two innermost plates were riveted together while the outer plates were bolted to the inner ones. A ninth plate, only thick and wide, was bolted over the butt joints of the innermost layer of armor. Glass portholes in the deck provided natural light for the interior of the ship; in action these were covered by iron plates.\nAfter the duel between the two ironclads at Hampton Roads there was concern by some Navy officials who witnessed the battle that \"Monitor\"'s design might allow for easy boarding by the Confederates. In a letter dated 27 April 1862 Lieutenant Commander O.C. Badger wrote to Lieutenant H. A. Wise, Assistant Inspector of Ordnance, advising the use of \"liquid fire\", scalding water from the boiler through hoses and pipes, sprayed out via the vents and pilothouse window, to repel enemy boarders. Wise who was aboard and inspected \"Monitor\" after the battle responded in a letter of 30 April 1862: \"With reference to the Monitor, the moment I jumped on board of her after the fight I saw that a steam tug with twenty men could have taken the upper part of her in as many seconds\u00a0... I hear that hot water pipes are arranged so as to scald the assailants when they may dare to set foot on her.\" The chance to employ such a tactic never arose. There are conflicting accounts as to whether such an anti-personnel provision was installed.\nConstruction.\nCommodore Joseph Smith, Chief of the Bureau of Yards and Docks, sent Ericsson formal notice of the acceptance of his proposal on 21 September 1861. Six days later, Ericsson signed a contract with Bushnell, John F. Winslow and John A. Griswold which stated that the four partners would equally share in the profits or the losses incurred by the construction of the ironclad. There was one major delay, however, over the signing of the actual contract with the government. Welles insisted that if \"Monitor\" did not prove to be a \"complete success\", the builders would have to refund every cent to the government. Winslow balked at this draconian provision and had to be persuaded by his partners to sign after the Navy rejected his attempt to amend the contract. The contract was finally signed on 4 October for a price of $275,000 to be paid in installments as work progressed.\nPreliminary work had begun well before that date, however, and Ericsson's consortium contracted with Thomas F. Rowland of the Continental Iron Works at Bushwick Inlet (in modern-day Greenpoint, Brooklyn) on 25 October for construction of \"Monitor\"'s hull. Her keel was laid the same day. The turret was built and assembled at the Novelty Iron Works in Manhattan, disassembled and shipped to Bushwick Inlet where it was reassembled. The ship's steam engines and machinery were constructed at the DeLamater Iron Works, also in Manhattan. Chief Engineer Alban C. Stimers, who once served aboard \"Merrimack\", was appointed Superintendent of the ship while she was undergoing construction. Although never formally assigned to the crew, he remained aboard her as an inspector during her maiden voyage and battle.\nConstruction progressed in fits and starts, plagued by a number of short delays in the delivery of iron and occasional shortages of cash, but they did not delay the ship's progress by more than a few weeks. The hundred days allotted for her construction passed on 12 January, but the Navy chose not to penalize the consortium. The name \"Monitor\", meaning \"one who admonishes and corrects wrongdoers\", was proposed by Ericsson on 20 January 1862 and approved by Assistant Secretary of the Navy Gustavus Fox. While Ericsson stood on its deck in defiance of all his critics who thought she would never float, \"Monitor\" was launched on 30 January 1862 to the cheers of the watching crowd, even those who had bet that the ship would sink straight to the bottom, and commissioned on 25 February.\nEven before \"Monitor\" was commissioned, she ran an unsuccessful set of sea trials on 19 February. Valve problems with the main engine and one of the fan engines prevented her from reaching the Brooklyn Navy Yard from Bushwick Inlet and she had to be towed there the next day. These issues were easily fixed and \"Monitor\" was ordered to sail for Hampton Roads on 26 February, but her departure had to be delayed one day to load ammunition. On the morning of 27 February the ship entered the East River preparatory to leaving New York, but proved to be all but unsteerable and had to be towed back to the navy yard. Upon examination, the steering gear controlling the rudder had been improperly installed and Rowland offered to realign the rudder, which he estimated to take only a day. Ericsson, however, preferred to revise the steering gear by adding an extra set of pulleys as he believed it would take less time. His modification proved to be successful during trials on 4 March. Gunnery trials were successfully performed the previous day, although Stimers twice nearly caused disasters as he did not understand how the recoil mechanism worked on Ericsson's carriage for the 11-inch guns. Instead of tightening them to reduce the recoil upon firing, he loosened them so that both guns struck the back of the turret, fortunately without hurting anybody or damaging the guns.\n\"Monitor\" employed over forty patented inventions and marked a significant departure from the dominant naval vessels of the time. Ericsson's innovative turret design, although not without flaws, facilitated the widespread adoption of rotating guns on warships in navies worldwide. Because \"Monitor\" was an experimental craft, urgently needed, hurriedly constructed, and almost immediately put to sea, a number of problems were discovered during her maiden voyage to Hampton Roads and during the battle there. Yet she was still able to challenge \"Virginia\" and prevent her from further destroying the remaining ships in the Union flotilla blockading Hampton Roads.\nDuring the \"boom time\" of the Civil War, Ericsson could have made a fortune with his inventions used in \"Monitor\", but instead gave the U.S. government all his \"Monitor\" patent rights saying it was his \"contribution to the glorious Union cause\".\nCrew.\nThe original officers at the time of \"Monitor\"'s commissioning were:\n\"Monitor\"'s crew were all volunteers and totaled 49 officers and enlisted men. The ship required ten officers: a commander, an executive officer, four engineers, one medical officer, two masters and a paymaster. Before Worden was allowed to select, assemble, and commit a crew to \"Monitor\", the vessel had to be completed.\nFour of the officers were line officers and responsible for the handling of the vessel and operation of guns during battle, while the engineering officers were considered a class unto themselves. In \"Monitor\"'s turret, Greene and Stodder supervised loading and firing of the two Dahlgrens. Each gun was crewed by eight men. In Worden's report of 27 January 1862 to Welles, he stated he believed 17 men and 2 officers would be the maximum number in the turret that allowed the crew to work without getting in each other's way.\n\"Monitor\" also required petty officers: among them was Daniel Toffey, Worden's nephew. Worden had selected Toffey to serve as his captain's clerk. Two black Americans were also among the enlisted men in the crew.\nLiving quarters for the senior officers consisted of eight separate well-furnished cabins, each provided with a small oak table and chair, an oil lamp, shelves and drawers and a canvas floor covering covered with a rug. The entire crew were given goat-skin mats to sleep on. Lighting for each living area was provided by small skylights in the deck above, which were covered by an iron hatch during battle. The officer's wardroom was located forward of the berth deck where officers would eat their meals, hold meetings or socialize during what little spare time they had. It was well furnished with an oriental rug, a large oak table and other such items. Ericsson had personally paid for the costs of all the officer's furnishings.\nMany details of \"Monitor\"'s history and insights of everyday crew life have been discovered from correspondence sent from the various crew members to family and friends while serving aboard the ironclad. In particular the correspondence of George S. Geer, who sent more than 80 letters, often referred to as \"The Monitor Chronicles\", to his wife Martha during the entire time of \"Monitor\"'s service provide many details and insights into every chapter of the ironclad's short-lived history, offering a rare perspective of a sailor's experience on the naval front during the Civil War. The letters of Acting Paymaster William F. Keeler to his wife Anna also corroborate many of the accounts of affairs that took place aboard \"Monitor\". The letters of Geer and Keeler are available for viewing and are housed at the Mariners' Museum in Virginia. Other crew members were interviewed later in life, like Louis N. Stodder, one of the last crew members to abandon \"Monitor\" minutes before she sank in a storm at sea, who was the last surviving crew member of \"Monitor\" and lived well into the 20th century.\nService.\nOn 6 March 1862, the ship departed New York bound for Fort Monroe, Virginia, towed by the ocean-going tug \"Seth Low\" and accompanied by the gunboats and . Worden, not trusting the seal between the turret and the hull, and ignoring Ericsson's advice, wedged the former in the up position and stuffed oakum and sail cloth in the gap. Rising seas that night washed the oakum away and water poured underneath the turret, as well as through the hawsepipe, various hatches, ventilation pipes, and the two funnels, so that the belts for the ventilation and boiler fans loosened and fell off and the fires in the boilers were nearly extinguished over the course of the next day; this created a toxic atmosphere in the engine room that knocked out most of the engine-room crew. First Assistant Engineer Isaac Newton ordered the engine room abandoned and had the able-bodied crew drag the afflicted engine room hands to the top of the turret where the fresh air could revive them. Both Newton and Stimers worked desperately to get the blowers to work, but they too succumbed to the noxious fumes and were taken above. One fireman was able to punch a hole in the fan box, drain the water, and restart the fan. Later that night, the wheel ropes controlling the ship's rudder jammed, making it nearly impossible to control the ship's heading in the rough seas. \"Monitor\" was now in danger of foundering, so Worden signaled \"Seth Low\" for help and had \"Monitor\" towed to calmer waters closer to shore so she was able to restart her engines later that evening. She rounded Cape Charles around 3:00\u00a0pm on 8 March and entered Chesapeake Bay, reaching Hampton Roads at 9:00\u00a0pm, well after the first day's fighting in the Battle of Hampton Roads had concluded.\nBattle of Hampton Roads.\nOn 8 March 1862, \"Virginia\", commanded by Commander Franklin Buchanan, was ready to engage the Union flotilla blockading the James River. \"Virginia\" was powered by \"Merrimack\"'s original engines, which had been condemned by the US Navy before her capture. The ship's chief engineer, H. Ashton Ramsay, served in \"Merrimack\" before the Civil War broke out and knew of the engines' unreliability, but Buchanan pushed forward undaunted.\nThe slow-moving \"Virginia\" attacked the Union blockading squadron in Hampton Roads, Virginia, destroying the sail frigates \"Cumberland\" and \"Congress\". Early in the battle, the steam frigate ran aground while attempting to engage \"Virginia\", and remained stranded throughout the battle. \"Virginia\", however, was unable to attack \"Minnesota\" before daylight faded. That day Buchanan was severely wounded in the leg and was relieved of command by Catesby ap Roger Jones.\nDays before the battle a telegraph cable was laid between Fortress Monroe, which overlooked Hampton Roads, and Washington. Washington was immediately informed of the dire situation after the initial battle. Many were now concerned \"Virginia\" would put to sea and begin bombarding cities such as New York while others feared she would ascend the Potomac River and attack Washington. In an emergency meeting among President Lincoln, Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary Welles and other senior naval officers, inquiries were made about \"Monitor\"'s ability to stop \"Virginia\"'s prospect of further destruction. When the temperamental Stanton learned that \"Monitor\" had only two guns, he expressed contempt and rage as he paced back and forth, further increasing the anxiety and despair among attendees of the meeting. Assurances from Admiral Dahlgren and other officers that \"Virginia\" was too massive to effectively approach Washington and that \"Monitor\" was capable of meeting the challenge gave him no consolation. After further deliberation, Lincoln was finally assured, but Stanton remained almost in a state of terror and sent telegrams to various governors and mayors of the coastal states warning them of the danger. Subsequently, Stanton approved a plan to load some sixty canal boats with stone and gravel and sink them in the Potomac, but Welles was able to convince Lincoln at the last moment that such a plan would only prevent \"Monitor\" and other Union ships from reaching Washington and that the barges should only be sunk if \"Virginia\" was able to make her way up the Potomac.\nAbout 9:00\u00a0pm, \"Monitor\" finally arrived on the scene, only to discover the destruction that \"Virginia\" had already wrought on the Union fleet. Worden was ordered upon reaching Hampton Roads to anchor alongside and report to Captain John Marston; Worden was briefed on the situation and received further orders to protect the grounded \"Minnesota\". By midnight, under the cover of darkness, \"Monitor\" quietly pulled up alongside and behind the \"Minnesota\" and waited.\nDuel of the ironclads.\nThe next morning at about 6:00\u00a0am \"Virginia\", accompanied by , and , got underway from Sewell's Point to finish off \"Minnesota\" and the rest of the blockaders, but were delayed from reaching Hampton Roads because of heavy fog until about 8:00\u00a0am. In \"Monitor\" Worden was already at his station in the pilot house while Greene took command of the turret. Samuel Howard, Acting Master of \"Minnesota\", who was familiar with Hampton Roads with its varying depths and shallow areas, had volunteered to be the pilot the night before and thus was accepted, while Quarter Master Peter Williams steered the vessel throughout the battle (Williams was later awarded the Medal of Honor for this act). The speaking tube used to communicate between the pilothouse and the turret broke early in the action, so Keeler and Toffey had to relay commands from Worden to Greene. As \"Virginia\" approached, she began firing at \"Minnesota\" from more than a mile away, a few of her shells hitting the vessel. When the firing was heard in the distance, Greene sent Keeler to the pilot house for permission to open fire as soon as possible; Worden ordered, \"Tell Mr. Greene not to fire till I give the word, to be cool and deliberate, to take sure aim and not waste a shot.\"\n\"Monitor\", to the surprise of \"Virginia\"'s crew, emerged from behind \"Minnesota\" and positioned herself between her and the grounded ship, preventing the Confederate ironclad from further engaging the vulnerable wooden ship at close range. At 8:45\u00a0am Worden gave the order to fire; Greene fired the first shots of the battle between the two ironclads, which harmlessly deflected off the Confederate ironclad. During the battle \"Monitor\" fired solid shot, about once every eight minutes, while \"Virginia\" fired shell exclusively. The ironclads fought, generally at close range, for about four hours, ending at 12:15\u00a0pm, ranging from a few yards to more than a hundred. Both ships were constantly in motion, maintaining a circular pattern. Because of \"Virginia\"'s weak engines, great size and weight, and a draft of , she was slow and difficult to maneuver, taking her half an hour to complete a 180-degree turn.\nDuring the engagement, the controls of the machinery driving \"Monitor\"'s turret spindle began to malfunction, making it extremely difficult to turn and stop the turret itself at a given position, so the crew simply let the turret continuously turn and fired their guns \"on the fly\" as they bore on \"Virginia\". \"Monitor\" received several direct hits on the turret, causing some bolts to violently shear off and ricochet around inside. The deafening sound of the impact stunned some of the crew, causing bleeding from noses and ears. However, neither vessel was able to sink or seriously damage the other. At one point, \"Virginia\" attempted to ram, but only struck \"Monitor\" a glancing blow and did no damage. The collision did, however, aggravate the damage to \"Virginia\"'s bow from when she had previously rammed \"Cumberland\". \"Monitor\" was also unable to do significant damage to \"Virginia\", possibly because her guns were firing with reduced charges, on advice from Commander John Dahlgren, the gun's designer, who lacked the \"preliminary information\" needed to determine what amount of charge was needed to \"pierce, dislocate or dislodge iron plates\" of various thicknesses and configurations. During the battle Stodder was stationed at the wheel that controlled the turning of the turret, but at one point when he was leaning against its side the turret received a direct hit directly opposite to him which knocked him clear across the inside, rendering him unconscious. He was taken below to recover and relieved by Stimers.\nThe two vessels were at such close range that they collided five times. By 11:00\u00a0am \"Monitor\"'s supply of shot in the turret had been exhausted. With one of the gun port covers jammed shut, she hauled off to shallow waters to resupply the turret and repair the damaged hatch, which could not be fixed. During the lull in the battle, Worden climbed through the gun port out onto the deck to get a better view of the overall situation. \"Virginia\", seeing \"Monitor\" turn away, turned her attention to \"Minnesota\" and fired shots that set the wooden vessel ablaze, also destroying the nearby tugboat \"Dragon\". When the turret was resupplied with ammunition, Worden returned to battle with only one gun able to fire.\nTowards the end of the engagement, Worden directed Williams to steer \"Monitor\" around the stern of the Confederate ironclad; Lieutenant Wood fired \"Virginia\"'s 7-inch Brooke gun at \"Monitor\"'s pilothouse, striking the forward side directly beneath the sight hold, cracking the structural \"iron log\" along the base of the narrow opening just as Worden was peering out. Worden was heard to cry out, \"My eyes\u2014I am blind!\" Others in the pilothouse had also been hit with fragments and were also bleeding. Temporarily blinded by shell fragments and gunpowder residue from the explosion, and believing the pilothouse to be severely damaged, Worden ordered Williams to sheer off into shallow water, where \"Virginia\" with her deep draft could not follow. There \"Monitor\" drifted idly for about twenty minutes. At the time the pilothouse was struck, Worden's injury was only known to those in the pilothouse and immediately nearby. With Worden severely wounded, command passed to the executive officer, Samuel Greene. Taken by surprise, he was briefly undecided as to what action to take next, but after assessing the damage, soon ordered \"Monitor\" to return to the battle.\nShortly after \"Monitor\" withdrew, \"Virginia\" ran aground, at which time Jones came down from the spar deck to find the gun crews not returning fire. Jones demanded to know why and was briefed by Lieutenant Eggleston that powder was low and precious, and given \"Monitor\"'s resistance to shot after two hours of battle, maintained that continued firing at that point would be a waste of ammunition. \"Virginia\" soon managed to break away and headed back towards Norfolk for needed repairs, believing that \"Monitor\" had withdrawn from battle. Greene did not pursue; like Worden, he was under orders to stay with and protect \"Minnesota\", an action for which he was later criticized.\nAs a result of the duel between the two ironclads, \"Monitor\" was struck 22 times, including nine hits to the turret and two to the pilothouse. She had managed to fire 41 shots from her pair of Dahlgren guns. \"Virginia\" sustained 97 indentations to her armor from the fire of \"Monitor\" and other ships. Neither ship sustained any significant damage. In the opinion of \"Virginia\"'s commander Jones and her other officers, \"Monitor\" could have sunk their ship had she hit the vessel at the waterline.\nStrategically, the battle between these two ships was considered the most definitive naval battle of the Civil War. The battle itself was largely considered a draw, though it could be argued \"Virginia\" did slightly more damage. \"Monitor\" did successfully defend \"Minnesota\" and the rest of the Union blockading force, while \"Virginia\" was unable to complete the destruction she started the previous day. The battle marked a turning point in the way naval warfare would be fought in the future. Strategically, nothing had changed: the Union still controlled Hampton Roads and the Confederates still held several rivers and Norfolk, making it a strategic victory for the North. The battle of the ironclads led to what was referred to as \"Monitor fever\" in the North. During the course of the war, improved designs based on \"Monitor\" emerged; 60 ironclads were built.\nEvents after the battle.\nImmediately following the battle Stimers telegraphed Ericsson, congratulating and thanking him for making it possible to confront the Confederate ironclad and for \"saving the day\". No sooner than \"Monitor\" had weighed anchor, numerous small boats and spectators on shore flocked around the ship to congratulate the crew for what they regarded as their victory over \"Virginia\". Assistant Secretary Fox, who observed the entire battle from aboard \"Minnesota\", came aboard \"Monitor\" and jokingly told her officers, \"Well gentlemen, you don't look as though you just went through one of the greatest naval conflicts on record\". A small tug soon came alongside and the blinded Worden was brought up from his cabin while crew members and spectators cheered. He was taken to Fort Monroe for preliminary treatment, then to a hospital in Washington.\nStimers and Newton soon began repairing the damage to the pilot house, and reconfigured the sides from an upright position to a slope of thirty degrees to deflect shot. During this time, Mrs. Worden personally brought news of her husband's progress and recovery and was optimistic, informing the crew his eyesight would soon return but he would be laid up for some time. She also informed them President Lincoln had personally paid Worden a visit extending his gratitude. Worden was later taken to his summer home in New York and remained unconscious for three months. He returned to Naval service in 1862 as captain of , another \"Monitor\"-type ironclad.\nThe Confederates were also celebrating what they considered a victory, as crowds of spectators gathered along the banks of the Elizabeth River, cheering and waving flags, handkerchiefs and hats as \"Virginia\", displaying the captured ensign of \"Congress\", passed along up the river. The Confederate government was ecstatic and immediately promoted Buchanan to Admiral.\nBoth the Union and Confederacy soon came up with plans for defeating the other's ironclad. Oddly, these did not depend on their own ironclads. The Union Navy chartered a large ship (the sidewheeler ) and reinforced her bow with steel specifically to be used as a naval ram, provided \"Virginia\" steamed far enough out into Hampton Roads.\nOn 11 April, \"Virginia\", accompanied by a number of gunboats, steamed into Hampton Roads to Sewell's Point at the southeast edge, almost over to Newport News, in a challenge to lure \"Monitor\" into battle. \"Virginia\" fired a few shots ineffectively at very long range while \"Monitor\" returned fire, remaining near Fort Monroe, ready to fight if \"Virginia\" came to attack the Federal force congregated there. Furthermore, \"Vanderbilt\" was in position to ram \"Virginia\" if she approached the fort, but \"Virginia\" did not take the bait. In a further attempt to entice \"Monitor\" closer to the Confederate side so she could be boarded, the James River Squadron moved in and captured three merchant ships, the brigs \"Marcus\" and \"Sabout\", and the schooner \"Catherine T. Dix\". These had been grounded and abandoned when they sighted \"Virginia\" entering the Roads. Their flags were then hoisted \"Union-side down\" to taunt \"Monitor\" into a fight as they were towed back to Norfolk. In the end, both sides had failed to provoke a fight on their terms.\nThe Confederate Navy originally had devised a plan by which the James River Squadron would swarm \"Monitor\" with a party of men to board and capture the vessel, and disable her by using heavy hammers to drive iron wedges under and disable the turret, and by covering the pilothouse with a wet sail effectively blinding the pilot. Others would throw combustibles down the ventilation openings and smoke holes. At one point Jones made such an attempt to board the vessel, but she managed to slip away around the stern of \"Virginia\" in time.\nThere was a second confrontation on 8 May, when \"Virginia\" came out while \"Monitor\" and four other Federal ships bombarded Confederate batteries at Sewell's Point. The Federal ships retired slowly to Fort Monroe, hoping to lure \"Virginia\" into the Roads. She did not follow, however, and after firing a gun to windward as a sign of contempt, anchored off Sewell's Point. Later, when Confederate forces abandoned Norfolk on 11 May 1862, they were forced to destroy \"Virginia\".\nBattle of Drewry's Bluff.\nAfter the destruction of \"Virginia\", \"Monitor\" was free to assist the Union Army and General McClellan's campaign against Richmond. As the Navy always gave command to officers based on seniority, Greene was replaced with Lieutenant Thomas O. Selfridge the day after the battle. Two days later, Selfridge was in turn relieved by Lieutenant William Nicholson Jeffers on 15 May 1862. \"Monitor\" was now part of a flotilla under the command of Admiral John Rodgers aboard \"Galena\", and, along with three other gunboats, steamed up the James River and engaged the Confederate batteries at Drewry's Bluff. The force had instructions to coordinate their efforts with McClellan's forces on land and push on towards Richmond to bombard the city into surrender if possible. Without any assistance, the task force got within of the Confederate capital but could not proceed further because of sunken vessels and debris placed in the river that blocked further passage. There were also artillery batteries at Fort Darling overlooking and guarding the approach, along with other heavy guns and sharpshooters positioned along the river banks. The fort was strategically situated on the west bank of the James River atop of a bluff some above and overlooking the bend in the river. \"Monitor\" was of little help in the assault because the confinement and small gun ports of her turret would not allow her to elevate her guns sufficiently to engage the Confederate batteries at close range, so she had to fall back and fire at a greater distance, while the other gunboats were unable to overcome the fortifications on their own. After \"Monitor\" received only a few hits, without incurring any damage, the Confederates, many of whom were former crew members of \"Virginia\" well aware of her ability to withstand cannon shot even at close range, concentrated their guns on the other ships, especially \"Galena\", which sustained considerable damage and moderate casualties. After a near four-hour artillery duel and sustaining numerous hits overall, the flotilla was unable to neutralize the fortification and had to turn back. Not a single Union ship reached Richmond until near the end of the war, when the city was finally evacuated by the Confederates.\nAfter the battle at Drewry's Bluff \"Monitor\" remained on the James River providing support, along with the \"Galena\" and other gunboats, to McClellan's troops at various points along the river including Harrison's Landing\n which ended in August. However most of the time spent on the river was marked with inactivity and hot weather which had a negative effect on the morale of \"Monitor\"'s crew. During the long, hot, summer, several crew members became sick and were transferred to Hampton Roads while various officers were replaced including Newton, while Jeffers was replaced by Commander Thomas H. Stevens, Jr. on 15 August. By the end of August, \"Monitor\" was ordered back to Hampton Roads and dropped anchor nearby the sunken \"Cumberland\" at Newport News Point on 30 August, much to the approval of the crew. \"Monitor\"'s sole purpose now was to blockade the James River from any advances made by the newly constructed , an ironclad ram.\nRepairs and refit.\nIn September Captain John P. Bankhead received orders to take command of \"Monitor\", relieving Stevens, and was sent to Hampton Roads to take charge of the vessel. Shortly after Bankhead assumed command, \"Monitor\"'s engines and boilers were condemned by a board of survey which recommended that they be overhauled completely. On 30 September the ironclad was sent to the Washington Navy Yard for repairs arriving there on 3 October.\nUpon arrival at Washington \"Monitor\" and her crew were greeted by a crowd of thousands of cheering admirers who came to see the ship that \"saved the nation\". \"Monitor\" was now a premier tourist attraction and the crowd was soon allowed on board to tour the vessel. During this time the vessel was picked clean of artifacts for souvenirs by the touring civilians that came aboard. When Stodder and others came to close up the dock and ship one evening Stodder noted, \"When we came up to clean that night there was not a key, doorknob, escutcheon \u2013 there wasn't a thing that hadn't been carried away.\"\nBefore \"Monitor\" was put into dry dock for repairs, Lincoln, Fox, various officials and a few of Worden's close friends arrived to ceremoniously review the vessel and pay respect to the crew and former commander Worden, who after a long and partial recovery arrived for the occasion. Entire army regiments were also directed to come by the navy yard and review the ship and honor the crew. \"Monitor\"'s crew assembled on deck in formation with their officers in front, while Lincoln, Fox and other guests stood near the turret. When Worden, with part of his face blackened from the wounds he received at Hampton Roads, came aboard, the heavy guns in the navy yard were fired in . Lincoln came forward and greeted Worden and then introduced him to some of the others. After his formal greeting the crew swarmed around Worden and embraced and shook hands with their former commander and thanked God for his recovery and return. Worden called each of them by name and spoke friendly to and complimented each of them personally. When order was restored the President gave a short speech about Worden's career. At Fox's request, Worden gave a speech to the gathering about his voyage from New York to Hampton Roads, the trials they were faced with along the way and of the great battle between \"Monitor\" and \"Virginia\", while paying tribute to many of the officers and men involved. In closing he gave special thanks to Ericsson, Lincoln, Welles and all who made construction of \"Monitor\" possible.\nWhile \"Monitor\" was undergoing repairs her crew was put aboard and were eventually granted a furlough by Bankhead who himself went on leave. For approximately six weeks the vessel remained in dry dock while her bottom was scraped clean, the engines and boilers were overhauled, the entire vessel was cleaned and painted, and a number of improvements made, including an iron shield around the top of the turret. To make the vessel more seaworthy, a funnel-shaped smokestack was placed over the smoke outlet while taller fresh air vents were installed. The berth deck below was also enlarged and raised by removing some of the side storerooms and placing them below, thus reducing the height of the interior which now barely allowed the crew to stand upright. Several cranes were also added while interior improvements were made making the confining environment more livable. A large blower that operated with its own engine was installed which drew fresh air down through the pilothouse. During this time the two Dahlgren guns were each engraved with large letters, \"MONITOR &amp; MERRIMAC \u2013 WORDEN\" and \"MONITOR &amp; MERRIMAC \u2013 ERICSSON\", respectively. Additional iron plates were installed covering the dents from the previous battles. Each plate was inscribed with the name of the source from where the shell causing the dent was made. i.e. \"Merrimack, Fort Darling\", etc. Stanchions were also installed around the perimeter of the freeboard with a rope strung through each making it safer to walk about the deck amid stormy weather and rough seas. \"Monitor\" was finally taken out of dry dock on 26 October. By November the ship was fully repaired and ready to return to service.\nFinal voyage.\nOn 24 December 1862, orders were issued directing \"Monitor\" to Beaufort, North Carolina to join and for a joint Army-Navy expedition against Wilmington, North Carolina, where she would join the blockade off Charleston. The orders were received by the crew on Christmas Day, some of whom had been aboard \"Monitor\" on her harrowing journey from New York to Hampton Roads in March and were not pleased with the prospect of taking to the high seas once again. Dana Greene remarked, \"I do not consider this steamer a sea going vessel\".\nThe crew celebrated Christmas aboard \"Monitor\" while berthed at Hampton Roads in what was described as a most merry fashion, while many other celebrations were occurring along the shore. The ship's cook was paid one dollar to prepare a meal for the crew befitting the day; it was received with mixed opinion. That day, \"Monitor\" was made ready for sea, her crew under strict orders not to discuss the impending voyage with anyone, but bad weather delayed her departure until 29 December.\nWhile the design of \"Monitor\" was well-suited for river combat, her low freeboard and heavy turret made her highly unseaworthy in rough waters. Under the command of John P. Bankhead, \"Monitor\" put to sea on 31 December, under tow from the steamship , as a heavy storm developed off Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Using chalk and a blackboard, Bankhead wrote messages alerting \"Rhode Island\" that if \"Monitor\" needed help she would signal with a red lantern.\n\"Monitor\" was soon in trouble as the storm increased in ferocity. Large waves were splashing over and completely covering the deck and pilot house so the crew temporarily rigged the wheel atop the turret which was manned by helmsman Francis Butts. Water continued flooding into the vents and ports and the ship began rolling uncontrollably in the high seas. Sometimes she would drop into a wave with such force the entire hull would tremble. Leaks were beginning to appear everywhere. Bankhead ordered the engineers to start the Worthington pumps, which temporarily stemmed the rising waters, but soon \"Monitor\" was hit by a squall and a series of violent waves and water continued to work its way into the vessel. Right when the Worthington pump could no longer keep pace with the flooding, a call came from the engine room that water was gaining there. Realizing the ship was in serious trouble, Bankhead signaled \"Rhode Island\" for help and hoisted the red lantern next to \"Monitor\"'s white running light atop the turret. He then ordered the anchor dropped to stop the ship's rolling and pitching with little effect, making it no easier for the rescue boats to get close enough to receive her crew. He then ordered the towline cut and called for volunteers, Stodder, along with crewmates John Stocking, and James Fenwick volunteered and climbed down from the turret, but eyewitnesses said that as soon as they were on the deck Fenwick and Stocking were quickly swept overboard and drowned. Stodder managed to hang onto the safety lines around the deck and finally cut through the towline with a hatchet. At 11:30\u00a0pm. Bankhead ordered the engineers to stop engines and divert all available steam to the large Adams centrifugal steam pump; but with reduced steam output from a boiler being fed wet coal, it too was unable to stem the rapidly rising water. After all of the steam pumps had failed, Bankhead ordered some of the crew to man the hand pumps and organized a bucket brigade, but to no avail.\nGreene and Stodder were among the last men to abandon ship and remained with Bankhead who was the last surviving man to abandon the sinking \"Monitor\". In his official report of \"Monitor\" to the Navy Department, Bankhead praised Greene and Stodder for their heroic efforts and wrote, \"I would beg leave to call the attention of the Admiral and of the Department of the particularly good conduct of Lieutenant Greene and Acting Master Louis N. Stodder, who remained with me until the last, and by their example did much toward inspiring confidence and obedience on the part of the others.\"\nAfter a frantic rescue effort, \"Monitor\" finally capsized and sank, stern first, approximately southeast off Cape Hatteras with the loss of sixteen men, including four officers, some of whom remained in the turret, which detached as the ship capsized. Forty-seven men were rescued by the life boats from \"Rhode Island\". Bankhead, Greene and Stodder barely managed to get clear of the sinking vessel and survived the ordeal, but suffered from exposure from the icy winter sea. After his initial recovery, Bankhead filed his official report, as did the commanding officers of the \"Rhode Island\", stating officers and men of both \"Monitor\" and \"Rhode Island\" did everything within their ability to keep \"Monitor\" from sinking. The Navy did not find it necessary to commission a board of inquiry to investigate the affair and took no action against Bankhead or any of his officers.\nSome time later a controversy emerged over why \"Monitor\" sank. In the \"Army and Navy Journal\", Ericsson accused the crew of drunkenness during the storm, being consequently unable to prevent the vessel from sinking. Stodder vigorously defended the crew and rebuked Ericsson's characterization of the crew and events and wrote to Pierce that Ericsson \"covers up defects by blaming those that are now dead\", pointing out that there were a number of unavoidable events and circumstances that led to the ship's sinking, foremost being the overhang between the upper and lower hulls which came loose and partially separated during the storm from slamming into the violent waves. Stodder's account was corroborated by other shipmates.\nRediscovery.\nThe Navy tested an \"underwater locator\" in August 1949 by searching an area south of the Cape Hatteras Lighthouse for the wreck of \"Monitor\". It found a long object bulky enough to be a shipwreck, in of water that was thought to be \"Monitor\", but powerful currents negated attempts by divers to investigate. Retired Rear Admiral Edward Ellsberg proposed using external pontoons to raise the wreck in 1951, the same method of marine salvage he had used on the sunken submarine , for the cost of $250,000. Four years later, Robert F. Marx claimed to have discovered the wreck based on the idea she had drifted into shallow water north of the lighthouse before sinking. Marx said he had dived on the wreck and placed a Coke bottle with his name on it in one of the gun barrels, although he never provided any proof of his story.\nInterest in locating the ship revived in the early 1970s and Duke University, the National Geographic Society and the National Science Foundation sponsored an expedition in August 1973 to search for the wreck using a towed sonar system. The Duke team was led by John G. Newton (no known relation to the Isaac Newton that served on the \"Monitor\"). On 27 August, \"Monitor\" was discovered almost 111 years after sinking, near Cape Hatteras at depth at coordinates . They sent a camera down to photograph the wreck, but the pictures were so fuzzy as to be useless; on a second attempt the camera snagged something on the wreck and was lost. The sonar images did not match what they expected the wreck to look like until they realized that the sinking vessel had turned over while descending and was resting at the bottom upside down. The team announced their discovery on 8 March 1974. Another expedition was mounted that same month to confirm the discovery and the research submersible \"Alcoa Sea Probe\" was able to take still photos and video of the wreck that confirmed it was \"Monitor\".\nThese photos revealed that the wreck was disintegrating and the discovery raised another issue. Since the Navy had formally abandoned the wreck in 1953, it could be exploited by divers and private salvage companies as it lay outside North Carolina's territorial limits. To preserve the ship, the wreck, and everything around it, a radius was designated as the Monitor National Marine Sanctuary, the first U.S. marine sanctuary, on 30 January 1975. \"Monitor\" was also designated a National Historic Landmark on 23 June 1986.\nIn 1977, scientists were finally able to view the wreckage in person as the submersible \"Johnson Sea Link\" was used to inspect it. The \"Sea Link\" was able to ferry divers down to the sunken vessel and retrieve small artifacts. U.S. Navy interest in raising the entire ship ended in 1978 when Captain Willard F. Searle Jr. calculated the cost and possible damage expected from the operation: $20\u00a0million to stabilize the vessel in place, or as much as $50\u00a0million to bring all of it to the surface. Research continued and artifacts continued to be recovered, including the ship's anchor in 1983. The growing number of relics required conservation and a proper home so the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), in charge of all U.S. marine sanctuaries, selected the Mariners' Museum on 9 March 1987 after considering proposals from several other institutions.\nRecovery.\nInitial efforts in 1995 by Navy and NOAA divers to raise the warship's propeller were foiled by an abnormally stormy season off Cape Hatteras. Realizing that raising the whole wreck was impractical for financial reasons as well as the inability to bring up the wreck intact, NOAA developed a comprehensive plan to recover the most significant parts of the ship, namely her engine, propeller, guns, and turret. It estimated that the plan would cost over 20\u00a0million dollars to implement over four years. The Department of Defense Legacy Resource Management Program contributed $14.5\u00a0million. The Navy divers, mainly from its two Mobile Diving and Salvage Units, would perform the bulk of the work necessary in order to train in deep sea conditions and evaluate new equipment.\nAnother effort to raise \"Monitor\"'s propeller was successful on 8 June 1998, although the amount of effort required to work in the difficult conditions off Cape Hatteras was underestimated and the fewer than 30 divers used were nearly overwhelmed. The 1999 dive season was mostly research oriented as divers investigated the wreck in detail, planning how to recover the engine and determining if they could stabilize the hull so that it would not collapse onto the turret. In 2000, the divers shored up the port side of the hull with bags of grout, installed the engine recovery system, an external framework to which the engine would be attached, in preparation for the next season, and made over five times as many dives as they had the previous season.\nThe 2001 dive season concentrated on raising the ship's steam engine and condenser. Hull plates had to be removed to access the engine compartment and both the engine and the condenser had to be separated from the ship, the surrounding wreckage and each other. A Mini Rover ROV was used to provide visibility of the wreck and divers to the support staff above water. The engine was raised on 16 July and the condenser three days later by the crane barge \"Wotan\". Saturation diving was evaluated by the Navy that dive season on \"Monitor\" and proved to be very successful, allowing divers to maximize their time on the bottom. The surface-supplied divers evaluated the use of heliox due to the depth of the wreck. It also proved to be successful once the dive tables were adjusted.\nMuch like the previous year, the 2002 dive season was dedicated to lifting the turret to the surface. Around 160 divers were assigned to remove the parts of the hull, including the armor belt, that lay on top of the turret using chisels, exothermic cutting torches and hydroblasters. They removed as much of the debris from inside the turret as possible to reduce the weight to be lifted. This was usually concreted coal as one of the ship's coal bunkers had ruptured and dumped most of its contents into the turret. The divers prepared the turret roof for the first stage of the lift by excavating underneath the turret and placed steel beams and angle irons to reinforce it for its move onto a lifting platform for the second stage. A large, eight-legged lifting frame, nicknamed the \"spider\", was carefully positioned over the turret to move it onto the platform and the entire affair would be lifted by the crane mounted on the \"Wotan\". The divers discovered one skeleton in the turret on 26 July before the lift and spent a week carefully chipping about half of it free of the concreted debris; the other half was inaccessible underneath the rear of one of the guns.\nWith Tropical Storm Cristobal bearing down on the recovery team, and time and money running out, the team made the decision to raise the turret on 5 August 2002, after 41 days of work, and the gun turret broke the surface at 5:30\u00a0pm to the cheers of everyone aboard \"Wotan\" and other recovery ships nearby. As archaeologists examined the contents of the turret after it had been landed aboard \"Wotan\", they discovered a second skeleton, but removing it did not begin until the turret arrived at the Mariners' Museum for conservation. The remains of these sailors were transferred to the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command (JPAC) at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, in the hope that they could be identified.\nOnly 16 of the crew were not rescued by \"Rhode Island\" before \"Monitor\" sank and the forensic anthropologists at JPAC were able to rule out the three missing black crewmen based on the shape of the femurs and skulls. Among the most promising of the 16 candidates were crew members Jacob Nicklis, Robert Williams and William Bryan, but a decade passed without their identities being discovered. On 8 March 2013 their remains were buried at Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors.\nIn 2003 NOAA divers and volunteers returned to the \"Monitor\" with the goal of obtaining overall video of the site to create a permanent record of the current conditions on the wreck after the turret recovery. Jeff Johnston of the Monitor National Marine Sanctuary (MNMS) also wanted a definitive image of the vessel's pilothouse. During the dives, \"Monitor\"'s iron pilothouse was located near the bow of the vessel and documented for the first time by videographer Rick Allen, of Nautilus Productions, in its inverted position.\nConservation of the propeller was completed nearly three years after its recovery, and it is on display in the Monitor Center at the Mariners' Museum. As of 2013, conservation of the engine, its components, the turret and the guns continues. The Dahlgren guns were removed from the turret in September 2004 and placed in their own conservation tanks. Among some of the artifacts recovered from the sunken vessel was a red signal lantern, possibly the one used to send a distress signal to \"Rhode Island\" and the last thing to be seen before \"Monitor\" sank in 1862 \u2013 it was the first object recovered from the site in 1977. A gold wedding band was also recovered from the hand of the skeletal remains of one of \"Monitor\"'s crew members found in the turret.\nNorthrop Grumman Shipyard in Newport News constructed a full-scale non-seaworthy static replica of \"Monitor\". The replica was laid down in February 2005 and completed just two months later on the grounds of the Mariners' Museum. The Monitor National Marine Sanctuary conducts occasional dives on the wreck to monitor and record any changes in its condition and its environment.\nMemorials.\nThe in McGolrick Park, Brooklyn, depicts a sailor from \"Monitor\" pulling on a capstan. The sculptor Antonio de Filippo was commissioned by the State of New York in the 1930s for a bronze statue to commemorate the Battle of Hampton Roads, John Ericsson, and the crew of the ship. It was dedicated on 6 November 1938. A vandal doused it with white paint on 7 January 2013.\nIn 1995 the U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating USS \"Monitor\" and CSS \"Virginia\" depicting the two ships while engaged in their famous battle at Hampton Roads. For an image of the stamp, see footnote link.\nThe 150th anniversary of the ship's loss prompted several events in commemoration. A memorial to \"Monitor\" and her lost crew members was erected in the Civil War section of Hampton National Cemetery by NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries, together with the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, and dedicated on 29 December 2012. The Greenpoint Monitor Museum commemorated the ship and her crew with an event on 12 January 2013 at the grave sites of those \"Monitor\" crew members buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, followed by a service in the cemetery's chapel.\nNew Jersey\u2013based indie rock band Titus Andronicus named their critically acclaimed second album, 2010's \"The Monitor\", for the ship. Featured on the album's sleeve are the crewmen of \"Monitor\", taken from a tintype portrait. The album's interwoven references to the Civil War include speeches and writings from the period, as well as the side-long closing track \"The Battle of Hampton Roads\". The latter refers to the \"Monitor\"'s encounter with CSS \"Virginia\" in prominent detail. Singer/guitarist Patrick Stickles commented while making the album that he was inspired by Ken Burns's \"The Civil War\" and the ship itself so much that he decided to name Titus Andronicus's second album in its honor.\nLegacy.\n\"Monitor\" gave her name to a new type of mastless, low-freeboard warship that mounted its armament in turrets. Many more were built, including river monitors, and they played key roles in Civil War battles on the Mississippi and James Rivers. The breastwork monitor was developed during the 1860s by Sir Edward Reed, Chief Constructor of the Royal Navy, as an improvement of the basic Monitor design. Reed gave these ships a superstructure to increase seaworthiness and raise the freeboard of the gun turrets so they could be worked in all weathers. The superstructure was armored to protect the bases of the turrets, the funnels and the ventilator ducts in what he termed a breastwork. The ships were conceived as harbor defense ships with little need to leave port. Reed took advantage of the lack of masts and designed the ships with one twin-gun turret at each end of the superstructure, each able to turn and fire in a 270\u00b0 arc. These ships were described by Admiral George Alexander Ballard as being like \"full-armoured knights riding on donkeys, easy to avoid but bad to close with\". Reed later developed the design into the , the first ocean-going turret ships without masts, the direct ancestors of the pre-dreadnought battleships and the dreadnoughts.\nIn popular culture.\nThe battle between the \"Monitor\" and the Confederate ironclad CSS \"Virginia\" was reenacted using scale models in the 1936 film \"Hearts in Bondage\" from Republic Pictures. The battle was also dramatized in the 1991 made-for-television movie \"Ironclads\", produced by Ted Turner.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32198", "revid": "48708993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32198", "title": "Office of State Protection", "text": "Polish Intelligence and security agency (1990\u20132002)\nThe Office of State Protection (Polish: \"Urz\u0105d Ochrony Pa\u0144stwa\" (, UOP)) was the intelligence agency of Poland from 1990 to 2002, when it was split into two new agencies.\nFoundation.\nThe UOP was founded on 6 April 1990 as a department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Krzysztof Koz\u0142owski served as the UOP's first chief from 1990 to 1992. In 1996 UOP was transformed into a separate government agency under the supervision of the prime minister. It was responsible for intelligence, counter-intelligence and government electronic security, including telephone wiretaps.\nReasons for formation.\nThe UOP replaced the communist-era S\u0142u\u017cba Bezpiecze\u0144stwa (SB), I Departament People's Republic of Poland Ministry of Internal Affairs \u2013 intelligence, II Departament People's Republic of Poland Ministry of Internal Affairs \u2013 counter-intelligence, whose responsibilities had additionally included the suppression of opposition to the government prior to 1989.\nAgency split.\nIn June 2002, the agency was split into two separate entities \u2013 Agencja Bezpiecze\u0144stwa Wewn\u0119trznego (\"Internal Security Agency\"), which deals with internal security of the country, and Agencja Wywiadu (\"Foreign Intelligence Agency\"), which deals with foreign intelligence. The abolishing of the office enabled dismissing several hundred people from service, without the possibility to use the appeal procedure. While budgetary restrictions were cited as the reason for the dismissal, but a political criterion was used as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32199", "revid": "16944783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32199", "title": "UOP", "text": "UOP is an initialism that may stand for the following:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32201", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32201", "title": "USS Peleliu", "text": "Amphibious assault ship of the U.S. Navy\nUSS \"Peleliu\" (LHA-5) is a of the United States Navy, named for the Battle of Peleliu of World War II. Entering service in 1980, she has been deployed to the Persian Gulf on several occasions, performed an evacuation of U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay following the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, operated with the INTERFET peacekeeping taskforce, participated in Pacific Partnership deployments, and provided assistance following the massive floods in Pakistan in 2010. She was decommissioned in San Diego, California on 31 March 2015. She currently rests, out of commission and in reserve, at NAVSEA Inactive Ships On-site Maintenance Office, Pearl Harbor, Hawaii in the inactive reserve in case of further need.\nDesign and construction.\n\"Peleliu\" was originally going to be named USS \"Khe Sanh\", and then USS \"Da Nang\". \"Peleliu\"'s keel was laid down in 1976 at the Litton Industries Ingalls Shipbuilding company in Pascagoula, Mississippi. She was launched on 25 November 1978, sponsored by Peggy Hayward, the wife of the Chief of Naval Operations at that time, Admiral Thomas B. Hayward. \"Peleliu\" was commissioned on 3 May 1980.\nOperational history.\n1980s.\n\"Peleliu\" immediately steamed southwards and transited the Panama Canal to the Pacific Ocean. She crossed the Equator for the first time on 27 May 1980, setting a new record for time between an American warship's commissioning and her crossing over into the Southern Hemisphere. \"Peleliu\" then steamed to the seaport of Long Beach, California.\nFollowing the 17 October 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, \"Peleliu\" was one of the 24 U.S. Navy and Military Sealift Command ships that rendered assistance. \"Peleliu\" provided shelter for 300 victims and provided helicopter support.\n1990s.\n\"Peleliu\" deployed again to the Western Pacific in January 1990. The ship, along with her Amphibious Ready Group (ARG), participated in multinational exercises including Exercise Team Spirit with forces from the Republic of Korea, and Exercise Cobra Gold, in Thailand. \"Peleliu\" returned home to Naval Station Long Beach in July and later that summer entered the shipyard for an availability period that was scheduled to last nearly a year. The U.S. response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 curtailed the shipyard availability and forced \"Peleliu\" into an accelerated schedule of pre-deployment training, but she did not deploy for Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm. She eventually departed Long Beach in May 1991, in support of ongoing U.S. operations in the Middle East. In June 1991, while en route to the Persian Gulf, she was diverted from a scheduled port call in Hong Kong to the Philippines, where she participated in the evacuation of the Americans from the Naval Base Subic Bay following the volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo. This evacuation included taking most of the patients from the maternity ward at the Subic Bay naval hospital, and hence there were several births on board. This eruption was one of the largest of the past 100 years and covered a large region of the Philippines in volcanic ash and caused extensive damage to American military bases in the area, including Naval Station Subic Bay, Naval Air Station Cubi Point, and Clark Air Force Base.\nOn returning to her home port at Long Beach Naval Shipyard, \"Peleliu\" went through an extensive shipyard rehabilitation, including time in the dry dock. She was again underway by May 1992 and going through workups and inspections for her next Western Pacific (WESTPAC) deployment on 21 January 1994. She changed home ports to Naval Station San Diego during this time period. On deploying with the 11th Marine Expeditionary Unit, and following stops in Pearl Harbor and Singapore, she steamed for Mogadishu, Somalia to participate in Operation Continue Hope and Operation Quick Draw. She arrived on station around 3 March 1994 and spent the next three months supporting operations in the area. VIP visits included Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General John Shalikashvili, COMPHIBGRU THREE, Rear Admiral James B. Perkins III, and CJTF Major General Thomas M. Montgomery, U.S. Army and Brig. General Vercauteren, USMC. While off the coast of Mombasa, she participated in Operation Distant Runner at the border of Rwanda and Burundi. Medical and Dental Civic Action Programs(MEDCAP, DENCAP) were performed in the villages of Kipini and Witu, Kenya, providing medical and dental services to local civilians. Leaving Somalia on 4 June 1994, she steamed to Perth, Australia for a port visit. On 30 June 1994, \"Peleliu\" slowed her pace home and along with ship's company, Marines of 2nd Battalion 5th Marines, paused to honor the fallen off the coast of her name sake Peleliu, where 50 years earlier the Marines of the 1st Marine Division suffered 6,526 casualties with 1,256 killed in action against 10,138 Japanese defenders of which very few were taken alive in the Battle of Peleliu.\n\"Peleliu\" again deployed to the Western Pacifice and to the Persian Gulf in November 1995. The 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit/Special Operations Capable, partially comprising aviation units from the Third Marine Aircraft Wing, (HMM-268 REIN) embarked on board \"Peleliu\". The ship eventually arrived in the Persian Gulf in support Operation Southern Watch. \"Peleliu\" made port calls at Pearl Harbor, Okinawa, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Phuket.\n\"Peleliu\" was deployed to East Timor as part of the Australian-led INTERFET peacekeeping task force from 26 October to 27 November 1999.\n2000s.\n\"Peleliu\" departed from San Diego in August 2001 with the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit on board for a six-month deployment in the Western Pacific. She was in the port of Darwin, Australia during the September 11 attacks. Following those attacks, \"Peleliu\" was sent to the North Arabian Sea and, on 26 November 2001, she took the first U.S. Marines to Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. After the American Taliban John Walker Lindh was captured in Afghanistan, he was taken aboard \"Peleliu\" on 14 December 2001. There he was interrogated by a U.S. Marine Corps intelligence team. While he was on board, Lindh signed confessions and he told his interrogators that he was not merely a member of the Taliban, but a full member of Al Qaeda.\nLindh received surgery by the senior surgeon of \"Peleliu\" to remove a bullet in his leg, and he was also treated for frostbite on his toes.\nWhile on deployment in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, in 2004, and as flagship of Expeditionary Strike Group One, a hostile boat was intercepted by warships at sea in the Indian Ocean, and 15 people were detained. An estimated of hashish was seized by American and Australian warships after the interception of the boat in the North Arabian Sea. During this deployment Peleliu was deployed for nine months and supported air strikes into Iraq. Marines from the embarked Marine Expeditionary Unit participated in ground operations in southern Iraq.\n\"Peleliu\" steamed to support of the Pacific Partnership mission from 23 May through 20 September 2007. This mission included medical, dental, construction, and other humanitarian assistance programs on shore and afloat in the Philippines, Vietnam, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and the Marshall Islands. The medical personnel on board \"Peleliu\" included teams from the U.S. Navy and ten other countries, and also from three private assistance organizations.\nIn 2008, \"Peleliu\" was sent to the Indian Ocean to support Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and antipiracy operations. On 10 August 2008, \"Peleliu\" responded to a distress call from a merchant ship, \"Gem of Kilakari\", that was being attacked by armed pirates in the Gulf of Aden. That pirate attack was suppressed with no injuries.\n2010s.\nIn August 2010, \"Peleliu\" was sent to Port of Karachi, Pakistan, to use 19 of her helicopters for rescue during the massive floods in southern Pakistan, which were the worst in the recorded history of Pakistan up to that point.\nDuring this deployment, \"Peleliu\"'s commanding officer was relieved of command and reassigned for being \"unduly familiar\" with several crewmembers. The chief of staff for Expeditionary Strike Group 3, was then assigned as the commanding officer of \"Peleliu\".\nOn 24 November 2010, \"Peleliu\" returned full circle and she was berthed in the Subic Bay Freeport Zone on her first visit there since the evacuation by the Navy in 1991. That deployment also included port visits to: Naval Base Guam, Apra Harbor, Guam; Darwin, Australia; Dubai, UAE; Phuket, Thailand; and Pearl Harbor, Hawai\u02bbi before returning to her home port in San Diego, California on 18 Dec 2010.\nOn 17 September 2012, \"Peleliu\" deployed to the C5F AOR. On 14 May 2013, \"Peleliu\" returned to her homeport after an eight-month deployment, accompanied by the and the .\nIn February 2014, the United States Pacific Fleet announced that would be forward deployed to replace the decommissioned in Japan. \"Peleliu\" deployed to the Western Pacific to mitigate the gap in amphibious presence. The ship visited numerous ports including, Apra Harbor, Guam; Sasebo and Okinawa, Japan; Subic Bay, Philippines and Singapore. During the visits, \"Peleliu\" competed against partner nation teams during various sporting events and participated in community relations projects.\nOver the course of deployment, \"Peleliu\" transited more than , conducted the safe launch and recovery of more than 50 Landing Craft Utility, 30 Landing Craft Air Cushion, and 25 Amphibious Assault Vehicle ship to shore movements, as well as carrier and deck landing qualifications and operations for U.S. Navy and Marine Corps aircraft squadrons, U.S. Army 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) and foreign aircraft from Colombia, Peru, Mexico and Argentina.\nUpon assignment to Seventh Fleet, the ship embarked Commander, Amphibious Force Seventh Fleet, Commander, Amphibious Squadron 11 and 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit and joined to form the \"Peleliu\" Amphibious Readiness Group (ARG). While deployed, the ARG conducted security and stability operations and exercises throughout the Indo-Asia-Pacific region to include Amphibious Landing Exercise (PHIBLEX) 15 and other maritime cooperation exercises with partner nations.\nFrom June to August 2014, \"Peleliu\", with Amphibious Squadron Three, Special Purpose Marine Task Force Three and Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron (HSC) 21 embarked, participated in Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) 2014 as part of the Third Fleet.\nDecommissioning.\n\"Peleliu\" returned to Naval Base San Diego on 24 December 2014 from her final six-month deployment to the Western Pacific. Upon return, the ship made preparations to decommission in March 2015 after 34 years of service, 17 deployments and more than transited.\n\"Peleliu\" was decommissioned on 31 March 2015 in San Diego. Following her decommissioning, the 820\u00a0ft-long vessel was moved to Pearl Harbor to join the reserve fleet. \"Peleliu\" was placed in an inactive reserve status and moored alongside her sister ship . Peleliu was struck April 30, 2024 and sits moored at NAVSEA Inactive Ships On-site Maintenance Office, Pearl Harbor, Hawaii pending final disposal.\nShip's coat of arms.\nThe stars across the top of the shield represent the eight Medal of Honor recipients from the Battle of Peleliu Island in 1944. Centered is the large Roman numeral \"V\", which represents the hull number of the ship, LHA-5. The four-point star in the \"V\" identifies the four functions of the landing force, and sustain their operations ashore. In the lower left-hand side of the shield is a ring, which by tradition of heraldry, symbolizes the fifth born. The 1st Marine Division emblem is the constellation Southern Cross with the numeral '1' superimposed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32202", "revid": "1243398641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32202", "title": "UIC franc", "text": "The UIC Franc (code: XFU) was a virtual currency unit used by the International Union of Railways (UIC). It was introduced in 1976 after the Gold Franc was abandoned for this purpose due to instability of the international monetary system, and was replaced by the European Currency Unit on 1 January 1990.\nThe code XFU was not withdrawn from the ISO-4217 currency list until 2013, despite the UIC franc having long fallen out of use.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32203", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32203", "title": "Unification Movement International", "text": ""}
{"id": "32205", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32205", "title": "Unification theology", "text": ""}
{"id": "32207", "revid": "6569922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32207", "title": "Theory of education (Unification Church)", "text": ""}
{"id": "32208", "revid": "575659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32208", "title": "Fall of man (Unification Church)", "text": ""}
{"id": "32209", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32209", "title": "Unification Church/fallen nature", "text": ""}
{"id": "32210", "revid": "32381689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32210", "title": "Subcommittee on International Organizations of the Committee on International Relations", "text": "1976\u20131977 U.S. committee on Koreagate\nThe Subcommittee on International Organizations of the Committee on International Relations (also known as the Fraser Committee) was a committee of the U.S. House of Representatives which met in 1976 and 1977 and conducted an investigation into the \"Koreagate\" scandal. It was chaired by Representative Donald M. Fraser of Minnesota. The committee's 447-page report, made public on November 29, 1977, reported on plans by the National Intelligence Service (South Korea) (KCIA) to manipulate American institutions to the advantage of South Korean government policies, overtly and covertly.\nHearings.\nThe committee conducted an extensive investigation into South Korea\u2013United States relations, and held a series of hearings. The committee's hearings were highly publicized, and the term \"Koreagate\" began to be used by American news media outlets at the time.\nDuring these hearings, former KCIA director Kim Hyong-uk testified that he had offered favors to Pak Tong-sun in exchange for the latter's efforts to lobby in Washington, D.C. Kim also testified that a month before the hearings, South Korean president Park Chung Hee had attempted to dissuade him from testifying, and had ordered his kidnapping or assassination if he proceeded to testify.\nVarious members of the Unification Church of the United States testified that churchmembers had been involved in attempts to lobby congress. Dan Fefferman, a leader in the Unification Church of the United States, refused to cooperate fully during the hearings.\nFraser Report.\nThe committee made its findings public in what became known as the \"Fraser report\". The committee's report that there were South Korean plans to plant an intelligence network in the White House and to influence the United States Congress, newsmedia, clergy, and educators. The report found that Korean businessman Tongsun Park had begun lobbying for in 1970, immediately after Nixon withdrew the U.S. Seventh Army division from South Korea.\nThe committee found that the KCIA was working with Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church of the United States, and that some church members worked as volunteers in congressional offices. Together they founded the Korean Culture and Freedom Foundation, a nonprofit organization which undertook a public diplomacy campaign for the Republic of Korea. The committee also investigated possible KCIA influence on the Unification movement's campaign in support of Richard Nixon during the Watergate scandal.\nThe report of the committee also found that the KCIA planned to grant money to American universities in order to attempt to influence them for political purposes. It also said that the KCIA had harassed and intimidated Korean people living in the United States if they protested against Republic of Korea government policies.\nAftermath.\nIn response to the investigation, the House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct filed and heard charges against members of the United States House of Representatives. Congressman Richard T. Hanna was convicted of conspiracy to defraud the United States Government, and was sentenced to serve between 6 and 30 months in prison.\nThe ethics committee censured Edward R. Roybal for failing to report that he had received a $1,000 gift from Park. Two other congressmen, Charles H. Wilson and John J. McFall were reprimanded. A fourth congressman, Edward J. Patten, was found not guilty. The committee investigated claims that Edward Derwinski had leaked confidential information to South Korean officials, but the inquiry ended inconclusively.\nKim Hyong-uk disappeared in October 1979, and was reportedly assassinated on the orders of Kim Jae-kyu, then-director of the KCIA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32211", "revid": "50963492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32211", "title": "United States Code", "text": "Codification of U.S. federal statutes\nThe United States Code (formally The Code of Laws of the United States of America) is the official codification of the general and permanent federal statutes of the United States. It contains 53 titles organized into numbered sections. \nThe U.S. Code is published by the U.S. House of Representatives' Office of the Law Revision Counsel. New editions are published every six years, with cumulative supplements issued each year. The official version of these laws appears in the \"United States Statutes at Large\", a chronological, uncodified compilation.\nCodification.\nProcess.\nThe official text of an act of Congress is that of the \"enrolled bill\" (traditionally printed on parchment) presented to the president for his signature or disapproval. Upon enactment of a law, the original bill is delivered to the Office of the Federal Register (OFR) within the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). After authorization from the OFR, copies are distributed as \"slip laws\" (as unbound, individually paginated pamphlets) by the Government Publishing Office (GPO). The OFR assembles annual volumes of the enacted laws and publishes them as the \"United States Statutes at Large.\" By law, the text of the \"Statutes at Large\" is \"legal evidence\" of the laws enacted by Congress. Slip laws are also competent evidence.\nThe \"Statutes at Large\", however, is not a convenient tool for legal research. It is arranged strictly in chronological order; statutes addressing related topics may be scattered across many volumes, and are not consolidated with later amendments. Statutes often repeal or amend earlier laws, and extensive cross-referencing is required to determine what laws are in force at any given time.\nThe United States Code is the result of an effort to make finding relevant and effective statutes simpler by reorganizing them by subject matter, and eliminating expired and amended sections. The code is maintained by the Office of the Law Revision Counsel (LRC) of the U.S. House of Representatives. The LRC determines which statutes in the United States Statutes at Large should be codified, and which existing statutes are affected by amendments or repeals, or have simply expired by their own terms. The LRC updates the code accordingly.\nBecause of this codification approach, a single named statute (like the Taft\u2013Hartley Act or the Embargo Act) may or may not appear in a single place in the code. Often, complex legislation bundles a series of provisions together as a means of addressing a social or governmental problem; those provisions often fall in different logical areas of the code. For example, an act providing relief for family farms might affect items in Title 7 (Agriculture), Title 26 (Tax), and Title 43 (Public Lands). When the act is codified, its various provisions might well be placed in different parts of those various Titles. Traces of this process are generally found in the Notes accompanying the \"lead section\" associated with the popular name, and in cross-reference tables that identify Code sections corresponding to particular acts of Congress.\nUsually, the individual sections of a statute are incorporated into the code exactly as enacted; however, sometimes editorial changes are made by the LRC (for instance, the phrase \"the date of enactment of this Act\" is replaced by the actual date). Though authorized by statute, these changes do not constitute positive law.\nLegal status.\nThe authority for the material in the United States Code comes from its enactment through the legislative process and not from its presentation in the code. For example, the United States Code omitted \u00a0https:// for decades, apparently because it was thought to have been repealed. In its 1993 ruling in \"U.S. National Bank of Oregon v. Independent Insurance Agents of America\", the Supreme Court ruled that 12 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a092 was still valid law.\nA positive law title is a title that is itself a federal statute, that is to say that it is one that has been enacted and codified into law by the United States Congress. The title itself has been enacted. By contrast, a non-positive law title is a title that has not been codified into federal law, and is instead merely an editorial compilation of individually enacted federal statutes.\nBy law, those titles of the United States Code that have not been enacted into positive law are \"prima facie\" evidence\" of the law in effect. The \"United States Statutes at Large\" remains the ultimate authority. If a dispute arises as to the accuracy or completeness of the codification of an unenacted title, the courts will turn to the language in the United States Statutes at Large. In case of a conflict between the text of the Statutes at Large and the text of a provision of the United States Code that has not been enacted as positive law, the text of the Statutes at Large takes precedence.\nIn contrast, if Congress enacts a particular title (or other component) of the code into positive law, the enactment repeals all of the previous acts of Congress from which that title of the code derives; in their place, Congress gives the title of the code itself the force of law. This process makes that title of the United States Code \"legal evidence\" of the law in force. Where a title has been enacted into positive law, a court may neither permit nor require proof of the underlying original acts of Congress.\nThe distinction between enacted and unenacted titles is largely academic because the code is nearly always accurate. The United States Code is routinely cited by the Supreme Court and other federal courts without mentioning this theoretical caveat. On a day-to-day basis, very few lawyers cross-reference the code to the \"Statutes at Large\". Attempting to capitalize on the possibility that the text of the United States Code can differ from the \"United States Statutes at Large\", Bancroft-Whitney for many years published a series of volumes known as United States Code Service (USCS), which used the actual text of the \"United States Statutes at Large\"; the series is now published by the Michie Company after Bancroft-Whitney parent Thomson Corporation divested the title as a condition of acquiring West.\nUncodified statutes.\nOnly \"general and permanent\" laws are codified in the United States Code; the code does not usually include provisions that apply only to a limited number of people (a private law) or for a limited time, such as most appropriation acts or budget laws, which apply only for a single fiscal year. If these limited provisions are significant, however, they may be printed as \"notes\" underneath related sections of the code. The codification is based on the content of the laws, however, not the vehicle by which they are adopted; so, for instance, if an appropriations act contains substantive, permanent provisions (as is sometimes the case), these provisions will be incorporated into the code even though they were adopted as part of a non-permanent enactment.\nVersions and history.\nEarly compilations.\nEarly efforts at codifying the acts of Congress were undertaken by private publishers; these were useful shortcuts for research purposes, but had no official status. Congress undertook an official codification called the \"Revised Statutes of the United States\" approved June 22, 1874, for the laws in effect as of December 1, 1873. Congress re-enacted a corrected version in 1878. The 1874 version of the Revised Statutes were enacted as positive law, but the 1878 version was not and subsequent enactments of Congress were not incorporated into the official code, so that over time researchers once again had to delve through many volumes of the \"Statutes at Large\".\nAccording to the preface to the code, \"From 1897 to 1907 a commission was engaged in an effort to codify the great mass of accumulating legislation. The work of the commission involved an expenditure of over $300,000, but was never carried to completion.\" Only the Criminal Code of 1909 and the Judicial Code of 1911 were enacted. In the absence of a comprehensive official code, private publishers once again collected the more recent statutes into unofficial codes. The first edition of the \"United States Code\" (published as Statutes at Large Volume 44, Part 1) includes cross-reference tables between the USC and two of these unofficial codes, \"United States Compiled Statutes Annotated\" by West Publishing Co. and \"Federal Statutes Annotated\" by Edward Thompson Co.\nOfficial code.\nDuring the 1920s, some members of Congress revived the codification project, resulting in the approval of the United States Code by Congress in 1926.\nThe official version of the code is published by the LRC (Office of the Law Revision Counsel) as a series of paper volumes. The first edition of the code was contained in a single bound volume; today, it spans several large volumes. Normally, a new edition of the code is issued every six years, with annual cumulative supplements identifying the changes made by Congress since the last \"main edition\" was published.\nThe official code was last printed in 2018.\nDigital and Internet versions.\nBoth the LRC and the GPO offer electronic versions of the code to the public. The LRC electronic version used to be as much as 18 months behind current legislation, but as of 2014 it is one of the most current versions available online. The United States Code is available from the LRC at http:// in both HTML and XML bulk formats. The \"United States Legislative Markup\" (USLM) schema of the XML was designed to be consistent with the Akoma Ntoso project (from the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs) XML schema, and the OASIS \"LegalDocML\" technical committee standard will be based upon Akoma Ntoso.\nA number of other online versions are freely available, such as Cornell's Legal Information Institute.\nAnnotated codes.\nPracticing lawyers who can afford them almost always use an annotated version of the code from a private company. The two leading annotated versions are the \"United States Code Annotated\", abbreviated as USCA, and the \"United States Code Service\", abbreviated as USCS. The USCA is published by West (part of Thomson Reuters), and USCS is published by LexisNexis (part of Reed Elsevier), which purchased the publication from the Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Co. in 1997 as a result of an antitrust settlement when the parent of Lawyers Co-operative Publishing acquired West. These annotated versions contain notes following each section of the law, which organize and summarize court decisions, law review articles, and other authorities that pertain to the code section, and may also include uncodified provisions that are part of the Public Laws. The publishers of these versions frequently issue supplements (in hard copy format as pocket parts) that contain newly enacted laws, which may not yet have appeared in an official published version of the code, as well as updated secondary materials such as new court decisions on the subject. When an attorney is viewing an annotated code on an online service, such as Westlaw or LexisNexis, all the citations in the annotations are hyperlinked to the referenced court opinions and other documents.\nOrganization.\nDivisions.\nThe code is divided into 53 titles (listed below), which deal with broad, logically organized areas of legislation. Titles may optionally be divided into subtitles, parts, subparts, chapters, and subchapters. All titles have sections (represented by a \u00a7) as their basic coherent units, and sections are numbered sequentially across the entire title without regard to the previously mentioned divisions of titles. Sections are often divided into (from largest to smallest) subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses, subclauses, items, and subitems. Congress, by convention, names a particular subdivision of a section according to its largest element. For example, \"subsection (c)(3)(B)(iv)\" is not a subsection but a clause, namely clause (iv) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3) of subsection (c); if the identity of the subsection and paragraph were clear from the context, one would refer to the clause as \"subparagraph (B)(iv)\".\nNot all titles use the same series of subdivisions above the section level, and they may arrange them in different order. For example, in Title 26 (the tax code), the order of subdivision runs: Title \u2013 Subtitle \u2013 Chapter \u2013 Subchapter \u2013 Part \u2013 Subpart \u2013 Section \u2013 Subsection \u2013 Paragraph \u2013 Subparagraph \u2013 Clause \u2013 Subclause \u2013 Item \u2013 Subitem.\nThe \"Section\" division is the core organizational component of the code, and the \"Title\" division is always the largest division of the code. Which intermediate levels between Title and Section appear, if any, varies from Title to Title. For example, in Title 38 (Veteran's Benefits), the order runs Title \u2013 Part \u2013 Chapter \u2013 Subchapter \u2013 Section.\nThe word \"title\" in this context is roughly akin to a printed \"volume\", although many of the larger titles span multiple volumes. Similarly, no particular size or length is associated with other subdivisions; a section might run several pages in print, or just a sentence or two. Some subdivisions within particular titles acquire meaning of their own; for example, it is common for lawyers to refer to a \"Chapter 11 bankruptcy\" or a \"Subchapter S corporation\" (often shortened to \"S corporation\").\nIn the context of federal statutes, the word \"title\" has two slightly different meanings. It can refer to the highest subdivision of the code itself, but it can also refer to the highest subdivision of an act of Congress which subsequently becomes part of an existing title of the code. For example, when Americans refer to Title VII, they are usually referring to the seventh title of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. That act is actually codified in Title 42 of the United States Code, not Title 7.\nThe intermediate subdivisions between title and section are helpful for reading the code (since Congress uses them to group together related sections), but they are not needed to cite a section in the code. To cite any particular section, it is enough to know its title and section numbers. According to one legal style manual, a sample citation would be \"Privacy Act of 1974, \u00a0https:// (2006)\", read aloud as \"Title five, United States Code, section five fifty-two A\" or simply \"five USC five fifty-two A\".\nSome section numbers consist of awkward-sounding combinations of letters, hyphens, and numerals. They are especially prevalent in Title 42. A typical example is the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (RFRA), which is codified in Chapter 21B of Title 42 at \u00a0https:// through \u00a0https://. In the case of RFRA, Congress was trying to squeeze a new act into Title 42 between Chapter 21A (ending at \u00a0https://) and Chapter 22 (beginning at \u00a0https://). The underlying problem is that the original drafters of the code in 1926 failed to foresee the explosive growth of federal legislation directed to \"The Public Health and Welfare\" (as Title 42 is literally titled) and did not fashion statutory classifications and section numbering schemes that could readily accommodate such expansion. Title 42 grew in size from 6 chapters and 106 sections in 1926 to over 160 chapters and 7,000 sections as of 1999.\nTitles.\nTitles that have been enacted into positive law are indicated by blue shading below with the year of last enactment. \nProposed titles.\nThe Office of Law Revision Counsel (LRC) has produced draft text for three additional titles of federal law. The subject matter of these proposed titles exists today in one or several existing titles.\nThe LRC announced an \"editorial reclassification\" of the federal laws governing voting and elections that went into effect on September 1, 2014. This reclassification involved moving various laws previously classified in Titles 2 and 42 into a new Title 52, which has not been enacted into positive law.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTreatment of repealed laws.\nWhen sections are repealed, their text is deleted and replaced by a note summarizing what used to be there. This is so that lawyers reading old cases can understand what the cases are talking about. As a result, some portions of the code consist entirely of empty chapters full of historical notes. For example, Title 8, Chapter 7 is labeled \"Exclusion of Chinese\". This contains historical notes relating to the Chinese Exclusion Act, which is no longer in effect.\nNumber and growth of federal crimes.\nThere are conflicting opinions on the number of federal crimes, but many have argued that there has been explosive growth and it has become overwhelming. In 1982, the U.S. Department of Justice could not come up with a number, but estimated 3,000 crimes in the United States Code. In 1998, the American Bar Association said that it was likely much higher than 3,000, but did not give a specific estimate. In 2008, the Heritage Foundation published a report that put the number at a minimum of 4,450. When staff for a task force of the U.S. House Judiciary Committee asked the Congressional Research Service (CRS) to update its 2008 calculation of criminal offenses in the USC in 2013, the CRS responded that they lack the manpower and resources to accomplish the task.\nRelated codifications.\nThe code generally contains only those Acts of Congress, or statutes, designated as public laws. The code itself does not include executive orders or other executive-branch documents related to the statutes, or rules promulgated by the courts. However, such related material is sometimes contained in notes to relevant statutory sections or in appendices. The code does not include statutes designated at enactment as private laws, nor statutes that are considered temporary in nature, such as appropriations. These laws are included in the \"Statutes at Large\" for the year of enactment.\nRegulations promulgated by executive agencies through the rulemaking process set out in the Administrative Procedure Act are published chronologically in the \"Federal Register\" and then codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Similarly, state statutes and regulations are often codified into state-specific codes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
