{"id": "39353", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39353", "title": "Operetta", "text": "Form of theatre and a genre of light opera\nOperetta is a form of theatre and a genre of light opera. It includes spoken dialogue, songs and including dances. It is lighter than opera in terms of its music, orchestral size, and length of the work. Apart from its shorter length, the operetta is usually of a light and amusing character. The subject matter may portray \"lovers' spats, mistaken identities, sudden reversals of fortune, and glittering parties\". It sometimes also includes satirical commentaries.\n\"Operetta\" is the Italian diminutive of \"opera\" and was used originally to describe a shorter, perhaps less ambitious work than an opera. Operetta provides an alternative to operatic performances in an accessible form targeting a different audience. Operetta became a recognizable form in the mid-19th century in France, and its popularity led to the development of many national styles of operetta. Distinctive styles emerged across countries including Austria-Hungary, Germany, England, Spain, the Philippines, Mexico, Cuba, and the United States. Through the transfer of operetta among different countries, cultural cosmopolitanism emerged in the previous century. Operetta as a genre lost favor in the 1930s and gave way to modern musical theatre. Important operetta composers include Johann Strauss, Jacques Offenbach, Franz Leh\u00e1r, and Francisco Alonso.\nDefinitions.\nThe term operetta arises in the mid-eighteenth-century Italy and it is first acknowledged as an independent genre in Paris around 1850. Castil-Blaze's \"Dictionnaire de la musique moderne\" claims that this term has a long history and that Mozart was one of the first people to use the word operetta, disparagingly, describing operettas as \"certain dramatic abortions, those miniature compositions in which one finds only cold songs and couplets from vaudeville\". The definition of operetta has changed over the centuries and ranges depending on each country's history with the genre. It is often used to refer to pieces that resemble the one-act compositions by Offenbach in contrast with his full length compositions, 'op\u00e9ra-bouffe'. Offenbach invented this art form in response to the French government's oppressive laws surrounding the stagings of works that were larger than one act or contained more than four characters. \nHistory.\nOperetta became recognized as a musical genre around 1850 in Paris. In 1870, the centre for operetta shifted to Vienna when Paris fell to the Prussians. The form of operetta continued to evolve through the First World War.\nThere are some common characteristics among operettas that flourished from the mid-1850s through the early 1900s, beginning with the French op\u00e9ra-bouffe. They contain spoken dialogue interspersed between musical numbers, and often the principal characters, as well as the chorus, are called upon to dance, although the music is largely derived from 19th-century operatic styles, with an emphasis on singable melodies. Operetta in the twentieth century is more complex and reached its pinnacle in Austria and Germany.\nOperetta is a precursor of the modern musical theatre or the \"musical\". In the early decades of the 20th century, operetta continued to exist alongside the newer musicals, with each influencing the other. The distinctive traits of operetta are found in the musical theatre works of Jerome Kern, Richard Rodgers and Stephen Sondheim.\nOperetta in French.\nOrigins.\nOperetta was first created in Paris, France in the middle of the 19th century in order to satisfy a need for short, light works in contrast to the full-length entertainment of the increasingly serious \"op\u00e9ra comique\". By this time, the \"comique\" part of the genre name had become misleading: Georges Bizet's \"Carmen\" (1875) is an example of an \"op\u00e9ra comique\" with a tragic plot. The definition of \"comique\" meant something closer to \"humanistic\", meant to portray \"real life\" in a more realistic way, representing tragedy and comedy next to each other, as Shakespeare had done centuries earlier. With this new connotation, \"op\u00e9ra comique\" had dominated the French operatic stage since the decline of \"trag\u00e9die lyrique\". The origins of French operetta began when comic actors would perform dances and songs to crowds of people at fairs on open-air stages. In the beginning of the 18th century these actors began to perform comic parodies of known operas. These performances formed operetta as a casual genre derived from \"op\u00e9ra comique\", while returning to a simpler form of music. Many scholars have debated as to which composer should be credited as the inventor of operetta; Jaques Offenbach or Herv\u00e9. It is concluded that Herv\u00e9 completed the groundwork, and Offenbach refined and developed the art form into the concept of operetta as we know it today. Therefore, \"Offenbach is considered the father of French operetta \u2013 but so is Herv\u00e9.\"\nNotable composers.\nHerv\u00e9 was a singer, composer, librettist, conductor, and scene painter. In 1842, he wrote the one act \"op\u00e9rette\", \"L'Ours et le pacha\", based on the popular vaudeville by Eug\u00e8ne Scribe and X. B. Saintine. In 1848, Herv\u00e9 made his first notable appearance on the Parisian stage, with \"Don Quichotte et Sancho Pan\u00e7a\" (after Cervantes), which can be considered the starting point for the new French musical theatre tradition. Herv\u00e9's most famous works are the Gounod parody \"Le petit Faust\" (1869) and \"Mam'zelle Nitouche\" (1883).\nJacques Offenbach is most responsible for the development and popularization of operetta\u2014also called or \u2014giving it its enormous vogue during the Second Empire and afterwards. In 1849, Offenbach obtained permission to open the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Bouffes Parisiens, a theatre company that offered programs of two or three satirical one-act sketches. The company was so successful that it led to the elongation of these sketches into an evening's duration. However, Offenbach's productions were bound by the police prefecture in Paris, which specified the type of performance that would be allowed: \"pantomimes with at most five performers, one-act comic musical dialogues for two to three actors, and dance routines with no more than five dancers; choruses were strictly forbidden.\" These rules defined what came to be defined as operetta: \"a small unpretentious operatic work that had no tragic implications and was designed to entertain the public\". Two other French composers, Robert Planquette and Charles Lecocq, followed Offenbach's model and wrote the operettas \"Les Cloches de Corneville\" (\"The Bells of Normandy\") and \"La Fille de Madame Angot\" (\"The Daughter of Madame Angot\"). The two operettas were considered a major hit.\nThe political limitations placed on Offenbach and Parisian theatre were gradually lifted, and operetta gained wide popularity. While Offenbach's earliest one-act pieces included \"Les deux aveugles\", \"Le violoneux\" and \"Ba-ta-clan\" (all 1855) did well, his first full-length operetta, \"Orph\u00e9e aux enfers\" (1858), was by far the most successful. It became the first repertory operetta and was staged hundreds of times across Europe and beyond. Offenbach's legacy is seen in operettas throughout the late 19th century and beyond by encouraging Strauss the Younger to bring the genre to Austria-Hungary. Offenbach also traveled to the US and England educating musicians on the more than 100 operettas he wrote during his lifetime. This international travel resulted in the appearance of strong national schools in both nations. By the 1870s, however, Offenbach's popularity declined. The public showed more interest in romantic operettas that showed the \"grace and refinement\" of the late Romantic period. This included Messager's operetta \"V\u00e9ronique\" and Louis Ganne's \"Les saltimbanques\". The 20th century found French operetta even more out of favor as the international public turned to Anglo-American and Viennese operettas, which continued to develop the art form into the late Romantic era.\nOperetta in German and Hungarian.\nOffenbach was unabashed about spreading operetta around the continent. In 1861, he staged some of his recent works at the Carltheater in Vienna, which paved the way for Austrian and German composers. Soon, Vienna became the epicenter of operetta productions. It is because of the Viennese operetta, not the French, that the term is used to describe a full-length work. Additionally, after the Prussian defeat in 1866, operetta became the sign of a new age in Austria, marked by modernity and industrialization.\nAustria\u2013Hungary.\nThe most significant composer of operetta in the German language was the Austrian Johann Strauss II (1825\u20131899). Strauss was recruited from the dance hall and introduced a distinct Viennese style to the genre. Strauss was highly influenced by the work of Offenbach, so much so that he collaborated with many of Offenbach's librettists for his most popular works. His operetta, \"Die Fledermaus\" (1874), became the most performed operetta in the world, and remains his most popular stage work. In all, Strauss wrote 16 operettas and one opera, most with great success when first premiered.\nStrauss's satire was often generic, unlike Offenbach who commented on real-life matters.\nStrauss's operettas, waltzes, polkas, and marches often have a strongly Viennese style, and his popularity causes many to think of him as the national composer of Austria. The Theater an der Wien never failed to draw huge crowds when his stage works were first performed. After many of the numbers the audience would call noisily for encores.\nFranz von Supp\u00e9, also known as Francesco Ezechiele Ermenegildo, Cavaliere Supp\u00e9-Demelli, was born in 1819 and his fame rivals that of Offenbach. Supp\u00e9 was a leading composer and conductor in Vienna and most known for his operetta \"Leichte Kavallerie\" (1866), \"Fatinitza\" (1876), and \"Boccaccio\" (1879). Supp\u00e9 was a contemporary to Strauss and composed over 30 operettas 180 farces, ballets and other stage works. Recently, though most of his works have been fallen into obscurity, many of them have been reprised within films, cartoons, advertisements and so on. Both Strauss and Supp\u00e9 are considered to be the most notable composers of the Golden Age of Viennese operetta.\nFollowing the death of Johann Strauss and his contemporary, Franz von Supp\u00e9, Franz Leh\u00e1r was the heir apparent. Lehar is widely considered the leading operetta composer of the 20th century and his most successful operetta, \"Die lustige Witwe\" (\"The Merry Widow\"), is one of the classic operettas still in repertory.\nLeh\u00e1r assisted in leading operetta into the Silver Age of Viennese Operetta. During this time, Viennese Censorship laws were changed in 1919. Leh\u00e1r is most responsible for giving the genre renewed vitality. Studying at the Prague Conservatory Leh\u00e1r began as a theatre violinist and then took off as a composer in the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During this 1905, Leh\u00e1r's \"Die lustige Witwe\" (\"The Merry Widow\") paved a pathway for composers such as Fall, Oscar Straus, and K\u00e1lm\u00e1n to continue the tradition of Operetta. Leh\u00e1r was also one of the first composers who began to incorporate into film. [2]\nThe Viennese tradition was carried on by Oscar Straus, Carl Zeller, Karl Mill\u00f6cker, Leo Fall, Richard Heuberger, Edmund Eysler, Ralph Benatzky, Robert Stolz, Leo Ascher, Emmerich K\u00e1lm\u00e1n, Nico Dostal, Fred Raymond, Igo Hofstetter, Paul Abraham and Ivo Tijardovi\u0107 in the 20th century.\nGermany.\nIn the same way that Vienna was the center of Austrian operetta, Berlin was the center of German operetta. Berlin operetta often had its own style, including, especially after World War I, elements of jazz and other syncopated dance rhythms, a transatlantic style, and the presence of ragged marching tunes. Berlin operettas also sometimes included aspects of burlesque, revue, farce, or cabaret.\nPaul Lincke pioneered the Berlin operetta in 1899 with \"Frau Luna\", which includes \"Berliner Luft\" (\"Berlin Air\"), which became the unofficial anthem of Berlin. His \"Lysistrata\" (1902) includes the song and tune \"The Glow-Worm\", which remains quite popular internationally. Much later, in the 1920s and 1930s, Kurt Weill took a more extreme form of the Berlin operetta style and used it in his operas, operettas, and musicals. It is arguable that some of Kurt Weill's compositions could be considered modernist operetta.\nThe Berlin-style operetta coexisted with more bourgeois, charming, home-loving, and nationalistic German operettas \u2013 some of which were called \"Volksoperetten\" (folk operettas). A prime example is Leon Jessel's extremely popular 1917 \"Schwarzwaldm\u00e4del\" (\"Black Forest Girl\"). These bucolic, nostalgic, home-loving operettas were officially preferred over Berlin-style operettas after 1933, when the Nazis came to power and instituted the \"Reichsmusikkammer\" (State Music Institute), which deprecated and banned \"decadent\" music like jazz and similar \"foreign\" musical forms. In the beginning of twenty-first century, German revival of operetta was an unforeseen theatrical development.\nNotable German operetta composers include Paul Lincke, Eduard K\u00fcnneke, Walter Kollo, Jean Gilbert, Leon Jessel, Rudolf Dellinger, Walter Goetze and Ludwig Schmidseder.\nOperetta in English.\nOffenbach's influence reached England by the 1860s. Arthur Sullivan, of the Gilbert and Sullivan duo, composed \"Cox and Box\" (1866) as a direct reaction to Offenbach's \"Les deux aveugles\" (1855). Gilbert and Sullivan solidified the format in England with their long-running collaboration during the Victorian era. With W. S. Gilbert writing the libretti and Sullivan composing the music, the pair produced 14 comic operas, which were later called Savoy Operas. Most were enormously popular in Britain, the U.S., and elsewhere. Gilbert, Sullivan, and their producer Richard D'Oyly Carte themselves call their joint works comic operas to distinguish this family-friendly fare from the risqu\u00e9 French operettas of the 1850s and 1860s. Their works, such as \"H.M.S. Pinafore\", \"The Pirates of Penzance\" and \"The Mikado\", continue to enjoy regular performances throughout the English-speaking world. While many of these operas seem to be very light-hearted, works such as \"The Mikado\" were making political commentaries on the British government and military with one of the main topics being capital punishment which was still widely used at the time.\nEnglish operetta continued into the 1890s, with works by composers such as Edward German, Ivan Caryll and Sidney Jones. These quickly evolved into the lighter song-and-dance pieces known as Edwardian musical comedy. Beginning in 1907, with \"The Merry Widow\", many of the Viennese operettas were adapted very successfully for the English stage. To explain this phenomenon, Derek Scott writes,In January 1908, London's \"Daily Mail\" claimed that \"The Merry Widow\" had been performed 450 times in Vienna, 400 times in Berlin, 350 times in St Petersburg, 300 times in Copenhagen, and was currently playing every evening in Europe in nine languages. In the USA, five companies were presenting it, and \"the rush for tickets at the New Amsterdam Theatre\" was likened to \"the feverish crowding round the doors of a threatened bank\". Stan Czech, in his Leh\u00e1r biography, claims that by 1910 it had been performed \"around 18,000 times in ten languages on 154 American, 142 German, and 135 British stages\".The international embrace of operetta directly correlated with the development of both the West End in London and Broadway in New York. American audiences were first introduced to operetta through Gilbert and Sullivan's \"H.M.S. Pinafore\" in 1878\".\" American operetta composers included Victor Herbert, whose works at the beginning of the 20th century were influenced by both Viennese operetta and Gilbert and Sullivan. He was followed by Sigmund Romberg and Rudolph Friml. Nevertheless, American operetta largely gave way, by the end of World War I, to musicals, such as the Princess Theatre musicals, and revues, followed by the musicals of Rodgers and Hart, Cole Porter, Irving Berlin and others. Another notable operetta in English is Candide by Leonard Bernstein. It was advertised as a \"comic operetta.\" Candide's score in some ways was typical for its announced genre with some waltzes, but Bernstein added the schottische, gavotte, and other dances, and also entered the opera house with the aria \"Glitter and Be Gay\"\nOperetta in Italian.\nOperetta was the first imported vocal genre in Italy. Since the 1860s, French and Viennese composers such as Offenbach, Herv\u00e9, Supp\u00e9, Strauss Jr and Leh\u00e1r have significantly influenced the operatic tradition of Italy. The widespread popularity of foreign operetta in Italy reached its climax at the turn of the century, in particular with the success of La vedova allegra, which premiered in Milan in 1907. Italian operetta composers tended to stretch the definition of an \"operetta\" more than other nations in order to fit the beauty of Italian Romantic opera style. An example would be Giacomo Puccini, who developed his work in the realistic \"verisimo\" style, and would compose \"operettas in three acts\". Other notable composers of Italian operetta include Vincenzo Valente, Ruggero Leoncavallo, Pasquale Mario Costa, Pietro Mascagni, Carlo Lombardo, Enrico Toselli, Virgilio Ranzato and Giuseppe Pietri.\nReception and controversy.\nThe audiences of operetta during the 1860s and 1870s are described as rowdy and loud. Operetta was considered one of the major controversies about Italian music and culture between the 1860s and the 1920s. During that period, strong nationalistic undertones in Italy strived to unify its national identity. Recognizing operetta as a foreign genre, operetta was perceived as an art form that would contaminate Italian opera or illegitimately undermine its primacy on the stage. It was not until the early twentieth century that Italian composers systematically engaged in writing operetta.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "39354", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39354", "title": "Uracil", "text": "Chemical compound of RNA\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nUracil () (symbol U or Ura) is one of the four nucleotide bases in the nucleic acid RNA. The others are adenine (A), cytosine (C), and guanine (G). In RNA, uracil binds to adenine via two hydrogen bonds. In DNA, the uracil nucleobase is replaced by thymine (T). Uracil is a demethylated form of thymine.\nUracil is a common and naturally occurring pyrimidine derivative. The name \"uracil\" was coined in 1885 by the German chemist Robert Behrend, who was attempting to synthesize derivatives of uric acid. Originally discovered in 1900 by Alberto Ascoli, it was isolated by hydrolysis of yeast nuclein; it was also found in bovine thymus and spleen, herring sperm, and wheat germ. It is a planar, unsaturated compound that has the ability to absorb light.\nUracil that was formed extraterrestrially has been detected in the Murchison meteorite, in near-Earth asteroid Ryugu, and possibly on the surface of the moon Titan. It has been synthesized under cold laboratory conditions similar to outer space, from pyrimidine embedded in water ice and exposed to ultraviolet light.\nProperties.\nIn RNA, uracil base-pairs with adenine and replaces thymine during DNA transcription. Methylation of uracil produces thymine. In DNA, the evolutionary substitution of thymine for uracil may have increased DNA stability and improved the efficiency of DNA replication (discussed below). Uracil pairs with adenine through hydrogen bonding. When base pairing with adenine, uracil acts as both a hydrogen bond acceptor and a hydrogen bond donor. In RNA, uracil binds with a ribose sugar to form the ribonucleoside uridine. When a phosphate attaches to uridine, uridine 5\u2032-monophosphate is produced.\nUracil undergoes amide-imidic acid tautomeric shifts because any nuclear instability the molecule may have from the lack of formal aromaticity is compensated by the cyclic-amidic stability. The amide tautomer is referred to as the lactam structure, while the imidic acid tautomer is referred to as the lactim structure. These tautomeric forms are predominant at pH\u00a07. The lactam structure is the most common form of uracil.\nUracil also recycles itself to form nucleotides by undergoing a series of phosphoribosyltransferase reactions. Degradation of uracil produces the substrates \u03b2-alanine, carbon dioxide, and ammonia.\nOxidative degradation of uracil produces urea and maleic acid in the presence of H2O2 and Fe2+ or in the presence of diatomic oxygen and Fe2+.\nUracil is a weak acid. The first site of ionization of uracil is not known. The negative charge is placed on the oxygen anion and produces a p\"K\"a of less than or equal to 12. The basic p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a0\u22123.4, while the acidic p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a09.389. In the gas phase, uracil has four sites that are more acidic than water.\nIn DNA.\nUracil is rarely found in DNA, and this may have been an evolutionary change to increase genetic stability. This is because cytosine can deaminate spontaneously to produce uracil through hydrolytic deamination. Therefore, if there were an organism that used uracil in its DNA, the deamination of cytosine (which undergoes base pairing with guanine) would lead to formation of uracil (which would base pair with adenine) during DNA synthesis.\nUracil-DNA glycosylase excises uracil bases from double-stranded DNA. This enzyme would therefore recognize and cut out both types of uracil \u2013 the one incorporated naturally, and the one formed due to cytosine deamination, which would trigger unnecessary and inappropriate repair processes.\nThis problem is believed to have been solved in terms of evolution, that is by \"tagging\" (methylating) uracil. Methylated uracil is identical to thymine. Hence the hypothesis that, over time, thymine became standard in DNA instead of uracil. So cells continue to use uracil in RNA, and not in DNA, because RNA is shorter-lived than DNA, and any potential uracil-related errors do not lead to lasting damage. Apparently, either there was no evolutionary pressure to replace uracil in RNA with the more complex thymine, or uracil has some chemical property that is useful in RNA, which thymine lacks. Uracil-containing DNA still exists, for example in: \nSynthesis.\nBiological.\nOrganisms synthesize uracil, in the form of uridine monophosphate (UMP), by decarboxylating orotidine 5'-monophosphate (orotidylic acid). In humans this decarboxylation is achieved by the enzyme UMP synthase. In contrast to the purine nucleotides, the pyrimidine ring (orotidylic acid) that leads uracil is synthesized first and then linked to ribose phosphate, forming UMP.\nLaboratory.\nThere are many laboratory synthesis of uracil available. The first reaction is the simplest of the syntheses, by adding water to cytosine to produce uracil and ammonia:\nThe most common way to synthesize uracil is by the condensation of malic acid with urea in fuming sulfuric acid:\n + \u2192 + 2 + \nUracil can also be synthesized by a double decomposition of thiouracil in aqueous chloroacetic acid.\nPhotodehydrogenation of 5,6-diuracil, which is synthesized by beta-alanine reacting with urea, produces uracil.\nPrebiotic.\nIn 2009, NASA scientists reported having produced uracil from pyrimidine and water ice by exposing it to ultraviolet light under space-like conditions. This suggests a possible natural original source for uracil. In 2014, NASA scientists reported that additional complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine and thymine, have been formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions, starting with ice, pyrimidine, ammonia, and methanol, which are compounds found in astrophysical environments. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), a carbon-rich chemical found in the Universe, may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds.\nBased on 12C/13C isotopic ratios of organic compounds found in the Murchison meteorite, it is believed that uracil, xanthine, and related molecules can also be formed extraterrestrially. Data from the Cassini mission, orbiting in the Saturn system, suggests that uracil is present on the surface of the moon Titan. In 2023, uracil was observed in a sample from 162173 Ryugu, a near-Earth asteroid, with no exposure to Earth's biosphere, giving further evidence for synthesis in space.\nReactions.\nUracil readily undergoes regular reactions including oxidation, nitration, and alkylation. While in the presence of phenol (PhOH) and sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl), uracil can be visualized in ultraviolet light. Uracil also has the capability to react with elemental halogens because of the presence of more than one strongly electron donating group.\nUracil readily undergoes addition to ribose sugars and phosphates to partake in synthesis and further reactions in the body. Uracil becomes uridine, uridine monophosphate (UMP), uridine diphosphate (UDP), uridine triphosphate (UTP), and uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose). Each one of these molecules is synthesized in the body and has specific functions.\nWhen uracil reacts with anhydrous hydrazine, a first-order kinetic reaction occurs and the uracil ring opens up. If the pH of the reaction increases to &gt;\u00a010.5, the uracil anion forms, making the reaction go much more slowly. The same slowing of the reaction occurs if the pH decreases, because of the protonation of the hydrazine. The reactivity of uracil remains unchanged, even if the temperature changes.\nUses.\nUracil's use in the body is to help carry out the synthesis of many enzymes necessary for cell function through bonding with riboses and phosphates. Uracil serves as allosteric regulator and coenzyme for reactions in animals and in plants. UMP controls the activity of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase and aspartate transcarbamoylase in plants, while UDP and UTP regulate CPSase II activity in animals. UDP-glucose regulates the conversion of glucose to galactose in the liver and other tissues in the process of carbohydrate metabolism. Uracil is also involved in the biosynthesis of polysaccharides and the transportation of sugars containing aldehydes. Uracil is important for the detoxification of many carcinogens, for instance those found in tobacco smoke. Uracil is also required to detoxify many drugs such as cannabinoids (THC) and morphine (opioids). It can also slightly increase the risk for cancer in unusual cases in which the body is extremely deficient in folate. The deficiency in folate leads to increased ratio of deoxyuridine monophosphates (dUMP)/deoxythymidine monophosphates (dTMP) and uracil misincorporation into DNA and eventually low production of DNA.\nUracil can be used for drug delivery and as a pharmaceutical. When elemental fluorine reacts with uracil, they produce 5-fluorouracil. 5-Fluorouracil is an anticancer drug (antimetabolite) used to masquerade as uracil during the nucleic acid replication process. Because 5-fluorouracil is similar in shape to, but does not undergo the same chemistry as, uracil, the drug inhibits RNA transcription enzymes, thereby blocking RNA synthesis and stopping the growth of cancerous cells. Uracil can also be used in the synthesis of caffeine. Uracil has also shown potential as a HIV viral capsid inhibitor. Uracil derivatives have antiviral, anti-tubercular and anti-leishmanial activity.\nUracil can be used to determine microbial contamination of tomatoes. The presence of uracil indicates lactic acid bacteria contamination of the fruit. Uracil derivatives containing a diazine ring are used in pesticides. Uracil derivatives are more often used as antiphotosynthetic herbicides, destroying weeds in cotton, sugar beet, turnips, soya, peas, sunflower crops, vineyards, berry plantations, and orchards. Uracil derivatives can enhance the activity of antimicrobial polysaccharides such as chitosan.\nIn yeast, uracil concentrations are inversely proportional to uracil permease.\nMixtures containing uracil are also commonly used to test reversed-phase HPLC columns. As uracil is essentially unretained by the non-polar stationary phase, this can be used to determine the dwell time (and subsequently dwell volume, given a known flow rate) of the system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39355", "revid": "410898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39355", "title": "Shodokan", "text": ""}
{"id": "39356", "revid": "9856656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39356", "title": "Anne Boleyn", "text": "Queen of England from 1533 to 1536\nAnne Boleyn (; c. 1501 or 1507 \u2013 19 May 1536) was Queen of England from 1533 to 1536, as the second wife of King Henry VIII. The circumstances of her marriage and execution, by beheading for treason, made her a key figure in the political and religious upheaval that marked the start of the English Reformation.\nAnne was the daughter of Thomas Boleyn (later Earl of Wiltshire), and his wife, Elizabeth Howard, and was educated in the Netherlands and France. Anne returned to England in early 1522, to marry her cousin James Butler, 9th Earl of Ormond; the marriage plans were broken off, and instead, she secured a post at court as maid of honour to Henry VIII's wife, Catherine of Aragon. Early in 1523, Anne was secretly betrothed to Henry Percy, son of Henry Percy, 5th Earl of Northumberland, but the betrothal was broken off when the Earl refused to support it. Cardinal Thomas Wolsey refused the match in January 1524.\nIn February or March 1526, Henry VIII began his pursuit of Anne. She resisted his attempts to seduce her, refusing to become his mistress, as her sister Mary had previously been. Henry focused on annulling his marriage to Catherine, so he would be free to marry Anne. After Wolsey failed to obtain an annulment from Pope Clement VII, it became clear the marriage would not be annulled by the Catholic Church. As a result, Henry and his advisers, such as Thomas Cromwell, began breaking the Church's power in England and closing the monasteries. Henry and Anne formally married on 25 January 1533, after a secret wedding on 14 November 1532. On 23 May 1533, the newly appointed Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Cranmer declared Henry and Catherine's marriage null and void. Five days later, he declared Henry and Anne's marriage valid. Clement excommunicated Henry and Cranmer. As a result of the marriage and excommunications, the first break between the Church of England and the Catholic Church took place, and the King took control of the Church of England. Anne was crowned queen on 1June 1533. On 7September, she gave birth to the future Queen Elizabeth I. Henry was disappointed to have a daughter, but hoped a son would follow and professed to love Elizabeth. Anne subsequently had three miscarriages and by March 1536, Henry was courting Jane Seymour.\nHenry had Anne investigated for high treason in April 1536. On 2May, she was arrested and sent to the Tower of London, where she was tried before a jury, including Henry Percy, her former betrothed, and her uncle Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk. She was convicted on 15 May and beheaded four days later. Historians view the charges, which included adultery, incest with her brother George, and plotting to kill the King, as unconvincing.\nAfter her daughter, Elizabeth, became queen in 1558, Anne became venerated as a martyr and heroine of the English Reformation, particularly through the works of George Wyatt. She has inspired, or been mentioned in, many cultural works and retained her hold on the popular imagination. She has been called \"the most influential and important queen consort England has ever had\", as she provided the occasion for Henry to declare the English Church's independence from the Vatican.\nEarly years.\nAnne was the daughter of Thomas Boleyn, later Earl of Wiltshire and Earl of Ormond, and his wife, Elizabeth Howard, who was the eldest daughter of Thomas Howard, then Earl of Surrey and future 2nd Duke of Norfolk, and his first wife Elizabeth Tilney. Anne's date of birth is unknown.\nThe academic debate about Anne's birth date focuses on two key dates: c.\u20091501 and c.\u20091507. Eric Ives, a British historian and biographer, advocates 1501, while Retha Warnicke, an American scholar who has also written a biography of Anne, prefers 1507. The key piece of surviving written evidence is a letter Anne wrote sometime in 1514. She wrote it in French to her father, who was still living in England while Anne was completing her education at Mechelen, in the Habsburg Netherlands, now Belgium. Ives argues that the style of the letter and its mature handwriting prove that Anne must have been about 13 at the time of its composition, while Warnicke argues that the numerous misspellings and grammatical errors show that the letter was written by a child. In Ives's view, this would also be around the minimum age that a girl could be a maid of honour, as Anne was to the regent, Margaret of Austria. This is supported by claims of a chronicler from the late 16th century, who wrote that Anne was 20 when she returned from France. These findings are contested by Warnicke in several books and articles, and the evidence does not conclusively support either date.\nAn independent contemporary source supports the 1507 date: William Camden wrote a history of the reign of Elizabeth I and was granted access to the private papers of Lord Burghley and to the state archives. In that history, in the chapter dealing with Elizabeth's early life, he records that Anne was born in 1507.\nAs with Anne, it is uncertain when her two siblings were born, but the evidence indicates that her sister Mary was older than Anne. Mary's children believed their mother was the elder sister, and her grandson claimed the Ormond title in 1596 on the basis that she was the elder daughter, which Elizabeth I accepted. Anne's brother George was born around 1504, and Thomas Boleyn, writing in the 1530s, stated that his children were born before the death of his father, William Boleyn, in 1505.\nAnne's paternal ancestor, Geoffrey Boleyn, had been a mercer and wool merchant before becoming Lord Mayor. The Boleyn family originally came from Blickling in Norfolk, north of Norwich. Anne's relatives included the Howards, one of the preeminent families in England; and Anne's ancestors included King Edward I of England. According to Eric Ives, she was certainly of more noble birth than Jane Seymour and Catherine Parr, Henry VIII's other English wives. The spelling of the Boleyn name was variable, as common at the time. Sometimes it was written as \"Bullen\", hence the bull's heads which formed part of her family arms.\nAt the court of Margaret of Austria in the Netherlands, Anne is listed as \"Boullan\". From there she signed the letter to her father as \"Anna de Boullan\". She was also called \"Anna Bolina\"; this Latinised form is used in most portraits of her.\nAnne's early education was typical for women of her class. In 1513, she was invited to join the schoolroom of Margaret of Austria and her four wards. Anne was sent to Austria by her father, where she served Archduchess Margaret and studied under a tutor. During her stay, Anne was called \"bright and pleasant\" for her age, and it was noted by many historians that her handwriting was more impressive than her French at the time. Her academic education was limited to arithmetic, her family genealogy, grammar, history, reading, spelling and writing. She also developed domestic skills such as dancing, embroidery, good manners, household management, music, needlework and singing. Anne learned to play games, such as cards, chess and dice. She was also taught archery, falconry, horseback riding and hunting.\nThe Netherlands and France.\nAnne's father, Thomas, continued his diplomatic career under Henry VIII. In Europe, his charm won many admirers, including Margaret of Austria, daughter of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor. During this period, Margaret ruled the Netherlands on her nephew Charles's behalf and was so impressed with Thomas Boleyn that she offered his daughter Anne a place in her household. Ordinarily, a girl had to be 12 years old to have such an honour, but Anne may have been younger, as Margaret affectionately called her [\"sic\"]. Anne made a good impression in the Netherlands with her manners and studiousness; Margaret reported that she was well spoken and pleasant for her young age, and told Thomas that his daughter was \"so presentable and so pleasant, considering her youthful age, that I am more beholden to you for sending her to me, than you to me\". Anne stayed at the Court of Savoy in Mechelen from spring 1513 until her father arranged for her to attend Henry VIII's sister Mary, who was about to marry Louis XII of France in October 1514.\nIn France, Anne was a maid of honour to Queen Mary, and then to Mary's 15-year-old stepdaughter Queen Claude, with whom she stayed for nearly seven years. In the Queen's household, she completed her study of French and developed interests in art, fashion, illuminated manuscripts, literature, music, poetry and religious philosophy. Ives asserts that she \"owed her evangelicalism to France\", studying \"reformist books\", and Jacques Lefevre's translations into French of the bible and the Pauline epistles. She also acquired knowledge of French culture, dance, etiquette, literature, music and poetry; and gained experience in flirtation and courtly love. Though all knowledge of Anne's experiences in the French court is conjecture, even Ives suggests that she was likely to have made the acquaintance of King Francis I's sister, Marguerite de Navarre, a patron of humanists and reformers. Marguerite de Navarre was also an author in her own right, and her works include elements of Christian mysticism and reform that verged on heresy, though she was protected by her status as the French king's beloved sister. She or her circle may have encouraged Anne's interest in religious reform, as well as in poetry and literature. Anne's education in France proved itself in later years, inspiring many new trends among the ladies and courtiers of England. It may have been instrumental in pressing their King toward England's break with the Papacy. William Forrest, author of a contemporary poem about Catherine of Aragon, complimented Anne's \"passing excellent\" skill as a dancer. \"Here\", he wrote, \"was [a] fresh young damsel, that could trip and go.\"\nAt the court of Henry VIII: 1522\u20131533.\nAnne was recalled to marry her Irish cousin, James Butler, who was living at the English court. The marriage was intended to settle a dispute over the title and estates of the Earldom of Ormond. Thomas Butler, 7th Earl of Ormond died in 1515, leaving his daughters, Margaret Boleyn and Anne St Leger, as co-heiresses. In Ireland, the great-great-grandson of the third earl, Sir Piers Butler, contested the will and claimed the earldom himself. He was already in possession of Kilkenny Castle, the earls' ancestral seat. Sir Thomas Boleyn, being the son of the eldest daughter, believed the title properly belonged to him and protested to his brother-in-law, the Duke of Norfolk, who spoke to the King about the matter. Henry, fearful the dispute could ignite civil war in Ireland, sought to resolve the matter by arranging an alliance between Piers's son James and Anne Boleyn. She would bring her Ormond inheritance as dowry and thus end the dispute. The plan ended in failure, perhaps because Sir Thomas hoped for a grander marriage for his daughter or because he himself coveted the titles. Whatever the reason, the marriage negotiations came to a complete halt. James Butler later married Lady Joan Fitzgerald, daughter and heiress of James FitzGerald, 10th Earl of Desmond and Amy O'Brien.\nMary Boleyn, Anne Boleyn's older sister, had been recalled from France in late 1519, ostensibly to end her affairs with the French king and his courtiers. She married William Carey, a minor noble, in February 1520, at Greenwich, with Henry VIII in attendance. Soon after, Mary became the English king's mistress. Historians dispute Henry VIII's paternity of one or both of Mary Boleyn's children born during this marriage. \"Henry VIII: The King and His Court\", by Alison Weir, questions the paternity of Henry Carey; Dr G. W. Bernard (\"The King's Reformation\") and Joanna Denny (\"Anne Boleyn: A New Life of England's Tragic Queen\") argue that Henry VIII was their father. Henry did not acknowledge either child, but he did recognise his illegitimate son Henry Fitzroy, by Elizabeth Blount, Lady Talboys.\nAs the daughter of courtier Thomas Boleyn, by New Year 1522 Anne had gained a position at the royal court, as lady-in-waiting to Queen Catherine. Her public d\u00e9but at a court event was at the \"Ch\u00e2teau Vert\" (Green Castle) pageant in honour of the Imperial ambassadors on 4March 1522, playing \"Perseverance\" (one of the dancers in the spectacle, third in precedence behind Henry's sister Mary, and Gertrude Courtenay, Marchioness of Exeter). All wore gowns of white satin embroidered with gold thread. She quickly established herself as one of the most stylish and accomplished women at the court, and soon a number of young men were competing for her.\nWarnicke writes that Anne was \"the perfect woman courtier ... her carriage was graceful and her French clothes were pleasing and stylish; she danced with ease, had a pleasant singing voice, played the lute and several other musical instruments well, and spoke French fluently ... A remarkable, intelligent, quick-witted young noblewoman ... that first drew people into conversation with her and then amused and entertained them. In short, her energy and vitality made her the center of attention in any social gathering\". Henry VIII's biographer J. J. Scarisbrick adds that Anne \"revelled in\" the attention she received from her admirers.\nDuring this time, Anne was courted by Henry Percy, son of the Earl of Northumberland, and entered into a secret betrothal with him. Thomas Wolsey's gentleman usher, George Cavendish, maintained the two had not been lovers. The romance was broken off when Percy's father refused to support their engagement. Wolsey refused the match for several conjectured reasons. According to Cavendish, Anne was sent from court to her family's countryside estates, but it is not known for how long. Upon her return to court, she again entered the service of Catherine of Aragon. Percy was married to Lady Mary Talbot, to whom he had been betrothed since adolescence.\nBefore marrying Henry VIII, Anne had befriended Sir Thomas Wyatt, one of the greatest poets of the Tudor period. In 1520, Wyatt married Elizabeth Cobham, who by many accounts was not a wife of his choosing. In 1525, Wyatt charged his wife with adultery and separated from her; coincidentally, historians believe that it was also the year when his interest in Anne intensified. In 1532, Wyatt accompanied the royal couple to Calais.\nIn 1526, Henry VIII became enamoured of Anne and began his pursuit. Anne was a skilful player at the game of courtly love, which was often played in the antechambers. This may have been how she caught the eye of Henry, who was also an experienced player. Anne resisted Henry's attempts to seduce her, refusing to become his mistress, and often left the court for the seclusion of Hever Castle. But within a year, he proposed marriage to her, and she accepted. Both assumed an annulment could be obtained within months. There is no evidence to suggest that they engaged in a sexual relationship until very shortly before their marriage; Henry's love letters to Anne suggest that their love affair remained unconsummated for much of their seven-year courtship.\nHenry's annulment.\nIt is probable that Henry had thought of the idea of annulment (not divorce as commonly assumed) much earlier than this as he strongly desired a male heir to secure the Tudor claim to the crown. Before Henry VII ascended the throne, England was beset by civil warfare over rival claims to the crown, and Henry VIII wanted to avoid similar uncertainty over the succession. He and Catherine had no living sons: all Catherine's children except Mary died in infancy. Catherine had first come to England to be bride to Henry's brother Arthur, Prince of Wales, who died soon after their marriage. Since Spain and England still wanted an alliance, Pope Julius II granted a dispensation for their marriage on the grounds that Catherine was \"perchance\" () still a virgin.\nCatherine and Henry married in 1509, but eventually he became dubious about the marriage's validity, claiming that Catherine's inability to provide an heir was a sign of God's displeasure. His feelings for Anne, and her refusals to become his mistress, probably contributed to Henry's decision that no pope had a right to overrule the Bible. This meant that he had been living in sin with Catherine, although Catherine hotly contested this and refused to concede that her marriage to Arthur had been consummated. It also meant that his daughter Mary was a bastard, and that the new pope (Clement VII) would have to admit the previous pope's mistake and annul the marriage. Henry's quest for an annulment became euphemistically known as the \"King's Great Matter\".\nAnne saw an opportunity in Henry's infatuation and the convenient moral quandary. She determined that she would yield to his embraces only as his acknowledged queen. She began to take her place at his side in policy and in state, but not yet in his bed.\nScholars and historians hold various opinions as to how deep Anne's commitment to the Reformation was, how much she was perhaps only personally ambitious, and how much she had to do with Henry's defiance of papal power: Ives, Maria Dowling and David Starkey are among those who believe that she was a devout evangelical, whereas Warnicke and George Bernard hold that her religious beliefs were \"conventional\". Warnicke acknowledges that Anne promoted vernacular (French or English) editions of the bible, but remained, \"deep seated[ly], a Catholic\". There is anecdotal evidence, related to biographer George Wyatt by her former lady-in-waiting Anne Gainsford, that Anne brought to Henry's attention a heretical pamphlet, perhaps William Tyndale's \"The Obedience of a Christian Man\" or one by Simon Fish called \"A Supplication for the Beggars\", which cried out to monarchs to rein in the evil excesses of the Catholic Church. She was sympathetic to those seeking further reformation of the Church, and actively protected scholars working on English translations of the scriptures. According to Maria Dowling, \"Anne tried to educate her waiting-women in scriptural piety\" and is believed to have reproved her cousin, Mary Shelton, for \"having 'idle poesies' written in her prayer book.\"\nIn 1528, sweating sickness broke out with great severity. In London, the mortality rate was great and the court was dispersed. Henry left London, frequently changing his residence; Anne Boleyn retreated to the Boleyn residence at Hever Castle, but contracted the illness; her brother-in-law, William Carey, died. Henry sent his own physician to Hever Castle to care for Anne, and shortly afterwards she recovered.\nHenry was soon absorbed in securing an annulment from Catherine. He set his hopes upon a direct appeal to the Holy See, acting independently of Wolsey, to whom he at first communicated nothing of his plans. In 1527 William Knight, the King's secretary, was sent to Pope Clement VII to sue for the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine, on the grounds that the dispensing bull of Julius II permitting him to marry his brother's widow, Catherine, had been obtained under false pretences. Henry also petitioned, in the event of his becoming free, a dispensation to contract a new marriage with any woman even in the first degree of affinity, whether the affinity was contracted by lawful or unlawful connection. This referred to Anne.\nAs Clement was at that time a prisoner of Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, as a result of the Sack of Rome in May 1527, Knight had some difficulty obtaining access. In the end he had to return with a conditional dispensation, which Wolsey insisted was technically insufficient. Henry then had no choice but to put his great matter into Wolsey's hands, who did all he could to secure a decision in Henry's favour, even going so far as to convene an ecclesiastical court in England, with a special emissary, Lorenzo Campeggio, from Clement to decide the matter. But Clement had not empowered his deputy to make a decision. He was still CharlesV's hostage, and CharlesV was loyal to his aunt Catherine. The Pope forbade Henry to contract a new marriage until a decision was reached in Rome, not in England. Convinced that Wolsey's loyalties lay with the Pope, not England, Anne, as well as Wolsey's many enemies, ensured his dismissal from public office in 1529. Cavendish, Wolsey's chamberlain, records that the servants who waited on the King and Anne at dinner in 1529 in Grafton heard her say that the dishonour Wolsey had brought upon the realm would have cost any other Englishman his head. Henry replied, \"Why then I perceive ... you are not the Cardinal's friend.\". Henry finally agreed to Wolsey's arrest on grounds of \"praemunire\". Had it not been for his death from illness in 1530, Wolsey might have been executed for treason. In 1531 (two years before Henry's marriage to Anne), Catherine was banished from court and her rooms given to Anne.\nPublic support remained with Catherine. One evening, in the autumn of 1531, Anne was dining at a manor house on the River Thames and was almost seized by a crowd of angry women. Anne just managed to escape by boat.\nWhen Archbishop of Canterbury William Warham died in 1532, the Boleyn family chaplain, Thomas Cranmer, was appointed, with papal approval.\nIn 1532, Thomas Cromwell brought before Parliament a number of acts, including the Supplication against the Ordinaries and Submission of the Clergy, which recognised royal supremacy over the church, thus finalising the break with Rome. Following these acts, Thomas More resigned as Lord Chancellor, leaving Cromwell as Henry's chief minister.\nPremarital role and marriage.\nEven before her marriage, Anne Boleyn was able to grant petitions, receive diplomats and give patronage, and had an influence over Henry to plead the cause of foreign diplomats.\nDuring this period, Anne played an important role in England's international position by solidifying an alliance with France. She established an excellent rapport with the French ambassador, Gilles de la Pommeraie. On 1September 1532, Henry granted Anne the Marquessate of Pembroke, an appropriate peerage for a future queen. Anne was a former lady-in-waiting at the French court, and the new title was a necessary mark of her new status before she and Henry attended a meeting with the French king Francis I at Calais in winter 1532. Henry hoped to enlist Francis's public support for the intended marriage. Henry performed the investiture himself, with de la Pommeraie as guest of honour.\nHenry lost fifteen shillings playing cards with Anne on 11 November. The conference at Calais was a political triumph, but even though the French government gave implicit support for Henry's remarriage and Francis I had a private conference with Anne, the French king maintained alliances with the Pope that he could not explicitly defy.\nAnne's family also profited from the relationship. Her father, already Viscount Rochford, was created Earl of Wiltshire. Henry also came to an arrangement with Anne's Irish cousin and created him Earl of Ormond. At the magnificent banquet to celebrate her father's elevation, Anne took precedence over the Duchesses of Suffolk and Norfolk, seated in the place of honour beside the King that was usually occupied by the Queen. Thanks to Anne's intervention, her widowed sister Mary received an annual pension of \u00a3100 (although later, when Mary remarried, Anne was to countermand this) and Mary's son, Henry Carey, was educated at the prestigious Brigettine nunnery of Syon Abbey. Anne arranged for Nicholas Bourbon, exiled from France for his support for religious reform, to be Henry's tutor there.\nSoon after returning to Dover, Henry and Anne married in a secret ceremony on 14 November 1532. She soon became pregnant and as the first wedding was considered to be unlawful at the time, a second wedding service, also private in accordance with the precedents established in \"The Royal Book\", took place in London on 25 January 1533. On 23 May 1533, Cranmer (who had been hastened, with the Pope's assent, into the position of Archbishop of Canterbury recently vacated by the death of Warham) sat in judgement at a special court convened at Dunstable Priory to rule on the validity of Henry's marriage to Catherine. He declared it null and void. Five days later, on 28 May 1533, Cranmer declared the marriage of Henry and Anne good and valid.\nQueen of England: 1533\u20131536.\nCatherine was formally stripped of her title as queen and Anne was consequently crowned queen consort on 1June 1533 in a magnificent ceremony at Westminster Abbey with a banquet afterwards. She was the last queen consort of England to be crowned separately from her husband. Unlike any other queen consort, Anne was crowned with St Edward's Crown, which had previously been used to crown only monarchs. Historian Alice Hunt suggests that this was done because Anne's pregnancy was visible by then and the child was presumed to be male. On the previous day, Anne had taken part in an elaborate procession through the streets of London seated in a litter of \"white cloth of gold\" that rested on two palfreys clothed to the ground in white damask, while the barons of the Cinque Ports held a canopy of cloth of gold over her head. In accordance with tradition, she wore white, and on her head, a gold coronet beneath which her long dark hair hung down freely. The public's response to her appearance was lukewarm.\nMeanwhile, the House of Commons had forbidden all appeals to Rome and exacted the penalties of \"praemunire\" against all who introduced papal bulls into England, by introducing the Ecclesiastical Appeals Act 1532 (24 Hen. 8 c. 12). It was only then that Pope Clement, at last, took the step of announcing a provisional excommunication of Henry and Cranmer. He condemned the marriage to Anne, and in March 1534 declared the marriage to Catherine legal and again ordered Henry to return to her. Henry now required his subjects to swear an oath attached to the First Succession Act, which effectively rejected papal authority in legal matters and recognised Anne Boleyn as queen. Those who refused, such as Sir Thomas More, who had resigned as Lord Chancellor, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, were placed in the Tower of London. In late 1534 parliament declared Henry \"the only supreme head on earth of the Church of England\". The Church in England was now under Henry's control, not Rome's. On 14 May 1534, in one of the realm's first official acts protecting Protestant Reformers, Anne wrote a letter to Thomas Cromwell seeking his aid in ensuring that English merchant Richard Herman be reinstated a member of the merchant adventurers in Antwerp and no longer persecuted simply because he had helped in \"setting forth of the New testament in English\". Before and after her coronation, Anne protected and promoted evangelicals and those wishing to study the scriptures of William Tyndale. She had a decisive role in influencing the Protestant reformer Matthew Parker to attend court as her chaplain, and before her death entrusted her daughter to Parker's care.\nStruggle for a son.\nAfter her coronation, Anne settled into a quiet routine at the King's favourite residence, Greenwich Palace, to prepare for the birth of her baby. Anne's first attempt to produce an heir was seemingly described by historians as \"a shapeless mass of flesh\". This caused Anne's detractors, such as imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys, to accuse her of witchcraft. These accusations were quickly discounted due to lack of evidence. The actual child was a girl, born slightly prematurely on 7September 1533. She was christened Elizabeth, probably in honour of either Anne's mother Elizabeth Howard or Henry's mother Elizabeth of York, or both. The birth of a girl was a heavy blow to her parents, who had confidently expected a boy. All but one of the royal physicians and astrologers had predicted a son and the French king had been asked to stand as his godfather. Now the prepared letters announcing the birth of a \"prince\" had an \"s\" hastily added to them to read \"princes[s]\" and the traditional jousting tournament for the birth of an heir was cancelled.\nThe infant princess was given a splendid christening, but Anne feared that Catherine's daughter Mary, now stripped of her title of princess and labelled a bastard, posed a threat to Elizabeth's position. Henry soothed his wife's fears by separating Mary from her many servants and sending her to live at Hatfield House, where Elizabeth would also reside with her own sizeable staff of servants as the country air was thought better for the baby's health. Anne frequently visited her daughter at Hatfield and other residences.\nThe new queen had a larger staff of servants than Catherine. There were more than 250 servants to tend to her personal needs, from priests to stable boys, and more than 60 maids-of-honour who served her and accompanied her to social events. She also employed several priests to act as her confessors, chaplains and religious advisers. One of these was Matthew Parker, who became one of the chief architects of Anglican thought during the reign of Anne's daughter, Elizabeth I.\nStrife with the king.\nThe King and his new queen enjoyed a reasonably happy accord with periods of calm and affection. Anne's sharp intelligence, political acumen and forward manner, although desirable in a mistress, were at the time unacceptable in a wife. She was once reported to have spoken to her uncle in words that \"shouldn't be used to a dog\". After miscarriage or stillbirth in summer 1534, Henry was discussing with Cranmer and Cromwell the possibility of divorcing her without having to return to Catherine. Nothing came of the matter as the royal couple reconciled and spent the summer of 1535 on progress, visiting Gloucester and hunting in the local countryside. By October, she was again pregnant.\nAnne presided over a court within the royal household. She spent lavish amounts of money on gowns, jewels, head-dresses, ostrich-feather fans, riding equipment, furniture and upholstery, maintaining the ostentatious display required by her status. Numerous palaces were renovated to suit the extravagant tastes she and Henry shared. Her motto was \"The most happy\", and she chose a white falcon as her personal device.\nAnne was blamed for Henry's tyranny and called by some of her subjects \"the king's whore\" or a \"naughty paike [prostitute]\". Public opinion turned further against her after the marriage produced no male heir. It sank even lower after the executions of her enemies More and Fisher.\nDownfall and execution: 1536.\nOn 8 January 1536, news of Catherine of Aragon's death reached Anne and the King, who was overjoyed. The following day, Henry wore yellow, a symbol of joy and celebration in England but of mourning in Spain, from head to toe, and celebrated Catherine's death with festivities. With Catherine dead, Anne attempted to make peace with Mary. Mary rebuffed Anne's overtures, perhaps because of rumours circulating that Catherine had been poisoned by Anne or Henry. These began after the discovery during her embalming that Catherine's heart was blackened. Modern medical experts are in agreement that this was not the result of poisoning, but from heart cancer, the cause of her death and an extremely rare condition that was not understood at the time.\nQueen Anne, pregnant again, was aware of the dangers if she failed to give birth to a son. With Catherine dead, Henry would be free to marry without any taint of illegality. At this time, Henry began paying court to one of Anne's maids-of-honour, Jane Seymour, and allegedly gave her a locket containing a portrait miniature of himself. While wearing this locket in the presence of Anne, Jane began opening and closing it. Anne responded by ripping the locket off Jane's neck with such force that her fingers bled.\nLater that month, the King was unhorsed in a tournament and knocked unconscious for two hours, a worrying incident that Anne believed led to her miscarriage five days later. Another possible cause of the miscarriage was an incident in which, upon entering a room, Anne saw Jane Seymour sitting on Henry's lap and flew into a rage. Whatever the cause, on the day that Catherine of Aragon was buried at Peterborough Abbey, Anne miscarried a baby which, according to the Imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys, she had borne for about three and a half months, and which \"seemed to be a male child\". Chapuys commented \"She has miscarried of her saviour.\" In Chapuys's opinion, this loss was the beginning of the end of the royal marriage.\nGiven Henry's desperate desire for a son, the sequence of Anne's pregnancies has attracted much interest. Mike Ashley speculated that Anne had two stillborn children after Elizabeth's birth and before the male child she miscarried in 1536. Gynaecologist John Dewhurst studied the sequence of the birth of Elizabeth in September 1533 and the series of reported miscarriages that followed, including the miscarriage of a male child of almost four months' gestation in January 1536, and postulates that, instead of a series of miscarriages, Anne was experiencing pseudocyesis, a condition \"occur[ing] in women desperate to prove their fertility\".\nAs Anne recovered from her miscarriage, Henry declared that he had been seduced into the marriage by means of \"sortileges\" \u2013 a French term indicating either \"deception\" or \"spells\". His new favourite Jane Seymour was quickly moved into royal quarters at Greenwich; Jane's brother Edward and his wife, for the sake of propriety, moved with her. This was followed by Anne's brother George Boleyn's being refused the prestigious honour of the Order of the Garter, given instead to Sir Nicholas Carew.\nCharges of adultery, incest and treason.\nAnne's biographer Eric Ives believes that her fall and execution were primarily engineered by her former ally Thomas Cromwell. The conversations between Chapuys and Cromwell indicate Cromwell as the instigator of the plot to remove Anne; evidence of this is seen through letters written from Chapuys to CharlesV. Anne argued with Cromwell over the redistribution of Church revenues and over foreign policy. She advocated that revenues be distributed to charitable and educational institutions; and she favoured a French alliance. Cromwell preferred an alliance with the Holy Roman Emperor and insisted on filling the King's depleted coffers. For these reasons, Ives suggests, \"Anne Boleyn had become a major threat to Thomas Cromwell.\" Cromwell's biographer John Schofield, on the other hand, contends that no power struggle existed between Anne and Cromwell and that \"not a trace can be found of a Cromwellian conspiracy against Anne\u00a0... Cromwell became involved in the royal marital drama only when Henry ordered him onto the case.\" Schofield claims that evidence for the power struggle between Anne and Cromwell comprises no more than \"fly-by-night stories from Alesius and the \"Spanish Chronicle\", words of Chapuys taken out of context, and an untrustworthy translation of the \"Calendar of State Papers\".\" Cromwell did not manufacture the accusations of adultery, though he and other officials used them to bolster Henry's case against Anne. Warnicke questions whether Cromwell could have or wished to manipulate the King in such a matter. Such a bold attempt by Cromwell, given the limited evidence, could have risked his office, even his life. Henry himself issued the crucial instructions: his officials, including Cromwell, carried them out. The result was by modern standards a legal travesty; however, the rules of the time were not bent in order to assure a conviction; there was no need to tamper with rules that guaranteed the desired result since law at the time was an engine of state, not a mechanism for justice.\nTowards the end of April, a Flemish musician in Anne's service named Mark Smeaton was arrested. He initially denied being the Queen's lover but later confessed, perhaps after being tortured or promised freedom. Another courtier, Sir Henry Norris, was arrested on May Day, but being an aristocrat, could not be tortured. Prior to his arrest, Norris was treated kindly by the King, who offered him his own horse to use on the May Day festivities. It seems likely that during the festivities, the King was notified of Smeaton's confession and it was shortly thereafter the alleged conspirators were arrested upon his orders. Norris denied his guilt and swore that Queen Anne was innocent; one of the most damaging pieces of evidence against Norris was an overheard conversation with Anne at the end of April, where she accused him of coming often to her chambers not to pay court to her lady-in-waiting Madge Shelton but to herself. Sir Francis Weston was arrested two days later on the same charge, as was Sir William Brereton, a groom of the King's Privy Chamber. Sir Thomas Wyatt, the poet and friend of the Boleyns who was allegedly infatuated with her before her marriage to the King, was also imprisoned for the same charge but later released, most likely due to his or his family's friendship with Cromwell. Sir Richard Page was also accused of having a sexual relationship with the Queen, but he was acquitted of all charges after further investigation could not implicate him with Anne. The final accused was Queen Anne's own brother, George Boleyn, arrested on charges of incest and treason. He was accused of two incidents of incest: November 1535 at Whitehall and the following month at Eltham.\nOn 2 May 1536 Anne was arrested and taken to the Tower of London. In the Tower, initially she became hysterical, demanding to know the location of her father and her \"sweet brother\", as well as the charges against her. The charge was treason, in that she and the other defendants had intended Henry's death: the shock of the news of her adultery was alleged to have put his life at risk. Anne was taken by barge from Greenwich to the Tower of London and lodged in the royal apartments.\nIn what is reputed to be her last letter to Henry, dated 6 May, she wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sir,\nYour Grace's displeasure, and my imprisonment are things so strange unto me, as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send unto me (willing me to confess a truth, and so obtain your favour) by such an one, whom you know to be my ancient professed enemy. I no sooner received this message by him, than I rightly conceived your meaning; and if, as you say, confessing a truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness and duty perform your demand.\nBut let not your Grace ever imagine, that your poor wife will ever be brought to acknowledge a fault, where not so much as a thought thereof preceded. And to speak a truth, never prince had wife more loyal in all duty, and in all true affection, than you have ever found in Anne Boleyn: with which name and place I could willingly have contented myself, if God and your Grace's pleasure had been so pleased. Neither did I at any time so far forget myself in my exaltation or received Queenship, but that I always looked for such an alteration as I now find; for the ground of my preferment being on no surer foundation than your Grace's fancy, the least alteration I knew was fit and sufficient to draw that fancy to some other object. You have chosen me, from a low estate, to be your Queen and companion, far beyond my desert or desire. If then you found me worthy of such honour, good your Grace let not any light fancy, or bad council of mine enemies, withdraw your princely favour from me; neither let that stain, that unworthy stain, of a disloyal heart toward your good grace, ever cast so foul a blot on your most dutiful wife, and the infant-princess your daughter. Try me, good king, but let me have a lawful trial, and let not my sworn enemies sit as my accusers and judges; yea let me receive an open trial, for my truth shall fear no open flame; then shall you see either my innocence cleared, your suspicion and conscience satisfied, the ignominy and slander of the world stopped, or my guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your grace may be freed of an open censure, and mine offense being so lawfully proved, your grace is at liberty, both before God and man, not only to execute worthy punishment on me as an unlawful wife, but to follow your affection, already settled on that party, for whose sake I am now as I am, whose name I could some good while since have pointed unto, your Grace being not ignorant of my suspicion therein. But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my death, but an infamous slander must bring you the enjoying of your desired happiness; then I desire of God, that he will pardon your great sin therein, and likewise mine enemies, the instruments thereof, and that he will not call you to a strict account of your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his general judgment-seat, where both you and myself must shortly appear, and in whose judgment I doubt not (whatsoever the world may think of me) mine innocence shall be openly known, and sufficiently cleared. My last and only request shall be, that myself may only bear the burden of your Grace's displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those poor gentlemen, who (as I understand) are likewise in strait imprisonment for my sake. If ever I found favour in your sight, if ever the name of Anne Boleyn hath been pleasing in your ears, then let me obtain this request, and I will so leave to trouble your Grace any further, with mine earnest prayers to the Trinity to have your Grace in his good keeping, and to direct you in all your actions. From my doleful prison in the Tower, this sixth of May;\nYour most loyal and ever faithful wife,\nAnne Boleyn.\nFour of the accused men were tried in Westminster on 12 May 1536. Weston, Brereton and Norris publicly maintained their innocence and only Smeaton supported the Crown by pleading guilty. Three days later, Anne and George Boleyn were tried separately in the Tower of London, before a jury of 27 peers. She was accused of adultery, incest, and high treason. The treason alleged against her (after Cromwell had used the nine days of her imprisonment to develop his case) was that of plotting the King's death, with her \"lovers\", so that she might later marry Henry Norris. One of Anne's ladies-in-waiting, the Countess of Worcester, gave evidence against her, claiming she had knowlege of the Queen's adultery with Henry Norris, Mark Smeaton, and Lord Rochford, the queen's brother. Anne's one-time betrothed, Henry Percy, 6th Earl of Northumberland, sat on the jury that unanimously found her guilty. When the verdict was announced, he collapsed and had to be carried from the courtroom. He died childless eight months later and was succeeded by his nephew.\nOn 17 May, Cranmer declared Anne's marriage to Henry null and void.\nFinal hours.\nThe accused were found guilty and condemned to death. George Boleyn and the other accused men were executed on 17May 1536. William Kingston, the Constable of the Tower, reported that Anne seemed very happy and ready to be done with life. Henry commuted Anne's sentence from burning to beheading, and rather than have a queen beheaded with the common axe, he brought an expert swordsman from Saint-Omer in France to perform the execution.\nAn anonymous manuscript of a poem \"O Death Rock Me Asleep\" that came into the possession of prolific 18th-century author John Hawkins, and now in the British Museum, was thought to be in the style of \"the time of Henry VIII\". On this weak premise, Hawkins conjectured that the writer was \"very probabl[y]\" Anne Boleyn, writing after her conviction. \"Defiled is my Name\", a similar lament, is also attributed to Anne. According to Ives, she could not have produced any such writings while under the scrutiny of the ladies set to watch over her in the Tower. Mary Joiner of the Royal Musical Association examined the BM documents and concluded that the attributions, although held in wide belief, are no more than an \"improbable ... legend\".\nOn the morning of 19 May, Kingston wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This morning she sent for me, that I might be with her at such time as she received the good Lord, to the intent I should hear her speak as touching her innocency alway to be clear. And in the writing of this she sent for me, and at my coming she said, \"Mr. Kingston, I hear I shall not die afore noon, and I am very sorry therefore, for I thought to be dead by this time and past my pain.\" I told her it should be no pain, it was so little. And then she said, \"I heard say the executioner was very good, and I have a little neck,\" and then put her hands about it, laughing heartily. I have seen many men and also women executed, and that they have been in great sorrow, and to my knowledge this lady has much joy in death. Sir, her almoner is continually with her, and had been since two o'clock after midnight.\nShortly before dawn, she called Kingston to hear mass with her and swore in his presence, on the eternal salvation of her soul and upon the Holy Sacraments, that she had never been unfaithful to the King. She ritually repeated this oath immediately before and after receiving the sacrament of the Eucharist.\nOn the morning of Friday 19 May, Anne was taken to a scaffold erected on the north side of the White Tower. She wore a red petticoat under a loose, dark grey gown of damask trimmed in fur, and a mantle of ermine. Accompanied by two female attendants, Anne made her final walk from the Queen's House to the scaffold; she showed a \"devilish spirit\" and looked \"as gay as if she was not going to die\". She climbed the scaffold and made a short speech to the crowd:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis version of her speech is found in John Foxe's \"Actes and Monuments\" (also known as \"Foxe's Book of Martyrs\").\nLancelot de Carle, a secretary to the French Ambassador, Antoine de Castelnau, was in London in May 1536, and was an eyewitness to her trial and execution. Two weeks after Anne's death, de Carle composed the 1,318-line poem \"\u00c9pistre Contenant le Proc\u00e8s Criminel Faict \u00e0 l'Encontre de la Royne Anne Boullant d'Angleterre\" (\"A Letter Containing the Criminal Charges Laid Against Queen Anne Boleyn of England\"), which provides a moving account of her last words and their effect on the crowd:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She gracefully addressed the people from the scaffold with a voice somewhat overcome by weakness, but which gathered strength as she went on. She begged her hearers to forgive her if she had not used them all with becoming gentleness, and asked for their prayers. It was needless, she said, to relate why she was there, but she prayed the Judge of all the world to have compassion on those who had condemned her, and she begged them to pray for the King, in whom she had always found great kindness, fear of God, and love of his subjects. The spectators could not refrain from tears.\nIt is thought that Anne avoided criticising Henry because she wished to save Elizabeth and her family from further consequences, but even under such extreme pressure, she did not confess guilt and indeed subtly implied her innocence in her appeal to those who might \"meddle of my cause\".\nDeath and burial.\nThe ermine mantle was removed, and Anne lifted off her headdress and tucked her hair under a coif. After a brief farewell to her weeping ladies and a request for prayers, she knelt down; one of the ladies tied a blindfold over Anne's eyes. She knelt upright, in the French style of beheadings. Her final prayer consisted of her continually repeating, \"Jesu receive my soul; O Lord God have pity on my soul.\"\nThe execution, which consisted of a single stroke, was witnessed by Thomas Cromwell; Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk; the King's illegitimate son, Henry FitzRoy; and Sir Ralph Warren, Lord Mayor of London, as well as aldermen, sheriffs and representatives of the various craft guilds. Most of the King's Council was also present. Cranmer, who was at Lambeth Palace, reportedly broke down in tears after telling Alexander Ales, \"She who has been the Queen of England on earth will today become a Queen in heaven.\" When the charges were first brought against Anne, Cranmer had expressed his astonishment to Henry and his belief that \"she should not be culpable\".\nCranmer felt vulnerable because of his closeness to the Queen; on the night before the execution, he declared Henry's marriage to Anne to have been void, like Catherine's before her. He made no serious attempt to save Anne's life, although some sources record that he had prepared her for death by hearing her last private confession of sins, in which she had stated her innocence before God.\nShe was buried in an unmarked grave in the Chapel of St Peter ad Vincula at the Tower of London. Her skeleton was identified during renovations of the chapel in 1876, in the reign of Queen Victoria, and reinterred there in 1877. Her grave is now clearly marked on the marble floor, although the historian Alison Weir believes that the bones identified as belonging to Anne might in fact be those of Catherine Howard.\nRecognition and legacy.\nNicholas Sanders, a Catholic recusant born c.\u20091530, was committed to deposing Elizabeth I and re-establishing Catholicism in England. In his \"De Origine ac Progressu schismatis Anglicani\" (\"The Rise and Growth of the Anglican Schism\"), published in 1585, he was the first to write that Anne had six fingers on her right hand. Since physical deformities were generally interpreted as a sign of evil, it is unlikely that Anne Boleyn would have gained Henry's romantic attention had she had any. Upon exhumation in 1876, no abnormalities were discovered. Her frame was described as delicate, approximately , \"the hand and feet bones indicated delicate and well-shaped hands and feet, with tapering fingers and a narrow foot\".\nAnne Boleyn was described by contemporaries as intelligent and gifted in musical arts and scholarly pursuits. She was also strong-willed and proud, and often quarrelled with Henry. Biographer Eric Ives evaluates the apparent contradictions in Anne's persona:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To us she appears inconsistent\u2014religious yet aggressive, calculating yet emotional, with the light touch of the courtier yet the strong grip of the politician\u2014but is this what she was, or merely what we strain to see through the opacity of the evidence? As for her inner life, short of a miraculous cache of new material, we shall never really know. Yet what does come to us across the centuries is the impression of a person who is strangely appealing to the early 21st century: A woman in her own right\u2014taken on her own terms in a man's world; a woman who mobilised her education, her style and her presence to outweigh the disadvantages of her sex; of only moderate good looks, but taking a court and a king by storm. Perhaps, in the end, it is Thomas Cromwell's assessment that comes nearest: intelligence, spirit and courage.\nFollowing the coronation of her daughter as queen, Anne was venerated as a martyr and heroine of the English Reformation, particularly through the works of John Foxe, who argued that Anne had saved England from the evils of Roman Catholicism and that God had provided proof of her innocence and virtue by making sure her daughter Elizabeth I ascended the throne. An example of Anne's direct influence in the reformed church is what Alexander Ales described to Queen Elizabeth as the \"evangelical bishops whom your holy mother appointed from among those scholars who favoured the purer doctrine\". Over the centuries, Anne has inspired or been mentioned in numerous artistic and cultural works. As a result, she has remained in the popular memory and has been called \"the most influential and important queen consort England has ever had.\"\nAppearance and portraits.\nAnne's appearance has been much discussed by historians, as all of her portraits were destroyed following an order by Henry VIII, who wanted to erase her from history. Many surviving depictions of her may be copies of a lost original that apparently existed as late as 1773. One of the few contemporary likenesses of Anne was captured on a medal referred to as \"The Moost Happi Medal\" which was struck in 1536, probably to celebrate her pregnancy which occurred around that time. The other possible portrait of Anne is the Chequers Ring, a secret locket ring that her daughter Elizabeth I possessed and was taken from one of her fingers at her death in 1603. \nAnother possible portrait of Anne was discovered in 2015 painted by artist Nidd Hall. Some scholars believe that it portrays Anne because it resembles the 1536 medal more than any other depiction. However, others believe that it is actually a portrait of her successor Jane Seymour.\nHolbein sketches.\n \nHans Holbein the Younger originally painted Anne's portrait and also sketched her during her lifetime. There are two surviving sketches that have been identified to be of Anne, by historians and people who knew her. Most scholars believe that Anne cannot be one of the two, as the portrayals do not look similar to each other, whilst others think that they do show the same woman but in one sketch she is pregnant, whilst in the other she is not.\nShe was considered brilliant, charming, driven, elegant, forthright and graceful, with a keen wit and a lively, opinionated and passionate personality. Anne was depicted as \"sweet and cheerful\" in her youth and enjoyed cards and dice games, drinking wine, French cuisine, flirting, gambling, gossiping and good jokes. She was fond of archery, falconry, hunting and the occasional game of bowls. She also had a sharp tongue and a terrible temper.\nAnne exerted a powerful charm on those who met her, though opinions differed on her attractiveness. The Venetian diarist Marino Sanuto the Younger, who saw Anne when Henry VIII met Francis I at Calais in October 1532, described her as \"not one of the handsomest women in the world; she is of middling stature, swarthy complexion, long neck, wide mouth, bosom not much raised\u00a0... eyes, which are black and beautiful\". Simon Gryn\u00e9e wrote to Martin Bucer in September 1531 that Anne was \"young, good-looking, of a rather dark complexion\". Lancelot de Carle called her \"beautiful with an elegant figure\", and a Venetian in Paris in 1528 also reported that she was said to be beautiful.\nThe most influential description of Anne, but also the least reliable, was written by the Catholic propagandist and polemicist Nicholas Sanders in 1586, half a century after Anne's death: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anne Boleyn was rather tall of stature, with black hair, and an oval face of a sallow complexion, as if troubled with jaundice. It is said she had a projecting tooth under the upper lip, and on her right hand six fingers. There was a large wen under her chin, and therefore to hide its ugliness she wore a high dress covering her throat\u00a0... She was handsome to look at, with a pretty mouth.\nAs Sander held Anne responsible for Henry VIII's rejection of the Catholic Church he was keen to demonise her. Sanders description contributed to what Ives calls the \"monster legend\" of Anne Boleyn. Though his details were fictitious, they have formed the basis for references to Anne's appearance even in some modern textbooks.\nFaith and spirituality.\nBecause of Anne's early exposure to court life, she had powerful influences around her for most of her life. These early influences were mostly women who were engaged with art, history and religion. Eric Ives described the women around Anne as \"aristocratic women seeking spiritual fulfillment\". They included Queen Claude, of whose court Anne was a member, and Marguerite of Angoul\u00eame, who was a well-known figure during the Renaissance and held strong religious views that she expressed through poetry. These women along with Anne's immediate family members, such as her father, may have had a large influence on Anne's personal faith.\nAnne's experience in France made her a devout Christian in the new tradition of Renaissance humanism. Anne knew little Latin and, trained at a French court, she was influenced by an \"evangelical variety of French humanism\", which led her to champion the vernacular Bible. Due to her Christian faith, she expected her council, among other things, to be both honest and modest, that they should wholly embrace faith in God, and that they would not associate with vice of any sort. She later held the reformist position that the papacy was a corrupting influence on Christianity, but her conservative tendencies could be seen in her devotion to the Virgin Mary. Anne's European education ended in 1521, when her father summoned her back to England. She sailed from Calais in January 1522.\nAnother clue to Anne's personal faith could be found in Anne's book of hours, in which she wrote, \"le temps viendra\" [\"the time will come\"]. Alongside this inscription, she drew an armillary sphere, an emblem (also used by her daughter Elizabeth) representing contemplation of heavenly wisdom.\nAnne Boleyn's last words before her beheading were a prayer for her salvation, her king, and her country. She said, \"Good Christian people! I am come hither to die, for according to the law, and by the law, I am judged to death; and therefore I will speak nothing against it. I come hither to accuse no man, nor to any thing of that whereof I am accused and condemned to die; but I pray God save the king, and send him long to reign over you, for a gentler, or a more merciful prince was there never; and to me he was ever a good, a gentle, and a sovereign lord.\" John Foxe, martyrologist, included Anne in his book, \"Actes and Monuments\", claiming she was a good woman who had sincere faith and trust in her God. Foxe also believed a sign of Anne's good faith was God's blessing on her daughter, Elizabeth I, and God allowing Elizabeth to prosper as queen.\nLegends.\nMany legends and stories about Anne Boleyn have existed over the centuries. One is that she was secretly buried in Salle Church in Norfolk under a black slab near the tombs of her ancestors. Her body was said to have rested in an Essex church on its journey to Norfolk. Another is that her heart, at her request, was buried in Erwarton (Arwarton) Church, Suffolk by her uncle Sir Philip Parker.\nIn 18th-century Sicily, the peasants of the village of Nicolosi believed that Anne Boleyn, for having made Henry VIII a heretic, was condemned to burn for eternity inside Mount Etna. This legend was often told for the benefit of foreign travellers.\nA number of people have claimed to have seen Anne's ghost at Hever Castle, Blickling Hall, Salle Church, the Tower of London and Marwell Hall. One account of her reputed sighting was given by paranormal researcher Hans Holzer. In 1864, Captain (later Major General) J. D. Dundas of the 60th Rifles regiment was billeted in the Tower of London. As he was looking out the window of his quarters, he noticed a guard below in the courtyard, in front of the lodgings where Anne had been imprisoned, behaving strangely. He appeared to challenge something, which to Dundas \"looked like a whitish, female figure sliding towards the soldier\". The guard charged through the form with his bayonet, then fainted. Only the captain's testimony and corroboration at the court-martial saved the guard from a lengthy prison sentence for having fainted while on duty.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39357", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39357", "title": "Tequila", "text": "Distilled alcoholic beverage from Mexico\nTequila (; ) is a distilled beverage made from the blue agave plant, primarily in the area surrounding the city of Tequila northwest of Guadalajara, and in the Jaliscan Highlands (\"Los Altos de Jalisco\") of the central western Mexican state of Jalisco.\nThe red volcanic soils in the region of Tequila are well suited for growing the blue agave, and more than 300 million plants are harvested there each year. Agave grows differently depending on the region. Blue agaves grown in the highlands Los Altos region are larger and sweeter in aroma and taste. Agaves harvested in the valley region have a more herbaceous fragrance and flavor. Due to its historical and cultural importance, the region near Tequila was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2006, the \"Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of Tequila\".\nTequila differs from other mezcals\u2014distilled spirits from the agave plant\u2014because it is made only from blue agave. By Mexican law, no beverage may be sold as tequila unless it contains between 35% and 55% alcohol content (70 and 110 U.S. proof) and is produced in the state of Jalisco and limited municipalities in the states of Guanajuato, Michoac\u00e1n, Nayarit, and Tamaulipas. \nInternational agreements also prevent the sale of \"tequila\" produced outside Mexico. The drink is recognized as a Mexican designation of origin product in more than 40 countries. It was protected through NAFTA in Canada and the United States until July 2020 and through bilateral agreements with individual countries such as Japan and Israel, and it has been a protected designation of origin product in the European Union since 1997.\nTequila is commonly served neat in Mexico and as a shot with salt and lime around the world.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nBefore the production of tequila or mezcal, pulque had been brewed from agave sap for thousands of years. Pulque is fermented, not distilled. The distillation technology to produce mezcal from agave heart juice was first introduced by Filipino sailors and migrants into the coastal regions of what was then Nueva Galicia (present-day Aguascalientes, Colima, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Nayarit, and Zacatecas). Mezcal distillation spread into the highland valleys of Amatit\u00e1n, Tequila, Magdalena, and El Arenal in the mid-1700s. The distinctive mezcal produced in these regions became known as \"tequila\".\nIn 1595, King Philip II of Spain banned the planting of new vineyards in Mexico and other Spanish colonies to boost exports and tax revenues on Spanish wine. The Marquis of Altamira, Don Pedro S\u00e1nchez de Tagle, turned to the neglected blue agave plants; built his first Tequila factory in his Hacienda Cuisillos, one of the largest haciendas of the day; and amassed a great fortune. The Marquis is known today as the \"Father of Tequila\". Don Pedro also served as the Prior of the Consulado, the head of the largest corporation in Mexico.\nSpain's King Carlos IV granted the Cuervo family the first license to commercially make tequila. Don Cenobio Sauza, founder of Sauza Tequila and Municipal President of the Village of Tequila from 1884 to 1885, was the first to export tequila to the United States. Don Cenobio's grandson Don Francisco Javier gained international attention for insisting that \"there cannot be tequila where there are no agaves!\" His efforts led to the principle that real tequila can come only from the State of Jalisco.\nThe first tequila distillery in the United States was opened in 1936 in Nogales, Arizona by Harry J. Karns, former Arizona state senator and Nogales Mayor.\nThe Mexican government declared the term \"tequila\" to be its intellectual property in 1974.\nRecent history.\nAlthough some tequilas have remained as family-owned brands, most well-known tequila brands are owned by large multinational corporations. Over 100 distilleries make over 900 brands of tequila in Mexico and over 2,000 brand names have been registered (2009 statistics). Due to this, each bottle of tequila contains a serial number (NOM) denoting in which distillery the tequila was produced. In many cases, multiple different brands come from the same manufacturer.\nIn 2003, Mexico issued a proposal that would require all Mexican-made tequila be bottled in Mexico before being exported to other countries. The Mexican government said that bottling tequila in Mexico would guarantee its quality. Liquor companies in the United States said Mexico just wanted to create bottling jobs in their own country, and also claimed this rule would violate international trade agreements and was in discord with usual exporting practices worldwide. The proposal might have resulted in the loss of jobs at plants in California, Arkansas, Missouri, and Kentucky, because Mexican tequila exported in bulk to the United States is bottled in those plants. On January 17, 2006, the United States and Mexico signed an agreement allowing the continued bulk import of tequila into the United States. The agreement also created a \"tequila bottlers registry\" to identify approved bottlers of tequila and created an agency to monitor the registry.\nThe Tequila Regulatory Council of Mexico (TRCM) originally did not permit flavored tequila to carry the tequila name. In 2004, the Council decided to allow flavored tequila to be called tequila, with the exception of 100% agave tequila, which still cannot be flavored.\nA new \"Norma Oficial Mexicana\" (NOM) for tequila (NOM-006-SCFI-2005) was issued in 2006 and, among other changes, introduced a class of tequila called \"extra a\u00f1ejo\" or \"ultra-aged\", which must be aged a minimum of three years.\nA one-liter bottle of limited-edition premium tequila was sold for $225,000 in July 2006 in Tequila, Jalisco, by the company Tequila Ley .925. The bottle that contained the tequila was a two-kilo display of platinum and gold. The manufacturer received a certificate from The Guinness World Records for the most expensive bottle of tequila spirit ever sold.\nIn June 2013, a Chinese ban on the importation of premium (100% blue agave) tequila into China was lifted, following a state visit to Mexico by Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping. The entry of premium tequila into the country was expected to increase tequila exports by 20 percent within the decade above the 170 million liters in 2013. Ramon Gonzalez, director of the \"Consejo Regulador del Tequila\", estimates that each of the top 16 producers of tequila had invested up to $3 million to enter the Chinese market. On 30 August 2013, the first 70,380 bottles of premium tequila from ten brands arrived in Shanghai. The arrival happened during an event held at the House of Roosevelt, a well-known club located on The Bund \u2013 an area with a long tradition of importing alcoholic beverages in China.\nThe latest version of the tequila standard (NOM-006-SCFI-2012) updated the standard to specify that the silver class of tequila cannot contain additives, to allow the aging time for the ultra-aged class to be displayed on the label, and to prohibit the selling of bulk tequila through vending machines, and required registering the agave during the calendar year of its plantation and required annual updates.\nIn 2018, the Mexican government approved a proposal to celebrate the third Saturday of March as National Tequila Day.\nProduction.\nTequila is made from the blue agave plant, primarily in the area surrounding the city of Tequila northwest of Guadalajara, and in the Jaliscan Highlands (\"Los Altos de Jalisco\") of the central western Mexican state of Jalisco. Aside from its geographical distinction, tequila is differentiated from other varieties of mezcal in that all of the agave used in tequila is blue agave, and the methods of production are different.\nThe red volcanic soils in the region of Tequila are well suited for growing the blue agave, and more than 300 million plants are harvested there each year. Agave grows differently depending on the region. Blue agaves grown in the highlands Los Altos region are larger and sweeter in aroma and taste. Agaves harvested in the valley region have a more herbaceous fragrance and flavor. Due to its historical and cultural importance, the region near Tequila was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2006, the \"Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of Tequila\".\nPlanting, tending, and harvesting the agave plant remains a manual effort, largely unchanged by modern farm machinery and relying on centuries-old expertise. The people who harvest it, the , have intimate knowledge of how the plants should be cultivated, passed down from generation to generation.\nBy regularly trimming any (a stalk at the center of the plant that could grow several meters high if not cut back), the prevent the agave from flowering and dying early, allowing it to fully ripen. They also determine when each plant is ready to be harvested, and using a special knife called a (with a circular blade on a long pole), carefully cut away the leaves from the (the succulent core of the plant), which can average around in the valley and in the highlands. If harvested too late or too early, the will not have the right amount of carbohydrates for fermentation.\nAfter harvesting, the are transported to ovens where they are slowly baked to break down their complex fructans into simple fructose. Then, the baked are either shredded or mashed under a large stone wheel called a . The pulp fiber, or , left behind is often reused as compost or animal feed, or can be used as fuel or processed into paper. Some producers like to add a small amount of back into their fermentation tanks for a stronger agave flavor in the final product.\nThe extracted agave juice is then poured into either large wooden or stainless steel vats for several days to ferment, resulting in a wort, or , with low alcohol content. This wort is then distilled once to produce what is called , and then a second time to produce clear \"silver\" tequila. A minimum of two distillations is required by law. A few producers such as Casa Noble (for their \"Crystal\" expression) and Corzo (for their expression) have experimented with distilling the product a third time, but this has not caught on as a trend, and some have said it removes too much of the agave flavor from the tequila. At this point the tequila is either bottled as silver tequila or it is pumped into wooden barrels to age, where it develops a mellower flavor and amber color.\nThe differences in taste between tequila made from valley and highland agave plants can be noticeable. Plants grown in the highlands often yield sweeter and fruitier-tasting tequila, while valley agaves give the tequila an earthier flavor.\nFermentation.\nUnlike other tequila production steps, fermentation is largely outside the control of human beings. Fermentation is the conversion of sugars and carbohydrates to alcohol through yeast under anaerobic conditions, meaning that oxygen is not present during the process. Fermentation is also carried out in a non-aseptic environment, which increases the bacterial activity of tequila. The participation of microorganisms from the environment (yeasts and bacteria) makes fermentation a spontaneous process that gives rise to many byproducts that contribute to the flavor and aroma of tequila.\nDuring the fermentation process, inoculum is added to the batch to accelerate the rate of fermentation. When inoculum is added, fermentation can take approximately 20 hours to 3 days. If inoculum is not added, fermentation could take up to 7 days. The rate of fermentation is a key factor in the quality and flavor of tequila produced. Worts fermented slowly are best because the amount of organoleptic compounds produced is greater. The alcohol content at the end of fermentation is between 4-9%.\nOrganoleptic compounds.\nOrganoleptic compounds enhance flavor and aroma. These include fusel oil, methanol, aldehydes, organic acids and esters. Production of isoamyl and isobutyl alcohols begins after the sugar level is lowered substantially and continues for several hours after the alcoholic fermentation ends. In contrast, ethanol production begins in the first hours of the fermentation and ends with logarithmic yeast growth. The alcohol content in tequila is affected by three factors: the amount of isoamyl alcohol and isobutanol in the yeast strain, the carbon:nitrogen ratio (the higher the ratio, the more alcohol produced), and the temperature of fermentation.\nThe higher the temperature, the greater concentration of isobutyl and isoamyl alcohols produced. Although if temperatures are too high, this can cause the yeast to become less effective. Similarly, if the temperature is too low, the process occurs too slowly. This can become a large issue in Central Mexico, most precisely the city of Tequila, Jalisco, where most tequila is processed. The temperature in the city of Tequila can reach 31\u00a0\u00b0C. For this reason, tequila producers often use large stainless steel tanks for fermentation.\nYeast.\nThe specific yeasts and the environments in which they act determine the resultant organoleptic combinations. The role of yeast is, through many enzymatic processes, to turn sugars and carbohydrates into alcohol. There are two steps, first in aerobic conditions, yeast is doubled in colony size every four hours. This process goes on for 24\u201348 hours. Next, yeast turns acetaldehyde into ethyl alcohol, which is known as one of the organoleptic compounds produced in fermentation.\nThe two main categories of yeast used in tequila are commercial brewers yeast and yeast that comes from precultivated existing yeast that has been preserved. The use of either type of yeast can result in different end products of tequila. Traditional production uses so-called \"open fermentation\", relying on yeasts from the surrounding environment. A 2023 article analyzes the diversity of yeasts found in these uncontrolled conditions.\nChemistry.\nAlcohol content.\nTequila must have between 35% and 55% alcohol content (70 and 110 U.S. proof). Tequila is a distilled beverage that is made from the fermentation of the sugars in the blue agave plant once it has been cooked, the main sugar being fructose. Through the fermentation process, many factors influence the higher-order alcohols present in tequila, which include molecules such as isobutyl alcohol and isoamyl alcohol, along with the ethanol. Factors include the strain of yeast, the age of the agave plant itself, temperature, and the ratio of carbon to nitrogen.\nThe yeast strain used and the carbon-to-nitrogen ratio have the biggest influence on the production of higher-order alcohols; this is not surprising, as production of ethanol and higher-order alcohols is an intrinsic property of the metabolism of each strain. The type of yeast most commonly found in tequila is \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\", which can include many different strains. For example, \"CF1 agaves\", a type of yeast, produces much more ethanol than a CF2 strain, as the two yeasts' metabolic mechanisms differ. Prevalence of certain strains of yeast may be influenced by agricultural practices. It was found that higher ratios of carbon to nitrogen resulted in greater production of higher-order alcohols such as isobutyl alcohol and isoamyl alcohol. The lower level of nitrogen in the fermentation process results in deamination reactions of amino acids, which in turn leads to the synthesis of higher alcohols. The Ehrlich pathway refers to this process in which alpha-keto acids are decarboxylated and transformed to aldehydes and to higher alcohols.\nThe temperature of the fermentation process also greatly affects the alcohol content of the resulting product. For example, a study conducted by Pinal \"et al.\" found that cultivating two strains at a temperature of 35\u00a0\u00b0C as compared to a temperature of 30\u00a0\u00b0C produced more isoamyl alcohol. The higher temperature appears to be favorable for the action of the yeast.\nThe age of the agave plant is also a factor: the older the plant, the greater the production of higher-order alcohols. It was shown in a study that the concentration of amyl alcohol increased by 30% as the plant aged. Conversely, a higher concentration of methanol is found when using younger plants. This change may be due to differences in agricultural practices with plants of different ages.\nColor.\nTequila's color ranges from clear to a brownish amber, depending on the aging process and the type of wood used for storage. The white (blanco) version of tequila, also nicknamed \"silver\", is the product with no aging, or may be aged less than two months. It is the purest form, as little has been done to change it. What is known as gold, joven or oro tequila is usually white tequila with the addition of grain alcohols and caramel color; some higher-end gold tequilas may be a blend of white and reposado. Rested (reposado) tequila is aged for a relatively short time (two months or more), and aged (a\u00f1ejo) tequila for a longer time (a year or more). All aging of tequila is done in wooden containers. The aging process can last three years or more, and can create or enhance flavors and aromas. It generally imparts a golden color.\nFlavor and aroma.\nThere are more than 300 known compounds in tequila, many of which are produced during the fermentation process, the raw material used, and to a lesser degree during the maturation. The components that make up tequila do not act individually to give tequila its distinctive flavor and aroma, but rather, depend on the interaction and quantity of each volatile compound. The volatile compounds responsible for the flavor and aroma profiles of the tequila are put into a category called organoleptic compounds and are known to increase in concentration with a slower fermentation process. The organoleptic compounds produced during fermentation include higher order alcohols, methanol, esters, carbonyls, terpenes, and furans.\nHigher-order alcohols have a strong aroma, and the quantity present in each tequila depends on the carbon:nitrogen ratio and temperature during the cooking and fermentation processes. Some of the most common alcohols present other than ethanol are: isoamyl alcohol, isobutanol, and 1-propanol. Methanol is thought to be mainly generated through hydrolysis of methylated pectin, which is naturally present in the agave plant, but there has been speculation that it is also partly produced from the enzymatic reactions of yeast strains containing pectin methyl esterase enzyme, which break up the methoxyl group from the pectin. Nearly 50 different esters are identified in tequila, which together give rise to the fruit-like flavors and smell. One of the most abundant esters is ethyl acetate, which is synthesized during fermentation by the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae,\" using alcohol transferase enzyme that links acetic acid to ethanol.\nIn general, the longer the controlled fermentation period, the higher yield of esters produced. During the fermentation process, ethanol is oxidized and produces aldehydes, which add the flavor necessary for the final product of tequila. For example, isovaleraldehyde seems to produce a sweet, cocoa, and chocolate-like flavor. 2 and 3-methylbutanal produce a malty flavor. The agave plant contains many phenolics such as vanillin and syringaldehydes, which present a strong and fruity or herbal aroma. It also contains eugenol, which can deliver a hint of spicy flavor to the tequila. Because the production of tequila involves heating, Maillard browning reactions occur, and furans are produced during the thermal degradation of sugar. The most prominent furanic compounds include 2-furaldehyde and 5-methylfuraldehyde, which can contribute to the smoky flavor of tequila. Guaiacol also seems to contribute to Tequila's smoky flavor. Beta-demascenone contributes to the woody, floral taste of tequila.\nVolatile compounds that contribute to the overall taste and aroma of tequila can be quantitatively assessed and evaluated by gas chromatography. Discrimination tests such as duo-trio and triangle tests are also used to evaluate the quality of the tequila.\nAging.\nProcess.\nIf silver or white (\"Blanco\") tequila is the desired final product, distillation is the final process it undergoes. Rested (\"Reposado\") or aged (\"A\u00f1ejo\") tequila must be matured in 200-liter (or larger) white oak barrels for at least two months for the former and 12 months for the latter. The newest category of tequila classification, extra a\u00f1ejo, must be aged for at least three years in oak barrels. There are, however, more than 50 different companies producing tequila in the Mexican state of Jalisco, with different maturation times according to the variety of tequila and desired quality of the final product.\nAll companies producing tequila have their aging processes regulated and fiscalized by the Mexican government.\nChemistry.\nThe maturation process causes four main chemical transformations to the tequila compounds: (1) decreasing of fusel oils by the char in barrels, which acts as an absorbing agent; (2) extraction of complex wood constituents by tequila, giving specific aroma and flavor to the final product; (3) reactions among the components of tequila, creating new chemical compounds; and (4) oxidation of the original contents of tequila and of those extracted from wood. The final results of these changes are increased concentrations of acids, esters and aldehydes, and a decrease in fusel oil concentration.\nReposado may be rested in oak barrels or casks as large as , allowing for richer and more complex flavors. The preferred oak comes from the US, France, or Canada, and is usually white oak. Some companies char the wood to impart a smoky flavor or use barrels previously used with different kinds of alcohol (e.g. whiskey or wine). Some \"reposados\" can also be aged in new wood barrels to achieve the same woody flavor and smoothness, but in less time.\n\"A\u00f1ejos\" are often rested in barrels previously used to rest \"reposados\". The barrels cannot be more than , and most are in the range. Many of the barrels used are from whiskey distilleries in the US or Canada, and Jack Daniel's barrels are especially popular. This treatment creates many of the aspects of the dark color and more complex flavors of the\" a\u00f1ejo\" tequila. After aging of at least one year, the \"a\u00f1ejo\" can be removed from the wood barrels and placed in stainless steel tanks to reduce the amount of evaporation that can occur in the barrels.\nThreats to quality.\nTMA (\"tristeza y muerte de agave\" \u2013 \"agave depression and death\") is a blight that has reduced the production of the agave grown to produce tequila. This has resulted in lower production and higher prices throughout the early 21st century, and due to the long maturation of the plant, will likely continue to affect prices for years to come.\n\"Tequila worm\" misconception.\nOnly certain \"mezcals\", usually from the state of Oaxaca, are ever sold \"con gusano\" (with worm). They are added as a marketing gimmick and are not traditional. The tequila regulatory council does not allow \"gusanos\" or scorpions (which are sometimes also added to mezcals) to be included in tequila bottles. The worm in some mezcals is actually the larval form of the moth \"Hypopta agavis\", which lives on the agave plant. Finding one in the plant during processing indicates an infestation and, correspondingly, a lower-quality product. The misconception that tequilas may contain worms continues, despite effort and marketing to represent tequila as a premium liquor.\nNorma Oficial Mexicana.\nThe \"Norma Oficial Mexicana\" (NOM) applies to all processes and activities related to the supply of agave, production, bottling, marketing, information, and business practices linked to the distilled alcoholic beverage known as tequila. Tequila must be produced using agave of the species Tequilana Weber Blue variety, grown in the federal states and municipalities indicated in the Declaration.\nFurthermore, the NOM establishes the technical specifications and legal requirements for the protection of the Appellation of Origin of \"Tequila\" in accordance with the current General Declaration of Protection of the Appellation of Origin of \"Tequila\", the Law, the Industrial Property Law, the Federal Consumer Protection Law and other related legal provisions.\nAll authentic, regulated tequilas will have a NOM identifier on the bottle. The important laws since 1990 were NOM-006-SCFI-1993, the later updates NOM-006-SCFI-1994 and NOM-006-SCFI-2005 and the most recent revision published on December 13, 2012, NOM-006-SCFI-2012.\nThe number after NOM is the distillery number, assigned by the government. NOM does not indicate the location of the distillery, merely the parent company or, in the case where a company leases space in a plant, the physical plant where the tequila was manufactured.\nStorage condition.\nUnlike wine, whose character may change in taste over time and storage conditions, tequila does not change much once bottled, even without ideal storage conditions, much like most other distilled spirits such as whiskey, rum, or vodka. The quality characteristics (flavor, aroma, color, etc.) of a tequila are primarily determined during its aging in wood barrels. To maintain the utmost quality though, some conditions should be met: a constant and moderate temperature (60 to 65\u00a0\u00b0F), protection from direct sunlight, and maintenance of the integrity of the seal of the bottle. Improper storage conditions will have more effect on the taste of aged tequila rather than the un-aged version, due to tannins and other compounds introduced into the spirit from the aging barrel. For instance, if stored in improper conditions, the dark and more complex flavors of the a\u00f1ejo tequila are more likely to be tainted than the blanco or the silver tequila.\nOnce the bottle is opened, the tequila will be subject to oxidation that will continue to happen even if no more oxygen is introduced. In addition, if the bottle has more room for air, the process of oxidation occurs faster on the liquor remaining inside the bottle. Therefore, it may be the best to consume the tequila within one or two years after opening. For the most part, the change in quality of tequila is due to extreme conditions of improper storage, not due to oxidation.\nTypes.\nThe two basic categories of tequila are\" mixtos\" and 100% agave. \"Mixtos\" use no less than 51% agave, with other sugars making up the remainder. \"Mixtos\" use both glucose and fructose sugars.\nThere are five categories of tequila defined by the NOM:\nThere are several more categories that are not defined by the NOM, including:\nBrands.\nThe \"Consejo Regulador del Tequila\" (Tequila Regulatory Council) reported 1377 registered brands from 150 producers for the year 2013.\nServing.\nIn Mexico, the most traditional way to drink tequila is neat, without lime and salt. It is popular in some regions to drink fine tequila with a side of sangrita\u2014a sweet, sour, and spicy drink typically made from orange juice, grenadine (or tomato juice), and hot chilli. Equal-sized shots of tequila and sangrita are sipped alternately, without salt or lime. Another popular drink in Mexico is the \"bandera\" (flag in Spanish), named after the Flag of Mexico, it consists of three shot glasses, filled with lime juice (for the green), white tequila, and sangrita (for the red).\nOutside Mexico, a single shot of tequila is often served with salt and a slice of lime or lemon. This is called \"tequila cruda\" and is sometimes referred to as \"training wheels\", \"lick-sip-suck\", or \"lick-shoot-suck\" (referring to the way in which the combination of ingredients is imbibed). The drinkers moisten the back of their hands below the index finger (usually by licking) and pour on the salt. Then the salt is licked off the hand, the tequila is drunk, and the fruit slice is quickly bitten. Groups of drinkers often do this simultaneously. Drinking tequila in this way is often erroneously called a Tequila Slammer, which is in fact a mix of tequila and carbonated drink. Though the traditional Mexican shot is tequila by itself, lime is the fruit of choice when a chaser must be used. The salt is believed to lessen the \"burn\" of the tequila and the sour fruit balances and enhances the flavor. In Germany and some other countries, \"tequila oro\" (gold) is often consumed with cinnamon on a slice of orange after, while \"tequila blanco\" (white) is consumed with salt and lime.\nIf the bottle of tequila does not state on the label that it is manufactured from 100% blue agave (no sugars added), then, by default, that tequila is a \"mixto\" (manufactured from at least 51% blue agave). Some tequila distilleries label their tequila as \"made with blue agave\" or \"made from blue agave\". The Tequila Regulatory Council has stated only tequilas distilled with 100% agave can be designated as \"100% agave\".\nMany of the higher-quality, 100% agave tequilas do not impart significant alcohol burn, and drinking them with salt and lime is likely to remove much of the flavor. These tequilas are usually sipped from a snifter glass rather than a shot glass, and savoured instead of quickly gulped. Doing so allows the taster to detect subtler fragrances and flavors that would otherwise be missed.\nTequila glasses.\nWhen served neat (without any additional ingredients), tequila is most often served in a narrow shot glass called a \"caballito\" (little horse in Spanish), but can often be found in anything from a snifter to a tumbler.\nThe Consejo Regulador del Tequila approved an \"official tequila glass\" in 2002 called the Ouverture Tequila glass, made by Riedel.\nThe margarita glass, frequently rimmed with salt or sugar, is a staple for the entire genre of tequila-based mixed drinks, including the margarita.\nCocktails.\nA variety of cocktails are made with tequila, including the margarita, a cocktail that helped make tequila popular in the United States. The traditional margarita uses tequila, Cointreau, and lime juice, though many variations exist. A popular cocktail in Mexico is the \"Paloma\", which is traditionally a highball of tequila and a grapefruit-flavored soda, but can also be made as a carbonated sour akin to a Tom Collins or gin rickey with tequila, fresh grapefruit juice, simple syrup, and plain carbonated water. Also, a number of martini variants involve tequila, and a large number of tequila drinks are made by adding fruit juice. These include the Tequila Sunrise and the Matador. Sodas and other carbonated drinks are a common mixer, as in the Tequila Slammer. Other popular cocktails are the \"Acapulco cocktail\", Chimay\u00f3 Cocktail, Mexican martini, Mojito Blanco, Vampiro and Ranch Water.\nIP protection and regulation outside of Mexico.\nMexican laws state that tequila can be produced only in the state of Jalisco and limited municipalities in the states of Guanajuato, Michoac\u00e1n, Nayarit, and Tamaulipas. Tequila is recognized as a Mexican designation of origin product in more than 40 countries. It was protected through NAFTA in Canada and the United States until July 2020 and through bilateral agreements with individual countries such as Japan and Israel, and it has been a protected designation of origin product in the European Union since 1997.\nThe Mexican government took initiatives to protect tequila as early as the 1970s. Tequila became the country's first appellation of origin (AO) in 1974, and in 1978 it was internationally registered for protection under the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration. The AO defines the area in which tequila can be produced, essentially the area home to the blue agave from which it is derived. Under the AO, selected municipalities within only five Mexican states can grow the agave and produce tequila. These municipalities were selected based on geographical factors (such as climate, altitude and soil characteristics) and human factors (the use of traditional techniques of producing tequila that have been passed on from generation to generation).\nFurther to the AO registration, the Mexican government holds all the rights over the use of the name tequila.\nAlong with the international protection, Mexico has also sought similar protection for tequila in other important countries and regions through a number of bilateral and multilateral agreements. Pursuant to Annex 313 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Canada and the United States recognize tequila and mezcal as products originating from Mexico and, consequently, do not permit the sale of any product as tequila and/or mezcal unless they have been lawfully prepared in Mexico.\nThe Mexican government enforces the tequila intellectual property through the Mexican Institute of Industrial Property (IMPI). The use of the name tequila is authorized and administered only by IMPI. IMPI may prohibit any unauthorized use of the name that may create confusion for the consumers, or constitute an act of unfair competition.\nDespite protection under the Lisbon Agreement and NAFTA, tequila still faced competition from some pseudo tequilas. During the mid-1990s, as much as 3.5 million liters of these liquors were sold annually in Europe. The European liquors were produced from sugars of agave-like plants and were illegally labeled as tequila. Following the NAFTA precedent, Mexico entered into a bilateral agreement with the European Union concerning the mutual recognition and protection of AO in the spirits sector. Under this agreement the EU recognizes tequila and mezcal as \"denominations of origin\", although enforcement has still been quite lax in Europe.\nMexico's tequila protection interests were prominent during the Chinese accession negotiations to the World Trade Organization. In accordance with WTO accession regulations, in order to gain considerations for WTO membership, China had to sign bilateral agreements with all existing members, including Mexico. Since China has a climatic condition suitable for blue agave plants, Mexico was worried about rival pseudo tequilas from China. The Mexican authorities took the opportunity of the bilateral negotiations with China to ensure that the latter accepted tequila as a geographically indicated product.\nCanada.\nUnder Canadian regulations (C.R.C., c.870, section B.02.90), any product labelled, advertised, or sold as tequila must be manufactured in Mexico, as it would be for consumption in Mexico. Once imported to Canada for sale, it is legal for tequila to be diluted with distilled or otherwise purified water to adjust it to the desired strength and then sold.\nUnited States.\nSimilar to the law of Canada, the U.S. law (27 CFR 5.148) says that tequila must be \"made in Mexico, in compliance with the laws and regulations of Mexico governing the manufacture of Tequila for consumption in that country.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39358", "revid": "47544869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39358", "title": "Open set", "text": "Basic subset of a topological space\nIn mathematics, an open set is a generalization of an open interval in the real line.\nIn a metric space (a set with a distance defined between every two points), an open set is a set that, with every point P in it, contains all points of the metric space that are sufficiently near to P (that is, all points whose distance to P is less than some value depending on P).\nMore generally, an open set is a member of a given collection of subsets of a given set, a collection that has the property of containing every union of its members, every finite intersection of its members, the empty set, and the whole set itself. A set in which such a collection is given is called a topological space, and the collection is called a topology. These conditions are very loose, and allow enormous flexibility in the choice of open sets. For example, \"every\" subset can be open (the discrete topology), or \"no\" subset can be open except the space itself and the empty set (the indiscrete topology).\nIn practice, however, open sets are usually chosen to provide a notion of nearness that is similar to that of metric spaces, without having a notion of distance defined. In particular, a topology allows defining properties such as continuity, connectedness, and compactness, which were originally defined by means of a distance.\nThe most common case of a topology without any distance is given by manifolds, which are topological spaces that, \"near\" each point, resemble an open set of a Euclidean space, but on which no distance is defined in general. Less intuitive topologies are used in other branches of mathematics; for example, the Zariski topology, which is fundamental in algebraic geometry and scheme theory.\nMotivation.\nIntuitively, an open set provides a method to distinguish two points. For example, if about one of two points in a topological space, there exists an open set not containing the other (distinct) point, the two points are referred to as topologically distinguishable. In this manner, one may speak of whether two points, or more generally two subsets, of a topological space are \"near\" without concretely defining a distance. Therefore, topological spaces may be seen as a generalization of spaces equipped with a notion of distance, which are called metric spaces.\nIn the set of all real numbers, one has the natural Euclidean metric; that is, a function which measures the distance between two real numbers: \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") = |\"x\" \u2212 \"y\"|. Therefore, given a real number \"x\", one can speak of the set of all points close to that real number; that is, within \"\u03b5\" of \"x\". In essence, points within \u03b5 of \"x\" approximate \"x\" to an accuracy of degree \"\u03b5\". Note that \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0 always but as \"\u03b5\" becomes smaller and smaller, one obtains points that approximate \"x\" to a higher and higher degree of accuracy. For example, if \"x\" = 0 and \"\u03b5\" = 1, the points within \"\u03b5\" of \"x\" are precisely the points of the interval (\u22121, 1); that is, the set of all real numbers between \u22121 and 1. However, with \"\u03b5\" = 0.5, the points within \"\u03b5\" of \"x\" are precisely the points of (\u22120.5, 0.5). Clearly, these points approximate \"x\" to a greater degree of accuracy than when \"\u03b5\" = 1.\nThe previous discussion shows, for the case \"x\" = 0, that one may approximate \"x\" to higher and higher degrees of accuracy by defining \"\u03b5\" to be smaller and smaller. In particular, sets of the form (\u2212\"\u03b5\", \"\u03b5\") give us a lot of information about points close to \"x\" = 0. Thus, rather than speaking of a concrete Euclidean metric, one may use sets to describe points close to \"x\". This innovative idea has far-reaching consequences; in particular, by defining different collections of sets containing 0 (distinct from the sets (\u2212\"\u03b5\", \"\u03b5\")), one may find different results regarding the distance between 0 and other real numbers. For example, if we were to define R as the only such set for \"measuring distance\", all points would be close to 0 since there is only one possible degree of accuracy one may achieve in approximating 0: being a member of R. Thus, we find that in some sense, every real number is distance 0 away from 0. It may help in this case to think of the measure as being a binary condition: all things in R are equally close to 0, while any item that is not in R is not close to 0.\nIn general, one refers to the family of sets containing 0, used to approximate 0, as a neighborhood basis; a member of this neighborhood basis is referred to as an open set. In fact, one may generalize these notions to an arbitrary set (\"X\"); rather than just the real numbers. In this case, given a point (\"x\") of that set, one may define a collection of sets \"around\" (that is, containing) \"x\", used to approximate \"x\". Of course, this collection would have to satisfy certain properties (known as axioms) for otherwise we may not have a well-defined method to measure distance. For example, every point in \"X\" should approximate \"x\" to \"some\" degree of accuracy. Thus \"X\" should be in this family. Once we begin to define \"smaller\" sets containing \"x\", we tend to approximate \"x\" to a greater degree of accuracy. Bearing this in mind, one may define the remaining axioms that the family of sets about \"x\" is required to satisfy.\nDefinitions.\nSeveral definitions are given here, in an increasing order of technicality. Each one is a special case of the next one.\nEuclidean space.\nA subset formula_1 of the Euclidean \"n\"-space R\"n\" is \"open\" if, for every point x in formula_1, there exists a positive real number \u03b5 (depending on x) such that any point in R\"n\" whose Euclidean distance from x is smaller than \u03b5 belongs to formula_1. Equivalently, a subset formula_1 of R\"n\" is open if every point in formula_1 is the center of an open ball contained in formula_6\nAn example of a subset of R that is not open is the closed interval [0,1], since neither 0 - \"\u03b5\" nor 1 + \"\u03b5\" belongs to [0,1] for any \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0, no matter how small.\nMetric space.\nA subset \"U\" of a metric space (\"M\", \"d\") is called \"open\" if, for any point \"x\" in \"U\", there exists a real number \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0 such that any point formula_7 satisfying \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") &lt; \"\u03b5\" belongs to \"U\". Equivalently, \"U\" is open if every point in \"U\" has a neighborhood contained in \"U\".\nThis generalizes the Euclidean space example, since Euclidean space with the Euclidean distance is a metric space.\nTopological space.\nA \"topology\" formula_8 on a set X is a set of subsets of X with the following properties:\nEach member of formula_8 is called an \"open set\". The set X together with formula_8 is called a \"topological space\".\nInfinite intersections of open sets need not be open. For example, the intersection of all intervals of the form formula_22 where formula_17 is a positive integer, is the set formula_24, which is not open in the real line.\nA metric space is a topological space, whose topology consists of the collection of all subsets that are unions of open balls. There are, however, topological spaces that are not metric spaces.\nProperties.\nThe union of any number of open sets, or infinitely many open sets, is open. The intersection of a finite number of open sets is open.\nA complement of an open set (relative to the space that the topology is defined on) is called a closed set. A set may be both open and closed (a clopen set). The empty set and the full space are examples of sets that are both open and closed.\nA set can never been considered as open by itself. This notion is relative to a containing set and a specific topology on it.\nWhether a set is open depends on the topology under consideration. Having opted for greater brevity over greater clarity, we refer to a set \"X\" endowed with a topology formula_8 as \"the topological space \"X\"\" rather than \"the topological space formula_26\", despite the fact that all the topological data is contained in formula_27 If there are two topologies on the same set, a set \"U\" that is open in the first topology might fail to be open in the second topology. For example, if \"X\" is any topological space and \"Y\" is any subset of \"X\", the set \"Y\" can be given its own topology (called the 'subspace topology') defined by \"a set \"U\" is open in the subspace topology on \"Y\" if and only if \"U\" is the intersection of \"Y\" with an open set from the original topology on \"X\".\" This potentially introduces new open sets: if \"V\" is open in the original topology on \"X\", but formula_28 isn't open in the original topology on \"X\", then formula_28 is open in the subspace topology on \"Y\".\nAs a concrete example of this, if \"U\" is defined as the set of rational numbers in the interval formula_30 then \"U\" is an open subset of the rational numbers, but not of the real numbers. This is because when the surrounding space is the rational numbers, for every point \"x\" in \"U\", there exists a positive number \"\u03b5\" such that all rational points within distance \"\u03b5\" of \"x\" are also in \"U\". On the other hand, when the surrounding space is the reals, then for every point \"x\" in \"U\" there is no positive \"\u03b5\" such that all real points within distance \"\u03b5\" of \"x\" are in \"U\" (because \"U\" contains no non-rational numbers).\nUses.\nOpen sets have a fundamental importance in topology. The concept is required to define and make sense of topological space and other topological structures that deal with the notions of closeness and convergence for spaces such as metric spaces and uniform spaces.\nEvery subset \"A\" of a topological space \"X\" contains a (possibly empty) open set; the maximum (ordered under inclusion) such open set is called the interior of \"A\". \nIt can be constructed by taking the union of all the open sets contained in \"A\".\nA function formula_31 between two topological spaces formula_32 and formula_33 is continuous if the preimage of every open set in formula_33 is open in formula_35\nThe function formula_31 is called open if the image of every open set in formula_32 is open in formula_38\nAn open set on the real line has the characteristic property that it is a countable union of disjoint open intervals.\nSpecial types of open sets.\nClopen sets and non-open and/or non-closed sets.\nA set might be open, closed, both, or neither. In particular, open and closed sets are not mutually exclusive, meaning that it is in general possible for a subset of a topological space to simultaneously be both an open subset and a closed subset. Such subsets are known as clopen sets. Explicitly, a subset formula_39 of a topological space formula_26 is called clopen if both formula_39 and its complement formula_42 are open subsets of formula_26; or equivalently, if formula_44 and formula_45 \nIn any topological space formula_46 the empty set formula_47 and the set formula_32 itself are always clopen. These two sets are the most well-known examples of clopen subsets and they show that clopen subsets exist in every topological space. To see, it suffices to remark that, by definition of a topology, formula_32 and formula_47 are both open, and that they are also closed, since each is the complement of the other.\nThe open sets of the usual Euclidean topology of the real line formula_51 are the empty set, the open intervals and every union of open intervals.\nIf a topological space formula_32 is endowed with the discrete topology (so that by definition, every subset of formula_32 is open) then every subset of formula_32 is a clopen subset. \nFor a more advanced example reminiscent of the discrete topology, suppose that formula_66 is an ultrafilter on a non-empty set formula_35 Then the union formula_68 is a topology on formula_32 with the property that every non-empty proper subset formula_39 of formula_32 is either an open subset or else a closed subset, but never both; that is, if formula_72 (where formula_73) then exactly one of the following two statements is true: either (1) formula_44 or else, (2) formula_45 Said differently, every subset is open or closed but the only subsets that are both (i.e. that are clopen) are formula_47 and formula_35\nRegular open sets.\nA subset formula_39 of a topological space formula_32 is called a regular open set if formula_80 or equivalently, if formula_81, where formula_82, formula_83, and formula_84 denote, respectively, the topological boundary, interior, and closure of formula_39 in formula_32. A topological space for which there exists a base consisting of regular open sets is called a semiregular space. \nA subset of formula_32 is a regular open set if and only if its complement in formula_32 is a regular closed set, where by definition a subset formula_39 of formula_32 is called a regular closed set if formula_91 or equivalently, if formula_92 \nEvery regular open set (resp. regular closed set) is an open subset (resp. is a closed subset) although in general, the converses are not true.\nGeneralizations of open sets.\nThroughout, formula_26 will be a topological space. \nA subset formula_94 of a topological space formula_32 is called:\nUsing the fact that \nformula_96 and formula_97\nwhenever two subsets formula_98 satisfy formula_99 the following may be deduced:\nMoreover, a subset is a regular open set if and only if it is preopen and semi-closed. The intersection of an \u03b1-open set and a semi-preopen (resp. semi-open, preopen, b-open) set is a semi-preopen (resp. semi-open, preopen, b-open) set. Preopen sets need not be semi-open and semi-open sets need not be preopen. \nArbitrary unions of preopen (resp. \u03b1-open, b-open, semi-preopen) sets are once again preopen (resp. \u03b1-open, b-open, semi-preopen). However, finite intersections of preopen sets need not be preopen. The set of all \u03b1-open subsets of a space formula_26 forms a topology on formula_32 that is finer than formula_27 \nA topological space formula_32 is Hausdorff if and only if every compact subspace of formula_32 is \u03b8-closed. \nA space formula_32 is totally disconnected if and only if every regular closed subset is preopen or equivalently, if every semi-open subset is preopen. Moreover, the space is totally disconnected if and only if the closure of every preopen subset is open.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39359", "revid": "43777333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39359", "title": "Disjoint sets", "text": "Sets with no element in common\nIn set theory in mathematics and formal logic, two sets are said to be disjoint sets if they have no element in common. Equivalently, two disjoint sets are sets whose intersection is the empty set. For example, {1, 2, 3} and {4, 5, 6} are \"disjoint sets,\" while {1, 2, 3} and {3, 4, 5} are not disjoint. A collection of two or more sets is called disjoint if any two distinct sets of the collection are disjoint.\nGeneralizations.\nThis definition of disjoint sets can be extended to families of sets and to indexed families of sets. \nBy definition, a collection of sets is called a \"family of sets\" (such as the power set, for example). In some sources this is a set of sets, while other sources allow it to be a multiset of sets, with some sets repeated.\nAn indexed family of sets formula_1 is by definition a set-valued function (that is, it is a function that assigns a set formula_2 to every element formula_3 in its domain) whose domain formula_4 is called its index set (and elements of its domain are called indices).\nThere are two subtly different definitions for when a family of sets formula_5 is called pairwise disjoint. According to one such definition, the family is disjoint if each two sets in the family are either identical or disjoint. This definition would allow pairwise disjoint families of sets to have repeated copies of the same set. According to an alternative definition, each two sets in the family must be disjoint; repeated copies are not allowed. The same two definitions can be applied to an indexed family of sets: according to the first definition, every two distinct indices in the family must name sets that are disjoint or identical, while according to the second, every two distinct indices must name disjoint sets. For example, the family of sets { {0, 1, 2}, {3, 4, 5}, {6, 7, 8}, ... } is disjoint according to both definitions, as is the family { {..., \u22122, 0, 2, 4, ...}, {..., \u22123, \u22121, 1, 3, 5} } of the two parity classes of integers. However, the family formula_6 with 10 members has five repetitions each of two disjoint sets, so it is pairwise disjoint under the first definition but not under the second.\nTwo sets are said to be almost disjoint sets if their intersection is small in some sense. For instance, two infinite sets whose intersection is a finite set may be said to be almost disjoint.\nIn topology, there are various notions of separated sets with more strict conditions than disjointness. For instance, two sets may be considered to be separated when they have disjoint closures or disjoint neighborhoods. Similarly, in a metric space, positively separated sets are sets separated by a nonzero distance.\nIntersections.\nDisjointness of two sets, or of a family of sets, may be expressed in terms of intersections of pairs of them.\nTwo sets \"A\" and \"B\" are disjoint if and only if their intersection formula_7 is the empty set.\nIt follows from this definition that every set is disjoint from the empty set,\nand that the empty set is the only set that is disjoint from itself.\nIf a collection contains at least two sets, the condition that the collection is disjoint implies that the intersection of the whole collection is empty. However, a collection of sets may have an empty intersection without being disjoint. Additionally, while a collection of less than two sets is trivially disjoint, as there are no pairs to compare, the intersection of a collection of one set is equal to that set, which may be non-empty. For instance, the three sets { {1, 2}, {2, 3}, {1, 3} } have an empty intersection but are not disjoint. In fact, there are no two disjoint sets in this collection. \nThe empty family of sets is pairwise disjoint.\nA Helly family is a system of sets within which the only subfamilies with empty intersections are the ones that are pairwise disjoint. For instance, the closed intervals of the real numbers form a Helly family: if a family of closed intervals has an empty intersection and is minimal (i.e. no subfamily of the family has an empty intersection), it must be pairwise disjoint.\nDisjoint unions and partitions.\nA partition of a set \"X\" is any collection of mutually disjoint non-empty sets whose union is \"X\". Every partition can equivalently be described by an equivalence relation, a binary relation that describes whether two elements belong to the same set in the partition.\nDisjoint-set data structures and partition refinement are two techniques in computer science for efficiently maintaining partitions of a set subject to, respectively, union operations that merge two sets or refinement operations that split one set into two.\nA disjoint union may mean one of two things. Most simply, it may mean the union of sets that are disjoint. But if two or more sets are not already disjoint, their disjoint union may be formed by modifying the sets to make them disjoint before forming the union of the modified sets. For instance two sets may be made disjoint by replacing each element by an ordered pair of the element and a binary value indicating whether it belongs to the first or second set.\nFor families of more than two sets, one may similarly replace each element by an ordered pair of the element and the index of the set that contains it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39360", "revid": "49713890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39360", "title": "Good-Bye to All That", "text": "1929 autobiography by Robert Graves\nGood-Bye to All That is an autobiography by Robert Graves which first appeared in 1929, when the author was 34 years old. \"It was my bitter leave-taking of England,\" he wrote in a prologue to the revised second edition of 1957, \"where I had recently broken a good many conventions\". The title may also point to the passing of an old order following the cataclysm of the First World War; the supposed inadequacies of patriotism, the interest of some in atheism, feminism, socialism and pacifism, the changes to traditional married life, and not least the emergence of new styles of literary expression, are all treated in the work, bearing as they did directly on Graves's life. The unsentimental and frequently comic treatment of the banalities and intensities of the life of a British army officer in the First World War gave Graves fame, notoriety and financial security, but the book's subject is also his family history, childhood, schooling and, immediately following the war, early married life; all phases bearing witness to the \"particular mode of living and thinking\" that constitute a poetic sensibility.\nLaura Riding, Graves's lover, is credited with being a \"spiritual and intellectual midwife\" to the work. Graves, in a 1969 interview, claimed that he \"entirely rewrote\" the book\u2014\"every single sentence\"\u2014when it was reissued in the 1950s, suggesting that the process of co-writing \"The Reader Over Your Shoulder\" had made him more conscious of, and determined to rectify, deficiencies in his own style.\nPre-war life.\nGraves undertook climbing, stating \"the sport made all others seem trivial.\" His first climb was Crib y Ddysgl, followed by climbs on Crib Goch and Y Lliwedd.\nGraves goes on to claim, \"In English preparatory and public schools romance is necessarily homosexual. The opposite sex is despised and treated as something obscene. Many boys never recover from this perversion. For every one born homosexual, at least ten permanent pseudo-homosexuals are made by the public school system: nine of these ten as honourably chaste and sentimental as I was.\"\nWartime experiences.\nA large part of the book is taken up by his experience of the First World War, in which Graves served as a lieutenant, then captain in the Royal Welch Fusiliers, with Siegfried Sassoon. \"Good-Bye to All That\" provides a detailed description of trench warfare, including the tragic incompetence of the Battle of Loos, including the use of gas, and the bitter fighting in the first phase of the Somme Offensive.\nGraves claimed, \"At least one in three of my generation at school died; because they all took commissions as soon as they could, most of them in the infantry and Royal Flying Corps. The average life expectancy of an infantry subaltern on the Western Front was, at some stages of the War, only about three months; by which time he had been either wounded or killed.\"\nRegarding trench conditions and Cuinchy-bred rats, Graves stated, \"They came up from the canal, fed on the plentiful corpses, and multiplied exceedingly.\"\nWounds.\nIn the Somme engagement, Graves was wounded while leading his men through the cemetery at Bazentin-le-petit church on 20 July 1916. The wound initially appeared so severe that military authorities erroneously reported to his family that he had died. While mourning his death, Graves's family received word from him that he was alive, and put an announcement to that effect in the newspapers. Graves later regretted omitting from the book the name of the soldier who had rescued him, Owen Roberts. The two met again fifty years later in a hospital ward to which both had been admitted for surgery, after which Graves signed Roberts's copy of the book, giving Roberts full credit for saving his life.\nReputed atrocities.\nGraves also discussed atrocities committed during the war in \"Good-Bye to All That\". He wrote that among his fellow troops, Allied atrocity propaganda, such as reports of the rape of Belgium, was widely disbelieved (defining \"atrocities\" in the book as wartime sexual violence, mutilation and torture instead of summary executions). Graves also noted that if \"the atrocity-list had to include the accidental-on-purpose bombing or machine-gunning of civilians from the air, the Allies were now committing as many atrocities as the Germans.\" Observing French and Belgian civilians showing British soldiers body parts allegedly mutilated by German troops, he argued that these were more likely the result of indiscriminate shelling.\nThough the German use of serrated knives and British deployment of expanding bullets were regarded by the other side as \"atrocious\", Graves claimed that the opportunity for soldiers on both sides to commit \"true atrocities\" only occurred when escorting prisoners of war to the rear lines. \"Nearly every instructor in the mess\", he wrote, \"could quote specific instances of prisoners having been murdered on the way back. The commonest motives were, it seems, revenge for the death of friends or relatives, jealousy of the prisoner's trip to a comfortable prison camp in England, military enthusiasm, fear of being suddenly overpowered by the prisoners or, more simply, impatience with the escorting job.\" Similarly, \"If a German patrol found a wounded man, they were likely as not to cut his throat.\" However, if POWs arrived at their destination, they were treated well during interrogations.\nIn the book, Graves stated that Australian and Canadian troops had the worst reputation for atrocities against German POWs. He recounted two first-hand anecdotes from a Scottish-Canadian and an Australian, who told him how they murdered German prisoners while escorting them using Mills bombs. Canadian soldiers were motivated to commit atrocities against POWs due to the story of \"The Crucified Soldier\", which Graves and his fellow soldiers also refused to believe. He also added that the use of \"semi-civilized coloured troops in Europe was, from the German point of view, we knew, one of the chief Allied atrocities. We sympathized.\"\nPostwar trauma.\nGraves was severely traumatised by his war experience. After being wounded in the lung by a shell blast, he endured a squalid five-day train journey with unchanged bandages. During initial military training in England, he received an electric shock from a telephone that had been hit by lightning, which caused him for the next twelve years to stammer and sweat badly if he had to use one. Upon his return home, he describes being haunted by ghosts and nightmares.\nAccording to Graves, \"My particular disability was neurasthenia.\" He went on to say, \"Shells used to come bursting on my bed at midnight\u00a0... strangers in daytime would assume the faces of friends who had been killed.\" Offered a chance to rejoin George Mallory in climbing, Graves declined, \"I could never again now deliberately take chances with my life.\"\nCritical responses.\nSiegfried Sassoon and his friend Edmund Blunden (whose First World War service had been in a different regiment) took umbrage at the contents of the book. Sassoon's complaints mostly related to Graves's depiction of him and his family, whereas Blunden had read the memoirs of J. C. Dunn and found them at odds with Graves in some places. The two men took Blunden's copy of \"Good-Bye to All That\" and made marginal notes contradicting some of the text. That copy survives and is held by the New York Public Library. Graves's father, Alfred Perceval Graves, also incensed at some aspects of Graves's book, wrote a riposte to it titled \"To Return to All That.\"\nIt was included in Robert McCrum's \"Guide to the 100 greatest nonfiction books in English\" published by \"The Guardian\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39361", "revid": "22444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39361", "title": "Phidippides (Marathon runner)", "text": ""}
{"id": "39363", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39363", "title": "Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Elector of Bradenburg from 1415 to 1440\nFrederick (Middle High German: \"Friderich\", Standard German: \"Friedrich\"; 21 September 1371 \u2013 20 September 1440) was the last Burgrave of Nuremberg from 1397 to 1427 (as Frederick VI), Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach from 1398, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach from 1420, and Elector of Brandenburg (as Frederick I) from 1415 until his death. He became the first member of the House of Hohenzollern to rule the Margraviate of Brandenburg.\nBiography.\nFrederick was born in Nuremberg, the second-born son of Burgrave Frederick V (1333\u20131398) and the Wettin princess Elisabeth of Meissen. He entered early into the service of his brother-in-law, the Habsburg duke Albert III of Austria. After Albert's death in 1395, he fought on the side of the Luxembourg king Sigismund of Hungary against invading Ottoman forces. He and his elder brother John, husband of Sigismund's sister Margaret of Bohemia, fought in the 1396 Battle of Nicopolis where they suffered a disastrous defeat.\nAfter Frederick returned to Nuremberg, he divided the Franconian inheritance from his father with his brother John, who received the Principality of Bayreuth, while Frederick kept the Principality of Ansbach; the brothers ruled jointly in the Burgraviate of Nuremberg. At first Frederick tried to mediate in the imperial confusion between Sigismund's elder half-brother, the German king Wenceslaus, and the party of Elector Rupert III of the Palatinate, but from September 1399 he fought on the side of Rupert, husband of his sister Elizabeth, nonetheless. Wenceslaus was eventually deposed and Rupert elected King of the Romans on 21 August 1400.\nFrederick resumed his rule of Ansbach in 1409 and after heavy feuding, entered into the service of King Sigismund. In 1410, the death of Rupert, King of the Germans, left the throne of the Holy Roman Empire vacant. Sigismund enlisted Frederick's help in obtaining the throne. At the time, Jobst of Moravia ruled Brandenburg and thus was one of the prince-electors who had the right to vote for the new king. However, Sigismund disputed Jobst's claim to Brandenburg and his right to vote in the imperial election. Sigismund claimed these rights for himself and designated Frederick to represent him as elector of Brandenburg in the imperial election of 20 September 1410. While Sigismund won this initial vote, Jobst of Moravia won the support of a majority of electors in an election in October 1410 and himself claimed the imperial throne. Jobst's death under suspicious circumstances in January 1411 cleared the way for Sigismund's recovery of Brandenburg and his undisputed election as king of the empire later that year. In gratitude for Frederick's services, King Sigismund made him \"Oberster Hauptmann\" and \"Verwalter der Marken\" (1411). With an iron hand Frederick fought against the rebellious nobility of the March of Brandenburg (in particular, the Quitzow family) and, in the end, restored security. Frederick also became a member of the Parakeet Society and of the League of Constance.\nAt the Council of Constance (30 April 1415) Sigismund granted Frederick the titles of Margrave and Prince-elector of Brandenburg. On 21 October 1415 the Brandenburg states meeting in a \"Landtag\" asked him to rule in Berlin. The king awarded him the formal enfeoffment of the margravate on 18 April 1417. As Frederick did not agree with the forcible action of Sigismund against the Hussites, relations between them cooled.\nConstant feuding with the nobility of Brandenburg led Frederick to withdraw to his castle at Cadolzburg in 1425 and transfer the regency of the mark to his son John in 1426 (Frederick, however, remained elector). After 1427 he organized the imperial war against the Hussites. He is best known for joining the papal legate Julian Cesarini in August 1431 to attack the Hussites in the disastrous Battle of Doma\u017elice. He subsequently provided substantial assistance in the mediation of the Compacta of Prague at the Council of Basel (30 November 1433).\nUpon his death in 1440, Frederick was succeeded as elector by his second-eldest son, Frederick II.\nFamily and children.\nHe married Elisabeth of Bavaria-Landshut (1383\u201313 November 1442, Ansbach), daughter of Duke Frederick of Bavaria-Landshut and Maddalena Visconti in 1401. Their children were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39368", "revid": "1298976485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39368", "title": "Frederick II, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Elector of Brandenburg from 1440 to 1470\nFrederick II of Brandenburg () (19 November 1413 \u2013 10 February 1471), nicknamed \"the Iron\" (\"der Eiserne\") and sometimes \"Irontooth\" (\"Eisenzahn\"), was a Prince-elector of the Margraviate of Brandenburg from 1440 until his abdication in 1470, and was a member of the House of Hohenzollern.\nBiography.\nFrederick II was born at Tangerm\u00fcnde Castle (German: \"\"), when Tangerm\u00fcnde was within the Margraviate of Brandenburg, to Frederick I, Brandenburg's first Hohenzollern ruler, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Frederick, Duke of Bavaria-Landshut, and Maddalena Visconti. The latter was a daughter of Bernab\u00f2 Visconti and Beatrice della Scala. As the second son, his brothers included John the Alchemist and Albert Achilles, both of whom also ruled Brandenburg as margraves.\nIn 1421, at age 8, Frederick was betrothed to Hedwig Jagiellon, but she died on 8 December 1431, before the marriage could take place.\nWhen Frederick I retired in 1437, he compensated his incapable eldest son John with the Principality of Bayreuth while Frederick II assumed the government of Brandenburg. Unlike his father, he turned away from imperial politics and concentrated on his efforts to pacify the nobility and towns of the electorate. Quarrels with the city of Berlin began in 1440 with his plans to build a new residence on the C\u00f6lln island of the Spree river. In 1448 the \"Berliner Unwille\" (indignation) against the cession of the city's territory for an electoral stronghold culminated in open revolt, when the citizens flooded the excavation of the future \"Stadtschloss\". Nevertheless, Frederick II prevailed, had the palace built and the city's rights decisively curtailed.\nIn 1453, Frederick II, in his position as the Margrave of Brandenburg, was sent a letter from Rhodes, penned by the Grand Master of the Knights of St John, notifying him of the Fall of Constantinople and requesting he send them support so as to allow them to continue to combat the Turkish threat. His response is unknown.\nIn 1454 and 1455, he concluded the Treaties of C\u00f6lln and Mewe and thereby re-gained the Neumark (New March) from the Teutonic Order state. Weary of the long struggle with the Duchy of Pomerania, he abdicated in 1470 in favour of his younger brother Albert Achilles, he retired to the Bayreuth Principality and died one year later in Neustadt an der Aisch.\nFamily and children.\nOn 11 June 1441, Frederick II married Catherine of Saxony (1421 \u2013 23 August 1476), a daughter of Elector Frederick I of Saxony and Katharina of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. They had three children (and Frederick had one bastard):"}
{"id": "39372", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39372", "title": "Prototile", "text": "Basic shape(s) used in a tessellation\nIn mathematics, a prototile is one of the shapes of a tile in a tessellation.\nDefinition.\nA tessellation of the plane or of any other space is a cover of the space by closed shapes, called tiles, that have disjoint interiors. Some of the tiles may be congruent to one or more others. If S is the set of tiles in a tessellation, a set R of shapes is called a set of prototiles if no two shapes in R are congruent to each other, and every tile in S is congruent to one of the shapes in R.\nIt is possible to choose many different sets of prototiles for a tiling: translating or rotating any one of the prototiles produces another valid set of prototiles. However, every set of prototiles has the same cardinality, so the number of prototiles is well defined. A tessellation is said to be \"monohedral\" if it has exactly one prototile.\nAperiodicity.\nA set of prototiles is said to be aperiodic if every tiling with those prototiles is an aperiodic tiling. In March 2023, four researchers, Chaim Goodman-Strauss, David Smith, Joseph Samuel Myers and Craig S. Kaplan, announced the discovery of an aperiodic monohedral prototile (monotile) and a proof that the tile discovered by David Smith is an aperiodic monotile, i.e. a solution to a longstanding open einstein problem.\nIn higher dimensions, the problem had been solved earlier: the Schmitt-Conway-Danzer tile is the prototile of a monohedral aperiodic tiling of three-dimensional Euclidean space, and cannot tile space periodically.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39374", "revid": "42021989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39374", "title": "Large Magellanic Cloud", "text": "Satellite galaxy of the Milky Way\nThe Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) is a dwarf galaxy and satellite galaxy of the Milky Way. At a distance of around , the LMC is the second- or third-closest galaxy to the Milky Way, after the Sagittarius Dwarf Spheroidal (c. away) and the possible dwarf irregular galaxy called the Canis Major Overdensity. It is about across, and has roughly one-hundredth the mass of the Milky Way making it the fourth-largest galaxy in the Local Group, after the Andromeda Galaxy (M31), the Milky Way, and the Triangulum Galaxy (M33).\nThe LMC is classified as a Magellanic spiral. It contains a stellar bar that is geometrically off-center, suggesting that it was once a barred dwarf spiral galaxy before its spiral arms were disrupted, likely by tidal interactions from the nearby Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) and the Milky Way's gravity. The LMC is predicted to merge with the Milky Way in approximately 2.4\u00a0billion years.\nWith a declination of about \u221270\u00b0, the LMC is visible as a faint \"cloud\" from the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth and from as far north as 20\u00b0\u00a0N. It straddles the constellations Dorado and Mensa and has an apparent length of about 10\u00b0 to the naked eye, 20 times the Moon's diameter, from dark sites away from light pollution.\nHistory of observation.\nBoth the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds have been easily visible for southern nighttime observers well back into prehistory. It has been claimed that the first known written mention of the Large Magellanic Cloud was by the Persian astronomer 'Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi Shirazi (later known in Europe as \"Azophi\"), which he referred to as \"Al Bakr\", the White Ox, in his \"Book of Fixed Stars\" around 964 AD. However, this seems to be a misunderstanding of a reference to some stars south of Canopus which he admits he had not seen.\nThe first confirmed recorded observation was in 1503\u20131504 by Amerigo Vespucci in a letter about his third voyage. He mentioned \"three Canopes [\"sic\"], two bright and one obscure\"; \"bright\" refers to the two Magellanic Clouds, and \"obscure\" refers to the Coalsack.\nFerdinand Magellan sighted the LMC on his voyage in 1519 and his writings brought it into common Western knowledge. The galaxy now bears his name.\nThe galaxy and southern end of Dorado are in the current epoch at opposition on about 5\u00a0December when thus visible from sunset to sunrise from equatorial points such as Ecuador, the Congos, Uganda, Kenya and Indonesia and for part of the night in nearby months. Above about 28\u00b0 south, such as most of Australia and South Africa, the galaxy is always sufficiently above the horizon to be considered properly circumpolar, thus during spring and autumn the cloud is also visible much of the night, and the height of winter in June nearly coincides with closest proximity to the Sun's apparent position.\nMeasurements with the Hubble Space Telescope, announced in 2006, suggest the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds may be moving too quickly to be orbiting the Milky Way.\nAstronomers discovered a new black hole inside the Large Magellanic Cloud in November 2021 using the European Southern Observatory's Very Large Telescope in Chile. Astronomers claim its gravity is influenced by a nearby star, which is about five times the mass of the Sun.\nIn March 2025, the Center for Astrophysics announced strong evidence for a supermassive black hole in the Large Magellanic Cloud, the second-closest besides Sagittarius A*, with an estimated mass 600,000 times that of the Sun.\nGeometry.\nThe Large Magellanic Cloud has a prominent central bar and spiral arm. The central bar, with a radius of 6,900 light-years (2.13 kpc) and a position angle of about 121\u00b0, seems to be warped so that the east and west ends are nearer the Milky Way than the middle. In 2014, measurements from the Hubble Space Telescope made it possible to determine a rotation period of 250 million years.\nThe LMC was long considered to be a planar galaxy that could be assumed to lie at a single distance from the Solar System. However, in 1986, Caldwell and Coulson found that field Cepheid variables in the northeast lie closer to the Milky Way than those in the southwest. From 2001 to 2002 this inclined geometry was confirmed by the same means, by core helium-burning red clump stars, and by the tip of the red giant branch. All three papers find an inclination of ~35\u00b0, where a face-on galaxy has an inclination of 0\u00b0. Further work on the structure of the LMC using the kinematics of carbon stars showed that the LMC's disk is both thick and flared, likely due to interactions with the SMC. Regarding the distribution of star clusters in the LMC, Schommer et al. measured velocities for ~80 clusters and found that the LMC's cluster system has kinematics consistent with the clusters moving in a disk-like distribution. These results were confirmed by Grocholski et al., who calculated distances to a sample of clusters and showed that the cluster system is distributed in the same plane as the field stars.\nDistance.\nThe distance to the LMC has been calculated using standard candles; Cepheid variables are one of the most popular. These have been shown to have a relationship between their absolute luminosity and the period over which their brightness varies. However the variable of metallicity may also need to be taken as a component of this as consensus is this likely affects their period-luminosity relations. Cepheid variables in the Milky Way typically used to calibrate the relation are more metal-rich than those found in the LMC.\nModern 8-meter-class optical telescopes have discovered eclipsing binaries throughout the Local Group. Parameters of these systems can be measured without mass or compositional assumptions. The light echoes of supernova 1987A are also geometric measurements, without any stellar models or assumptions.\nIn 2006, the Cepheid absolute luminosity was re-calibrated using Cepheid variables in the galaxy Messier 106 that cover a range of metallicities. Using this improved calibration, they find an absolute distance modulus of formula_1, or . This distance has been confirmed by other authors.\nBy cross-correlating different measurement methods, one can bound the distance; the residual errors are now less than the estimated size parameters of the LMC.\nThe results of a study using late-type eclipsing binaries to determine the distance more accurately was published in the scientific journal \"Nature\" in March 2013. A distance of with an accuracy of 2.2% was obtained.\nFeatures.\nLike many irregular galaxies, the LMC is rich in gas and dust, and is currently undergoing vigorous star formation activity. It holds the Tarantula Nebula, the most active star-forming region in the Local Group.\nThe LMC has a wide range of galactic objects and phenomena that make it known as an \"astronomical treasure-house, a great celestial laboratory for the study of the growth and evolution of the stars\", per Robert Burnham Jr. Surveys of the galaxy have found roughly 60 globular clusters, 400 planetary nebulae and 700 open clusters, along with hundreds of thousands of giant and supergiant stars. Supernova 1987A\u2014the nearest supernova in recent years\u2014was in the Large Magellanic Cloud. The Lionel-Murphy SNR (N86) nitrogen-abundant supernova remnant was named by astronomers at the Australian National University's Mount Stromlo Observatory, acknowledging Australian High Court Justice Lionel Murphy's interest in science and its perceived resemblance to his large nose.\nA bridge of gas connects the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) with the LMC, which evinces tidal interaction between the galaxies. The Magellanic Clouds have a common envelope of neutral hydrogen, indicating that they have been gravitationally bound for a long time. This bridge of gas is a star-forming site.\nThe Large Magellanic Cloud has a supermassive black hole at its center, estimated to have times the mass of the Sun. 21 hypervelocity stars have been discovered within the Milky Way's halo, which are thought to have been ejected from the Large Magellanic Cloud after gravitational interaction with this black hole via the Hills mechanism.\nX-ray sources.\nNo X-rays above background were detected from either cloud during the September 20, 1966, Nike-Tomahawk rocket flight nor that of two days later. The second took off from Johnston Atoll at 17:13 UTC and reached an apogee of , with spin-stabilization at 5.6 rps. The LMC was not detected in the X-ray range 8\u201380 keV.\nAnother was launched from same atoll at 11:32 UTC on October 29, 1968, to scan the LMC for X-rays. The first discrete X-ray source in Dorado was at RA 05h 20m Dec \u00b0, and it was the Large Magellanic Cloud. This X-ray source extended over about 12\u00b0 and is consistent with the Cloud. Its emission rate between 1.5\u201310.5 keV for a distance of 50 kpc is /s. An X-ray astronomy instrument was carried aboard a Thor missile launched from the same atoll on September 24, 1970, at 12:54 UTC and altitudes above , to search for the Small Magellanic Cloud and to extend observation of the LMC. The source in the LMC appeared extended and contained star \u03b5 Dor. The X-ray luminosity (Lx) over the range 1.5\u201312 keV was ().\nThe Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) appears in the constellations Mensa and Dorado. LMC X-1 (the first X-ray source in the LMC) is at RA 05h 40m 05s Dec \u00b0\u00a045\u2032\u00a051\u2033, and is a high-mass X-ray binary (star system) source (HMXB). Of the first five luminous LMC X-ray binaries: LMC X-1, X-2, X-3, X-4 and A 0538\u201366 (detected by Ariel 5 at A 0538\u201366), LMC X-2 is the one that is a bright low-mass X-ray binary system (LMXB) in the LMC.\nDEM L316 in the Cloud consists of two supernova remnants. Chandra X-ray spectra show that the hot gas shell on the upper left has an abundance of iron. This implies that the upper-left SNR is the product of a Type Ia supernova; much lower such abundance in the lower remnant belies a Type II supernova.\nA 16 ms X-ray pulsar is associated with SNR 0538-69.1. SNR 0540-697 was resolved using ROSAT.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39375", "revid": "6095424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39375", "title": "Space suit", "text": "Garment worn to protect a human in space\nA space suit (or spacesuit) is an environmental suit used for protection from the harsh environment of outer space, mainly from its vacuum as a highly specialized pressure suit, but also its temperature extremes, as well as radiation and micrometeoroids. Basic space suits are worn as a safety precaution inside spacecrafts in case of loss of cabin pressure. For extravehicular activity (EVA) more complex space suits are worn, featuring a portable life support system.\nPressure suits are in general needed at low pressure environments above the Armstrong limit, at around above Earth. Space suits augment pressure suits with complex system of equipment and environmental systems designed to keep the wearer comfortable, and to minimize the effort required to bend the limbs, resisting a soft pressure garment's natural tendency to stiffen against the vacuum. A self-contained oxygen supply and environmental control system is frequently employed to allow complete freedom of movement, independent of the spacecraft.\nThree types of space suits exist for different purposes: IVA (intravehicular activity), EVA (extravehicular activity), and IEVA (intra/extravehicular activity). IVA suits are meant to be worn inside a pressurized spacecraft, and are therefore lighter and more comfortable. IEVA suits are meant for use inside and outside the spacecraft, such as the Gemini G4C suit. They include more protection from the harsh conditions of space, such as protection from micrometeoroids and extreme temperature change. EVA suits, such as the EMU, are used outside spacecraft, for either planetary exploration or spacewalks. They must protect the wearer against all conditions of space, as well as provide mobility and functionality.\nThe first full-pressure suits for use at extreme altitudes were designed by individual inventors as early as the 1930s. The first space suit worn by a human in space was the Soviet SK-1 suit worn by Yuri Gagarin in 1961. Since then space suits have been worn beside in Earth orbit, en-route and on the surface of the Moon.\nRequirements.\nA space suit must perform several functions to allow its occupant to work safely and comfortably, inside or outside a spacecraft. It must provide:\nSecondary requirements.\nAdvanced suits better regulate the astronaut's temperature with a Liquid Cooling and Ventilation Garment (LCVG) in contact with the astronaut's skin, from which the heat is dumped into space through an external radiator in the PLSS.\nAdditional requirements for EVA include:\nAs part of astronautical hygiene control (i.e., protecting astronauts from extremes of temperature, radiation, etc.), a space suit is essential for extravehicular activity. The Apollo/Skylab A7L suit included eleven layers in all: an inner liner, a LCVG, a pressure bladder, a restraint layer, another liner, and a Thermal Micrometeoroid Garment consisting of five aluminized insulation layers and an external layer of white Ortho-Fabric. This space suit is capable of protecting the astronaut from temperatures ranging from to .\nDuring exploration of the Moon or Mars, there will be the potential for lunar or Martian dust to be retained on the space suit. When the space suit is removed on return to the spacecraft, there will be the potential for the dust to contaminate surfaces and increase the risks of inhalation and skin exposure. Astronautical hygienists are testing materials with reduced dust retention times and the potential to control the dust exposure risks during planetary exploration. Novel ingress and egress approaches, such as suitports, are being explored as well.\nIn NASA space suits, communications are provided via a cap worn over the head, which includes earphones and a microphone. Due to the coloration of the version used for Apollo and Skylab, which resembled the coloration of the comic strip character Snoopy, these caps became known as \"Snoopy caps\".\nOperating pressure.\nGenerally, to supply enough oxygen for respiration, a space suit using pure oxygen must have a pressure of about , equal to the partial pressure of oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere at sea level, plus CO2 and water vapor pressure, both of which must be subtracted from the alveolar pressure to get alveolar oxygen partial pressure in 100% oxygen atmospheres, by the alveolar gas equation. The latter two figures add to , which is why many modern space suits do not use , but (this is a slight overcorrection, as alveolar partial pressures at sea level are slightly less than the former). In space suits that use 20.7\u00a0kPa, the astronaut gets only 20.7\u00a0kPa \u2212 11.6\u00a0kPa = of oxygen, which is about the alveolar oxygen partial pressure attained at an altitude of above sea level. This is about 42% of normal partial pressure of oxygen at sea level, about the same as pressure in a commercial passenger jet aircraft, and is the realistic lower limit for safe ordinary space suit pressurization which allows reasonable capacity for work.\nOxygen prebreathing.\nWhen space suits below a specific operating pressure are used from craft that are pressurized to normal atmospheric pressure (such as the Space Shuttle), this requires astronauts to \"pre-breathe\" (meaning pre-breathe pure oxygen for a period) before donning their suits and depressurizing in the air lock. This procedure purges the body of dissolved nitrogen, so as to avoid decompression sickness due to rapid depressurization from a nitrogen-containing atmosphere.\nIn the US space shuttle, cabin pressure was reduced from normal atmospheric to 70kPa (equivalent to an altitude of about 3000m) for 24 hours before EVA, and after donning the suit, a pre-breathing period of 45 minutes on pure oxygen before decompressing to the EMU working pressure of 30kPa. In the ISS there is no cabin pressure reduction, instead a 4-hour oxygen pre-breathe at normal cabin pressure is used to desaturate nitrogen to an acceptable level. US studies show that a rapid decompression from 101kPa to 55kPa has an acceptable risk, and Russian studies show that direct decompression from 101kPa to 40kPa after 30 minutes of oxygen pre-breathing, roughly the time required for pre-EVA suit checks, is acceptable.\nPhysiological effects of unprotected space exposure.\nThe human body can briefly survive the hard vacuum of space unprotected, despite contrary depictions in some popular science fiction. Consciousness is retained for up to 15 seconds as the effects of oxygen starvation set in. No snap freeze effect occurs because all heat must be lost through thermal radiation or the evaporation of liquids, and the blood does not boil because it remains pressurized within the body, but human flesh expands up to about twice its volume due to ebullism in such conditions, giving the visual effect of a body builder rather than an overfilled balloon.\nIn space, there are highly energized subatomic particles that can cause radiation damage by disrupting essential biological processes. Exposure to radiation can create problems via two methods: the particles can react with water in the human body to produce free radicals that break DNA molecules apart, or by directly breaking the DNA molecules.\nTemperature in space can vary extremely depending on the exposure to radiant energy sources. Temperatures from solar radiation can reach up to , and in its absence, down to . Because of this, space suits must provide sufficient insulation and cooling for the conditions in which they will be used.\nThe vacuum environment of space has no pressure, so gases will expand and exposed liquids may evaporate. Some solids may sublimate. It is necessary to wear a suit that provides sufficient internal body pressure in space. The most immediate hazard is in attempting to hold one's breath during explosive decompression as the expansion of gas can damage the lungs by overexpansion rupture. These effects have been confirmed through various accidents (including in very-high-altitude conditions, outer space and training vacuum chambers). Human skin does not need to be protected from vacuum and is gas-tight by itself. It only needs to be mechanically restrained to retain its normal shape and the internal tissues to retain their volume. This can be accomplished with a tight-fitting elastic body suit and a helmet for containing breathing gases, known as a space activity suit (SAS).\nDesign concepts.\nA space suit should allow its user natural unencumbered movement. Nearly all designs try to maintain a constant volume no matter what movements the wearer makes. This is because mechanical work is needed to change the volume of a constant pressure system. If flexing a joint reduces the volume of the space suit, then the astronaut must do extra work every time they bend that joint, and they have to maintain a force to keep the joint bent. Even if this force is very small, it can be seriously fatiguing to constantly fight against one's suit. It also makes delicate movements very difficult. The work required to bend a joint is dictated by the formula\nformula_1\nwhere \"Vi\" and \"Vf\" are respectively the initial and final volume of the joint, \"P\" is the pressure in the suit, and \"W\" is the resultant work. It is generally true that all suits are more mobile at lower pressures. However, because a minimum internal pressure is dictated by life support requirements, the only means of further reducing work is to minimize the change in volume.\nAll space suit designs try to minimize or eliminate this problem. The most common solution is to form the suit out of multiple layers. The bladder layer is a rubbery, airtight layer much like a balloon. The restraint layer goes outside the bladder, and provides a specific shape for the suit. Since the bladder layer is larger than the restraint layer, the restraint takes all of the stresses caused by the pressure inside the suit. Since the bladder is not under pressure, it will not \"pop\" like a balloon, even if punctured. The restraint layer is shaped in such a way that bending a joint causes pockets of fabric, called \"gores\", to open up on the outside of the joint, while folds called \"convolutes\" fold up on the inside of the joint. The gores make up for the volume lost on the inside of the joint, and keep the suit at a nearly constant volume. However, once the gores are opened all the way, the joint cannot be bent any further without a considerable amount of work.\nIn some Russian space suits, strips of cloth were wrapped tightly around the cosmonaut's arms and legs outside the space suit to stop the space suit from ballooning when in space.\nThe outermost layer of a space suit, the Thermal Micrometeoroid Garment, provides thermal insulation, protection from micrometeoroids, and shielding from harmful solar radiation.\nThere are four main conceptual approaches to suit design:\nSoft suits.\nSoft suits typically are made mostly of fabrics. All soft suits have some hard parts; some even have hard joint bearings. Intra-vehicular activity and early EVA suits were soft suits.\nHard-shell suits.\nHard-shell suits are usually made of metal or composite materials and do not use fabric for joints. Hard suits joints use ball bearings and wedge-ring segments similar to an adjustable elbow of a stove pipe to allow a wide range of movement with the arms and legs. The joints maintain a constant volume of air internally and do not have any counter-force. Therefore, the astronaut does not need to exert to hold the suit in any position. Hard suits can also operate at higher pressures which would eliminate the need for an astronaut to pre-breathe oxygen to use a space suit before an EVA from a spacecraft cabin. The joints may get into a restricted or locked position requiring the astronaut to manipulate or program the joint. The NASA Ames Research Center experimental AX-5 hard-shell space suit had a flexibility rating of 95%. The wearer could move into 95% of the positions they could without the suit on.\nHybrid suits.\nHybrid suits have hard-shell parts and fabric parts. NASA's Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) uses a fiberglass Hard Upper Torso (HUT) and fabric limbs. ILC Dover's I-Suit replaces the HUT with a fabric soft upper torso to save weight, restricting the use of hard components to the joint bearings, helmet, waist seal, and rear entry hatch. Virtually all workable space suit designs incorporate hard components, particularly at interfaces such as the waist seal, bearings, and in the case of rear-entry suits, the back hatch, where all-soft alternatives are not viable.\nSkintight suits.\nSkintight suits, also known as mechanical counterpressure suits or space activity suits, are a proposed design which would use a heavy elastic body stocking to compress the body. The head is in a pressurized helmet, but the rest of the body is pressurized only by the elastic effect of the suit. This mitigates the constant volume problem, reduces the possibility of a space suit depressurization and gives a very lightweight suit. When not worn, the elastic garments may appear to be that of clothing for a small child. These suits may be very difficult to put on and face problems with providing a uniform pressure. Most proposals use the body's natural perspiration to keep cool. Sweat evaporates readily in vacuum and may desublime or deposit on objects nearby: optics, sensors, the astronaut's visor, and other surfaces. The icy film and sweat residue may contaminate sensitive surfaces and affect optical performance.\nContributing technologies.\nRelated preceding technologies include the stratonautical space suit, the gas mask used in World War II, the oxygen mask used by pilots of high-flying bombers in World War II, the high-altitude or vacuum suit required by pilots of the Lockheed U-2 and SR-71 Blackbird, the diving suit, rebreather, scuba diving gear, and many others.\nMany space suit designs are taken from the U.S. Air Force suits, which are designed to work in \"high-altitude aircraft pressure[s]\", such as the Mercury IVA suit or the Gemini G4C, or the Advanced Crew Escape Suits.\nGlove technology.\nThe Mercury IVA, the first U.S. space suit design, included lights at the tips of the gloves in order to provide visual aid. As the need for extravehicular activity grew, suits such as the Apollo A7L included gloves made of a metal fabric called Chromel-r in order to prevent punctures. In order to retain a better sense of touch for the astronauts, the fingertips of the gloves were made of silicone. With the shuttle program, it became necessary to be able to operate spacecraft modules, so the ACES suits featured gripping on the gloves. EMU gloves, which are used for spacewalks, are heated to keep the astronaut's hands warm. The Phase VI gloves, meant for use with the Mark III suit, are the first gloves to be designed with \"laser scanning technology, 3D computer modeling, stereo lithography, laser cutting technology and CNC machining\". This allows for cheaper, more accurate production, as well as increased detail in joint mobility and flexibility.\nLife support technology.\nPrior to the Apollo missions, life support in space suits was connected to the space capsule via an umbilical cable. However, with the Apollo missions, life support was configured into a removable capsule called the Portable Life Support System that allowed the astronaut to explore the Moon without having to be attached to the space craft. The EMU space suit, used for spacewalks, allows the astronaut to manually control the internal environment of the suit. The Mark III suit has a backpack containing about 12 pounds of liquid air for breathing, pressurization, and heat exchange.\nHelmet technology.\nThe development of the spheroidal dome helmet was key in balancing the need for field of view, pressure compensation, and low weight. One inconvenience with some space suits is the head being fixed facing forwards and being unable to turn to look sideways. Astronauts call this effect \"alligator head\".\nList of space suit models.\nUnited States suit models.\nSpaceX suit (\"Starman suit\").\nIn February 2015, SpaceX began developing a space suit for astronauts to wear within the Dragon 2 space capsule. Its appearance was jointly designed by Jose Fernandez\u2014a Hollywood costume designer known for his works for superhero and science fiction films\u2014and SpaceX founder and CEO Elon Musk. The first images of the suit were revealed in September 2017. A mannequin, called \"Starman\" (after David Bowie's song of the same name), wore the SpaceX space suit during the maiden launch of the Falcon Heavy in February 2018. For this exhibition launch, the suit was not pressurized and carried no sensors.\nThe suit, which is suitable for vacuum, offers protection against cabin depressurization through a single tether at the astronaut's thigh that feeds air and electronic connections. The helmets, which are 3D-printed, contain microphones and speakers. As the suits need the tether connection and do not offer protection against radiation, they are not used for extra-vehicular activities. The suits are custom-made for each astronaut.\nIn 2018, NASA commercial crew astronauts Bob Behnken, and Doug Hurley tested the spacesuit inside the Dragon 2 spacecraft in order to familiarize themselves with the suit. They wore it in the Crew Dragon Demo-2 flight launched on 30 May 2020. The suit is worn by astronauts involved in Commercial Crew Program missions involving SpaceX.\nOn 4 May 2024, SpaceX unveiled a spacesuit designed for extravehicular activity based on the IVA suit for Polaris Dawn mission in Polaris program. As with the IVA suit, the helmets are 3D-printed, though the EVA helmet incorporates a heads-up display providing information and a camera on suit metrics during operation. It is more mobile, includes new thermal insulation fabrics, and materials used Falcon\u2019s interstage and Crew Dragon\u2019s external unpressurized trunk.\nFuture NASA contracted suits.\nOn 1 June 2022, NASA announced it had selected competing Axiom Space and Collins Aerospace to develop and provide astronauts with next generation spacesuit and spacewalk systems to first test and later use outside the International Space Station, as well as on the lunar surface for the crewed Artemis missions, and prepare for human missions to Mars.\nEmerging technologies.\nSeveral companies and universities are developing technologies and prototypes which represent improvements over current space suits.\nAdditive manufacturing.\n3D printing (additive manufacturing) can be used to reduce the mass of hard-shell space suits while retaining the high mobility they provide. This fabrication method also allows for the potential for in-suit fabrication and repair of suits, a capability which is not currently available, but will likely be necessary for Martian exploration. The University of Maryland began development of a prototype 3D printed hard suit in 2016, based on the kinematics of the AX-5. The prototype arm segment is designed to be evaluated in the Space Systems Laboratory glovebox to compare mobility to traditional soft suits. Initial research has focused on the feasibility of printing rigid suit elements, bearing races, ball bearings, seals, and sealing surfaces.\nAstronaut Glove Challenge.\nThere are certain difficulties in designing a dexterous space suit glove and there are limitations to the current designs. For this reason, the Centennial Astronaut Glove Challenge was created to build a better glove. Competitions have been held in 2007 and 2009, and another is planned. The 2009 contest required the glove to be covered with a micro-meteorite layer.\nAouda.X.\nSince 2009, the Austrian Space Forum has been developing \"Aouda.X\", an experimental Mars analogue space suit focusing on an advanced human\u2013machine interface and on-board computing network to increase situational awareness. The suit is designed to study contamination vectors in planetary exploration analogue environments and create limitations depending on the pressure regime chosen for a simulation.\nSince 2012, for the Mars2013 analogue mission by the Austrian Space Forum to Erfoud, Morocco, the Aouda.X analogue space suit has a sister in the form of Aouda.S. This is a slightly less sophisticated suit meant primarily to assist Aouda.X operations and be able to study the interactions between two (analogue) astronauts in similar suits.\nThe Aouda.X and Aouda.S space suits have been named after the fictional princess from the Jules Verne's 1873 novel \"Around the World in Eighty Days\". A public display mock-up of Aouda.X (called Aouda.D) is currently on display at the Dachstein Ice Cave in Obertraun, Austria, after the experiments done there in 2012.\nAxiom Space and Prada.\nIn 2024, at the International Astronautical Congress in Milan, Italy, Axiom Space and Prada showed the results of an ongoing collaboration to develop a spacesuit for NASA's Artemis III mission.\nBio-Suit.\nBio-Suit is a space activity suit under development at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which as of 2006[ [update]] consisted of several lower leg prototypes. Bio-suit is custom fit to each wearer, using laser body scanning.\nConstellation Space Suit system.\nOn August 2, 2006, NASA indicated plans to issue a Request for Proposal (RFP) for the design, development, certification, production, and sustaining engineering of the Constellation Space Suit to meet the needs of the Constellation Program. NASA foresaw a single suit capable of supporting: survivability during launch, entry and abort; zero-gravity EVA; lunar surface EVA; and Mars surface EVA.\nOn June 11, 2008, NASA awarded a US$745 million contract to Oceaneering International to create the new space suit.\nFinal Frontier Design IVA Space Suit.\nFinal Frontier Design (FFD) is developing a commercial full IVA space suit, with their first suit completed in 2010. FFD's suits are intended as a light-weight, highly mobile, and inexpensive commercial space suits. Since 2011, FFD has upgraded IVA suit's designs, hardware, processes, and capabilities. FFD has built a total of 7 IVA space suit (2016) assemblies for various institutions and customers since founding, and has conducted high fidelity human testing in simulators, aircraft, microgravity, and hypobaric chambers. FFD has a Space Act Agreement with NASA's Commercial Space Capabilities Office to develop and execute a Human Rating Plan for FFD IVA suit. FFD categorizes their IVA suits according to their mission: Terra for Earth-based testing, Stratos for high altitude flights, and Exos for orbital space flights. Each suit category has different requirements for manufacturing controls, validations, and materials, but are of a similar architecture.\nI-Suit.\nThe I-Suit is a space suit prototype also constructed by ILC Dover, which incorporates several design improvements over the EMU, including a weight-saving soft upper torso. Both the Mark III and the I-Suit have taken part in NASA's annual Desert Research and Technology Studies (D-RATS) field trials, during which suit occupants interact with one another, and with rovers and other equipment.\nMark III.\nThe Mark III is a NASA prototype, constructed by ILC Dover, which incorporates a hard lower torso section and a mix of soft and hard components. The Mark III is markedly more mobile than previous suits, despite its high operating pressure (), which makes it a \"zero-prebreathe\" suit, meaning that astronauts would be able to transition directly from a one-atmosphere, mixed-gas space station environment, such as that on the International Space Station, to the suit, without risking decompression sickness, which can occur with rapid depressurization from an atmosphere containing nitrogen or another inert gas.\nMX-2.\nThe MX-2 is a space suit analogue constructed at the University of Maryland's Space Systems Laboratory. The MX-2 is used for crewed neutral buoyancy testing at the Space Systems Lab's Neutral Buoyancy Research Facility. By approximating the work envelope of a real EVA suit, without meeting the requirements of a flight-rated suit, the MX-2 provides an inexpensive platform for EVA research, compared to using EMU suits at facilities like NASA's Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory.\nThe MX-2 has an operating pressure of 2.5\u20134 psi. It is a rear-entry suit, featuring a fiberglass HUT. Air, LCVG cooling water, and power are open loop systems, provided through an umbilical. The suit contains a Mac Mini computer to capture sensor data, such as suit pressure, inlet and outlet air temperatures, and heart rate. Resizable suit elements and adjustable ballast allow the suit to accommodate subjects ranging in height from , and with a weight range of .\nNorth Dakota suit.\nBeginning in May 2006, five North Dakota colleges collaborated on a new space suit prototype, funded by a US$100,000 grant from NASA, to demonstrate technologies which could be incorporated into a planetary suit. The suit was tested in the Theodore Roosevelt National Park badlands of western North Dakota. The suit has a mass of without a life support backpack, and costs only a fraction of the standard US$12,000,000 cost for a flight-rated NASA space suit. The suit was developed in just over a year by students from the University of North Dakota, North Dakota State, Dickinson State, the state College of Science and Turtle Mountain Community College. The mobility of the North Dakota suit can be attributed to its low operating pressure; while the North Dakota suit was field tested at a pressure of differential, NASA's EMU suit operates at a pressure of , a pressure designed to supply approximately sea-level oxygen partial pressure for respiration (see discussion above).\nPXS.\nNASA's Prototype eXploration Suit (PXS), like the Z-series, is a rear-entry suit compatible with suitports. The suit has components which could be 3D printed during missions to a range of specifications, to fit different individuals or changing mobility requirements.\nSuitports.\nA suitport is a theoretical alternative to an airlock, designed for use in hazardous environments and in human spaceflight, especially planetary surface exploration. In a suitport system, a rear-entry space suit is attached and sealed against the outside of a spacecraft, such that an astronaut can enter and seal up the suit, then go on EVA, without the need for an airlock or depressurizing the spacecraft cabin. Suitports require less mass and volume than airlocks, provide dust mitigation, and prevent cross-contamination of the inside and outside environments. Patents for suitport designs were filed in 1996 by Philip Culbertson Jr. of NASA's Ames Research Center and in 2003 by Joerg Boettcher, Stephen Ransom, and Frank Steinsiek.\nZ-series.\nIn 2012, NASA introduced the Z-1 space suit, the first in the Z-series of space suit prototypes designed by NASA specifically for planetary extravehicular activity. The Z-1 space suit includes an emphasis on mobility and protection for space missions. It features a soft torso versus the hard torsos seen in previous NASA EVA space suits, which reduces mass. It has been labeled the \"Buzz Lightyear suit\" due to its green streaks for a design.\nIn 2014, NASA released the design for the Z-2 prototype, the next model in the Z-series. NASA conducted a poll asking the public to decide on a design for the Z-2 space suit. The designs, created by fashion students from Philadelphia University, were \"Technology\", \"Trends in Society\", and \"Biomimicry\". The design \"Technology\" won, and the prototype is built with technologies like 3D printing. The Z-2 suit will also differ from the Z-1 suit in that the torso reverts to the hard shell, as seen in NASA's EMU suit.\nEuroSuit.\nIn 2023, CNES contracted with Spartan Space to develop a European IVA spacesuit named EuroSuit and plans to test it on the ISS in 2026.\nIn fiction.\nSpace suits are a common staple of science fiction. They appeared in sf works as early as 19th century (Jules Verne's \"From the Earth to the Moon\", 1865).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39376", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39376", "title": "Engagement ring", "text": "Ring indicating that the person wearing it is engaged to be married\nAn engagement ring, also known as a betrothal ring, is a ring indicating that the person wearing it is engaged to be married, especially in Western cultures. A ring is presented as an engagement gift by a partner to their prospective spouse when they propose marriage to represent a formal agreement to future marriage. In most Western countries, engagement rings are usually worn only by women, and they are typically adorned with diamonds. In some countries, partners wear matching rings, and engagement rings may also be used as wedding rings. In the Anglosphere, the ring is customarily worn on the left hand ring finger, but customs vary across the world.\nEngagement rings have been common in Western countries since at least the time of the Roman Empire. They began to feature diamonds during the Renaissance, and became especially closely associated with diamonds after a marketing campaign by the De Beers Group between 1939 and 1979.\nIn some Christian traditions, engagement rings may be blessed and then worn during a betrothal ceremony of a couple, but neither the engagement ring nor any other ring is worn at the time when the wedding ring is put by the groom on the finger of the bride as part of the marriage ceremony, and sometimes by the bride onto the groom's finger. After the wedding, the engagement ring is sometimes put back on and is usually worn on the outside of the wedding ring.\nHistory.\nAncient times.\nAlthough the ancient Egyptians are sometimes credited with inventing the engagement ring, and the ancient Greeks with adopting the tradition, the history of the engagement ring can only be reliably traced as far back as ancient Rome.\nIn many countries, engagement rings are placed on the ring finger of the left hand. At one time it was believed that this finger contained a vein (the vena amoris) that led to the heart. This idea was popularized by Henry Swinburne in \"A treatise of Spousals, or Matrimonial Contracts\" (1686). The story seems to have its origin in the ancient Roman book \"Attic Nights\" by Aulus Gellius quoting Apion's \"Aegyptiacorum\", where the alleged vein was originally a \"nervus\" (a word that can be translated either as \"nerve\" or \"sinew\").\nThe popular belief that an engagement ring was originally part of the bride price which represented purchase and ownership of the bride, has been called into question by contemporary scholarship.\nIn the second century BC, the Roman bride-to-be was given two rings, a gold one which she wore in public, and one made of iron which she wore at home while attending to household duties. At one time Roman citizens wore rings made of iron. In later years senators who served as ambassadors were given gold seal rings for official use when abroad. Later the privilege of wearing gold rings was extended to other public officials, then to the knights, later to all freeborn, and finally under Justinian, to freedmen. For several centuries it was the custom for Romans to wear iron rings at home, gold rings in public. During this period a girl or woman might receive two engagement rings, one of iron and one of gold.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe mid-7th century Visigothic Code required \"that when the ceremony of betrothal has been performed ... and the ring shall have been given or accepted as a pledge, although nothing may have been committed to writing, the promise shall, under no circumstances, be broken.\"\nIn 860 AD, Pope Nicholas I wrote a letter to Boris I of Bulgaria in reply to questions regarding differences between Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox practices. Pope Nicholas describes how in the Western church the man gives his betrothed an engagement ring. At the Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1215, convoked by Pope Innocent III, the banns of marriage was instituted, prohibiting clandestine marriages and requiring that marriages be made public in advance. Some legal scholars have seen in this a parallel with the engagement-ring tradition described by Pope Nicholas I.\nRenaissance.\nThe first well-documented use of a diamond ring to signify engagement was by the Archduke Maximilian of Austria in the imperial court of Vienna in 1477, upon his betrothal to Mary of Burgundy. This then influenced those of higher social class and of significant wealth to give diamond rings to their loved ones.\nReformation.\nDuring the Protestant Reformation the wedding ring replaced the betrothal ring as the primary ring associated with marriage. In Catholic countries the transition took place somewhat later.\nEnlightenment.\nDuring the Age of Enlightenment both the gimmal rings and posie rings were popular, although the latter was more often used as an expression of sentiment than to indicate a formal engagement.\nVictorian era.\nIn South Africa, diamonds were first found in 1866, although they were not identified as such until 1867. By 1872, the output of the diamond mines exceeded one million carats per year. As production increased, those of lesser means were able to join in on this movement. However, diamond engagement rings were for a long time seen as the domain of the nobility and aristocracy, and tradition often favoured simpler engagement bands.\nIn 1852, the Koh-i-Noor diamond was re-cut and embellished in Queen Victoria's crown. This triggered a diamond rush throughout the world.\n20th century.\nIn the United States, the popularity of diamond engagement rings declined after World War I, even more so than after the onset of the Great Depression. \nIn 1938, the diamond cartel De Beers began a marketing campaign that would have a major impact on engagement rings. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the price of diamonds collapsed. At the same time, market research indicated that engagement rings were going out of style with the younger generation. Before World War II, only 10% of American engagement rings contained a diamond. While the first phase of the marketing campaign consisted of market research, the advertising phase began in 1939. One of the first elements of this campaign was to educate the public about the 4 Cs (cut, carats, color, and clarity). In 1947 the slogan \"a diamond is forever\" was introduced. Ultimately, the De Beers campaign sought to persuade the consumer that an engagement ring is indispensable, and that a diamond is the only acceptable stone for an engagement ring. The sales of diamonds in the United States rose from $23 million to $2.1 billion between 1939 and 1979.\nLaw professor Margaret F. Brining links the surge in engagement ring sales in the USA after 1945 to the abolishment of the \"breach of promise\", that had entitled a woman whose fianc\u00e9 had broken off their engagement to sue him for damages. This rule of law was especially important for many women who had been sexually intimate with the fianc\u00e9, but were socially expected to be virgins in a new marriage, therefore lost \"market value\". After the gradual abolishment of that law action in all states the expensive engagement ring rose to popularity as a new financial security in case of a break-up, since it was custom for the women to keep the ring (partly only under the condition that the break-up was not seen as her fault).\n21st century.\nIn the early 21st century, the jewellery industry started marketing engagement rings for men under the name \"mangagement rings\".\nIndustry.\nIn the 20th century, if he could afford it, the typical Western groom privately selected and purchased an engagement ring, which he then presented to his desired bride when he proposed marriage. In countries where both partners wear engagement rings, matching rings may be selected and purchased together. In the United States and Canada, where only women traditionally wear engagement rings, women also occasionally present their partners with an engagement gift.\nLike all jewellery, the price for an engagement ring varies considerably depending on the materials used: the design of the ring, whether it includes a gemstone, the value of any gemstone, and the seller. The price of the gemstones, if any, in the ring depends on the type and quality of the gem. Diamonds have a standardized description that values them according to their carat weight, color, clarity, and cut. Other gemstones, such as sapphires, rubies, and emeralds have different systems. The jewellery may be chosen to honor a family tradition, to use family heirlooms, to have an unusual style, to have socially responsible characteristics (e.g., a style that is not associated with blood diamond controversy or the pollution caused by gold mining and cyanide process), to fit the individual's stylistic preferences, or to manage cost. Synthetic diamonds and diamond substitutes such as cubic zirconias and moissanites are also popular choices that are socially responsible and reduce cost while maintaining the desired appearance.\nThe idea that a man should spend a significant fraction of his annual income for an engagement ring originated from De Beers marketing materials in the mid-20th century in an effort to increase the sale of diamonds. In the 1930s, they suggested that a man should spend the equivalent of one month's income in the engagement ring. In the 1980s, they suggested that he should spend two months' income on it (three months in Japan). In 2012, the average cost of an engagement ring in the US as reported by the industry was US$4,000. In a 2015 scholarly study, almost a quarter of couples said that they did not buy a ring, and another third spent less than US$2000 on it. Less than 15% of couples spent $4,000 or more. In the UK, estimates of the average cost of an engagement ring range from \u00a31200 to \u00a32000. Scholarly research indicates that expensive engagement rings are associated with early divorces, possibly because spending more than US$2,000 on an engagement ring is strongly associated with debt-related stress. Couples that spend less money on engagement rings and the wedding ceremony tend to have longer marriages and a lower risk of divorce.\nOne reason for the increased popularity of expensive engagement rings is its relationship to human sexuality and the woman's marriage prospects. In the United States, until the Great Depression, a man who broke off a marriage engagement could be sued for breach of promise. Monetary damages included actual expenses incurred in preparing for the wedding, plus damages for emotional distress and loss of other marriage prospects. Damages were greatly increased if the woman had engaged in sexual intercourse with her fianc\u00e9. Beginning in 1935, these laws were repealed or limited. However, the social and financial cost of a broken engagement was no less: marriage was the only financially sound option for most women, and if she was no longer a virgin, her prospects for a suitable future marriage were greatly decreased. The diamond engagement ring thus became a source of financial security for the woman.\nThe online purchase of engagement rings is growing, disrupting the market for the diamonds by bringing greater transparency to an industry that has traditionally relied on opacity. Online diamond retailers and e-commerce platforms include Blue Nile, Brilliant Earth, and Costco.\nStyles.\nEngagement rings, like any other kind of jewellery, come in many different styles.\nGold (Available in Yellow Gold, White Gold and Rose Gold) and platinum are preferred for engagement rings, but common metal types such as titanium, silver, and stainless steel are also used for engagement rings. This allows for the bride-to-be to exert her own individual style into the ring in a simple manner.\nIn the United States, where engagement rings are worn by women, diamonds have been widely featured in engagement rings since the middle of the 20th century. Solitaire rings have one diamond. The most common setting for engagement rings is the solitaire prong setting, which was popularized by Tiffany &amp; Co. in 1886 and its six-claw prong setting design sold under the \"Tiffany setting\" trademark. The modern favorite cut for an engagement ring is the brilliant cut, which provides the maximum amount of sparkle to the gemstone. The traditional engagement rings may have different prong settings and bands. Another major category is engagement rings with side stones. Rings with a larger diamond set in the middle and smaller diamonds on the side fit under this category. Three-stone diamond engagement rings, sometimes called \"trinity rings\" or \"trilogy rings\", are rings with three matching diamonds set horizontally in a row with the bigger stone placed in the center. The three diamonds on the ring are typically said to represent the couple's past, present, and future, but other people give religious significance to the arrangement.\nA wedding set, or bridal set, includes an engagement ring and a wedding band that matches and can be bought as a set. In some cases, the wedding ring looks incomplete; it is only when the two halves, engagement and wedding, are assembled that the ring looks whole. In other cases, a wedding set consists of two rings that match stylistically and are worn stacked, although either piece would look appropriate as a separate ring. Although the wedding band is not to be worn until the wedding day, the two rings are usually sold together as a wedding set. After the wedding, the bride may choose to have the two pieces welded together, to increase convenience and reduce the likelihood of losing one of the rings. A trio ring set includes a women's engagement ring, a women's wedding band, and a men's wedding band. These sets often have matching rings and are lower in price.\nIn Nordic countries, engagement rings are worn by both men and women. Traditionally they are plain gold bands, although more ornate designs and other materials are gaining popularity. In the United States, engagement rings typically feature a dominant center stone, while wedding bands are usually simpler rings or bands of small stones exchanged during the ceremony. The two are distinct pieces often worn together.\nIn North America and the United Kingdom, it is customarily worn on the left hand ring finger. Similar traditions purportedly date to classical times, dating back from an early usage reportedly referring to the fourth finger of the left hand as containing the \"vena amoris\" or \"vein of love\". This custom may have its origins in an ancient Egyptian myth that the finger contained a vein leading directly to the heart, or it may simply be because the heart lies slightly to the left side of the body. In Germany the ring is worn on the left hand while engaged, but moved to the right hand when married. In Poland and Turkey, the engagement ring and wedding band are traditionally worn on the right hand but modern practice varies considerably.\nLegal ownership.\nTradition generally holds that if the betrothal fails because the man himself breaks off the engagement, the woman is not obliged to return the ring. This reflects the ring's role as a form of compensation for the woman's damaged reputation. Legally, this condition can be subject to either a modified or a strict fault rule. Under the former, the fianc\u00e9 can demand the return of the ring unless he breaks the engagement. Under the latter, the fianc\u00e9 is entitled to the return unless his actions caused the breakup of the relationship, the same as the traditional approach. However, a no-fault rule is being advanced in some jurisdictions, under which the fianc\u00e9 is always entitled to the return of the ring. The ring only becomes the property of the woman when marriage occurs. An unconditional gift approach is another possibility, wherein the ring is always treated as a gift, to be kept by the fianc\u00e9e whether or not the relationship progresses to marriage. Recent court rulings have determined that the date in which the ring was offered can determine the condition of the gift. E.g. Valentine's Day and Christmas are widely recognized as gift-giving holidays in the United States and some other countries. A ring offered in the form of a Christmas present is likely to remain the personal property of the recipient in the event of a breakup.\nIn most states of the United States, engagement rings are considered \"conditional gifts\" under the legal rules of property. This is an exception to the general rule that gifts cannot be revoked once properly given. See, for example, the case of \"Meyer v. Mitnick\", 625 N.W.2d 136 (Michigan, 2001), whose ruling found the following reasoning persuasive: \"the so-called 'modern trend' holds that because an engagement ring is an inherently conditional gift, once the engagement has been broken, the ring should be returned to the donor. Thus, the question of who broke the engagement and why, or who was 'at fault,' is irrelevant. This is the no-fault line of cases.\" Though in certain states, whether a judicial action can be maintained at all to require return of an engagement ring is blocked by statute, as many states have statutes which state that no civil action shall be maintained for breach of promise to marry. A 2024 Massachusetts ruling adopting no-fault return (overturning a 1959 ruling) cited the adoption of no-fault divorce by the state legislature as a sign that this was the modern expectation.\nOne case in New South Wales, Australia ended in the man suing his former fianc\u00e9e because she threw the ring away, after he told her she could keep it even though the marriage plans had fallen through. The Supreme Court of New South Wales held that, despite what the man said, the ring remained a conditional gift (partly because his saying that she could keep it reflected his desire to salvage the relationship) and she was ordered to pay him its A$15,250 cost.\nIn England and Wales, the gift of an engagement ring is presumed to be an absolute gift to the fianc\u00e9e. This presumption may be rebutted however by proving that the ring was given on condition (express or implied) that it must be returned if the marriage did not take place, for whatever reason. This was decided in the case \"Jacobs v Davis\" (1917).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39377", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39377", "title": "Similarity (geometry)", "text": "Property of objects which are scaled or mirrored versions of each other\nIn Euclidean geometry, two objects are similar if they have the same shape, or if one has the same shape as the mirror image of the other. More precisely, one can be obtained from the other by uniformly scaling (enlarging or reducing), possibly with additional translation, rotation and reflection. This means that either object can be rescaled, repositioned, and reflected, so as to coincide precisely with the other object. If two objects are similar, each is congruent to the result of a particular uniform scaling of the other.\nFor example, all circles are similar to each other, all squares are similar to each other, and all equilateral triangles are similar to each other. On the other hand, ellipses are not all similar to each other, rectangles are not all similar to each other, and isosceles triangles are not all similar to each other. This is because two ellipses can have different width to height ratios, two rectangles can have different length to breadth ratios, and two isosceles triangles can have different base angles. \nIf two angles of a triangle have measures equal to the measures of two angles of another triangle, then the triangles are similar. Corresponding sides of similar polygons are in proportion, and corresponding angles of similar polygons have the same measure.\nTwo congruent shapes are similar, with a scale factor of 1. However, some school textbooks specifically exclude congruent triangles from their definition of similar triangles by insisting that the sizes must be different if the triangles are to qualify as similar.\nSimilar triangles.\nTwo triangles, \u25b3\"ABC\" and \u25b3\"A'B'C\"' are similar if and only if corresponding angles have the same measure: this implies that they are similar if and only if the lengths of corresponding sides are proportional. It can be shown that two triangles having congruent angles (\"equiangular triangles\") are similar, that is, the corresponding sides can be proved to be proportional. This is known as the AAA similarity theorem. Note that the \"AAA\" is a mnemonic: each one of the three A's refers to an \"angle\". Due to this theorem, several authors simplify the definition of similar triangles to only require that the corresponding three angles are congruent.\nThere are several criteria each of which is necessary and sufficient for two triangles to be similar:\nIf \u2220\"BAC\" is equal in measure to \u2220\"B'A'C',\" and \u2220\"ABC\" is equal in measure to \u2220\"A'B'C',\" then this implies that \u2220\"ACB\" is equal in measure to \u2220\"A'C'B\"' and the triangles are similar.\nformula_1 \nThis is equivalent to saying that one triangle (or its mirror image) is an enlargement of the other.\nformula_2\nThis is known as the SAS similarity criterion. The \"SAS\" is a mnemonic: each one of the two S's refers to a \"side\"; the A refers to an \"angle\" between the two sides.\nSymbolically, we write the similarity and dissimilarity of two triangles \u25b3\"ABC\" and \u25b3\"A'B'C\"' as follows:\nformula_3\nThere are several elementary results concerning similar triangles in Euclidean geometry:\nGiven a triangle \u25b3\"ABC\" and a line segment one can, with a ruler and compass, find a point F such that \u25b3\"ABC\" ~ \u25b3\"DEF\". The statement that point F satisfying this condition exists is Wallis's postulate and is logically equivalent to Euclid's parallel postulate. In hyperbolic geometry (where Wallis's postulate is false) similar triangles are congruent.\nIn the axiomatic treatment of Euclidean geometry given by George David Birkhoff (see Birkhoff's axioms) the SAS similarity criterion given above was used to replace both Euclid's parallel postulate and the SAS axiom which enabled the dramatic shortening of Hilbert's axioms.\nSimilar triangles provide the basis for many synthetic (without the use of coordinates) proofs in Euclidean geometry. Among the elementary results that can be proved this way are: the angle bisector theorem, the geometric mean theorem, Ceva's theorem, Menelaus's theorem and the Pythagorean theorem. Similar triangles also provide the foundations for right triangle trigonometry.\nOther similar polygons.\nThe concept of similarity extends to polygons with more than three sides. Given any two similar polygons, corresponding sides taken in the same sequence (even if clockwise for one polygon and counterclockwise for the other) are proportional and corresponding angles taken in the same sequence are equal in measure. However, proportionality of corresponding sides is not by itself sufficient to prove similarity for polygons beyond triangles (otherwise, for example, all rhombi would be similar). Likewise, equality of all angles in sequence is not sufficient to guarantee similarity (otherwise all rectangles would be similar). A sufficient condition for similarity of polygons is that corresponding sides and diagonals are proportional.\nFor given n, all regular n-gons are similar.\nSimilar curves.\nSeveral types of curves have the property that all examples of that type are similar to each other. These include:\nIn Euclidean space.\nA similarity (also called a similarity transformation or similitude) of a Euclidean space is a bijection f from the space onto itself that multiplies all distances by the same positive real number r, so that for any two points x and y we have\nformula_4\nwhere \"d\"(\"x\",\"y\") is the Euclidean distance from x to y. The scalar r has many names in the literature including; the \"ratio of similarity\", the \"stretching factor\" and the \"similarity coefficient\". When \"r\" = 1 a similarity is called an isometry (rigid transformation). Two sets are called similar if one is the image of the other under a similarity.\nAs a map &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; a similarity of ratio r takes the form\nformula_5\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is an \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" orthogonal matrix and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a translation vector.\nSimilarities preserve planes, lines, perpendicularity, parallelism, midpoints, inequalities between distances and line segments. Similarities preserve angles but do not necessarily preserve orientation, \"direct similitudes\" preserve orientation and \"opposite similitudes\" change it.\nThe similarities of Euclidean space form a group under the operation of composition called the \"similarities group\" S. The direct similitudes form a normal subgroup of S and the Euclidean group \"E\"(\"n\") of isometries also forms a normal subgroup. The similarities group S is itself a subgroup of the affine group, so every similarity is an affine transformation.\nOne can view the Euclidean plane as the complex plane, that is, as a 2-dimensional space over the reals. The 2D similarity transformations can then be expressed in terms of complex arithmetic and are given by \nwhere a and b are complex numbers, \"a\" \u2260 0. When |\"a\"|= 1, these similarities are isometries.\nArea ratio and volume ratio.\nThe ratio between the areas of similar figures is equal to the square of the ratio of corresponding lengths of those figures (for example, when the side of a square or the radius of a circle is multiplied by three, its area is multiplied by nine \u2014 i.e. by three squared). The altitudes of similar triangles are in the same ratio as corresponding sides. If a triangle has a side of length b and an altitude drawn to that side of length h then a similar triangle with corresponding side of length kb will have an altitude drawn to that side of length kh. The area of the first triangle is formula_8 while the area of the similar triangle will be \nformula_9\nSimilar figures which can be decomposed into similar triangles will have areas related in the same way. The relationship holds for figures that are not rectifiable as well.\nThe ratio between the volumes of similar figures is equal to the cube of the ratio of corresponding lengths of those figures (for example, when the edge of a cube or the radius of a sphere is multiplied by three, its volume is multiplied by 27 \u2014 i.e. by three cubed).\nGalileo's square\u2013cube law concerns similar solids. If the ratio of similitude (ratio of corresponding sides) between the solids is k, then the ratio of surface areas of the solids will be \"k\"2, while the ratio of volumes will be \"k\"3.\nSimilarity with a center.\nIf a similarity has exactly one invariant point: a point that the similarity keeps unchanged, then this only point is called \"center\" of the similarity.\nOn the first image below the title, on the left, one or another similarity shrinks a regular polygon into a concentric one, the vertices of which are each on a side of the previous polygon. This rotational reduction is repeated, so the initial polygon is extended into an abyss of regular polygons. The center of the similarity is the common center of the successive polygons. A red segment joins a vertex of the initial polygon to its image under the similarity, followed by a red segment going to the following image of vertex, and so on to form a spiral. Actually we can see more than three direct similarities on this first image, because every regular polygon is invariant under certain direct similarities, more precisely certain rotations the center of which is the center of the polygon, and a composition of direct similarities is also a direct similarity. For example we see the image of the initial regular pentagon under a homothety of negative ratio \u2212k, which is a similarity of \u00b1180\u00b0 angle and a positive ratio equal to k.\nBelow the title on the right, the second image shows a similarity decomposed into a rotation and a homothety. Similarity and rotation have the same angle of +135 degrees modulo 360 degrees. Similarity and homothety have the same ratio of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; multiplicative inverse of the ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (square root of 2) of the inverse similarity. Point S is the common center of the three transformations: rotation, homothety and similarity. For example point W is the image of F under the rotation, and point T is the image of W under the homothety, more briefly\nformula_10\nby naming R, H and D the previous rotation, homothety and similarity, with \u201cD\" like \"Direct\".\nThis direct similarity that transforms triangle \u25b3\"EFA\" into triangle \u25b3\"ATB\" can be decomposed into a rotation and a homothety of same center S in several manners. For example, \"D\" = \"R\" \u25cb \"H\" = \"H\" \u25cb \"R\", the last decomposition being only represented on the image. To get D we can also compose in any order a rotation of \u221245\u00b0 angle and a homothety of ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\nWith \"M\" like \"Mirror\" and \"I\" like \"Indirect\", if M is the reflection with respect to line CW, then \"M\" \u25cb \"D\" = \"I\" is the indirect similarity that transforms segment like D into segment , but transforms point E into B and point A into A itself. Square ACBT is the image of ABEF under similarity I of ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; Point A is the center of this similarity because any point K being invariant under it fulfills formula_11 only possible if \"AK\" = 0, otherwise written \"A\" = \"K\".\nHow to construct the center S of direct similarity D from square ABEF, how to find point S center of a rotation of +135\u00b0 angle that transforms ray &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; into ray &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;? This is an inscribed angle problem plus a question of orientation. The set of points P such that formula_12 is an arc of circle that joins E and A, of which the two radius leading to E and A form a central angle of 2(180\u00b0 \u2212 135\u00b0) = 2 \u00d7 45\u00b0 = 90\u00b0. This set of points is the blue quarter of circle of center F inside square ABEF. In the same manner, point S is a member of the blue quarter of circle of center T inside square BCAT. So point S is the intersection point of these two quarters of circles.\nIn general metric spaces.\nIn a general metric space (\"X\", \"d\"), an exact similitude is a function f from the metric space X into itself that multiplies all distances by the same positive scalar r, called f 's contraction factor, so that for any two points x and y we have\nformula_13\nWeaker versions of similarity would for instance have f be a bi-Lipschitz function and the scalar r a limit\nformula_14\nThis weaker version applies when the metric is an effective resistance on a topologically self-similar set.\nA self-similar subset of a metric space (\"X\", \"d\") is a set K for which there exists a finite set of similitudes { \"fs\"}\"s\"\u2208\"S\" with contraction factors 0 \u2264 \"rs\" &lt; 1 such that K is the unique compact subset of X for which\nformula_15\nThese self-similar sets have a self-similar measure \"\u03bcD\" with dimension D given by the formula\nformula_16\nwhich is often (but not always) equal to the set's Hausdorff dimension and packing dimension. If the overlaps between the \"fs\"(\"K\") are \"small\", we have the following simple formula for the measure:\nformula_17\nTopology.\nIn topology, a metric space can be constructed by defining a similarity instead of a distance. The similarity is a function such that its value is greater when two points are closer (contrary to the distance, which is a measure of dissimilarity: the closer the points, the lesser the distance).\nThe definition of the similarity can vary among authors, depending on which properties are desired. The basic common properties are\nformula_18\nformula_19\nMore properties can be invoked, such as:\nThe upper value is often set at 1 (creating a possibility for a probabilistic interpretation of the similitude).\nNote that, in the topological sense used here, a similarity is a kind of measure. This usage is not the same as the \"similarity transformation\" of the and sections of this article.\nSelf-similarity.\nSelf-similarity means that a pattern is non-trivially similar to itself, e.g., the set {..., 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, ...} of numbers of the form {2\"i\", 3\u00b72\"i\"} where i ranges over all integers. When this set is plotted on a logarithmic scale it has one-dimensional translational symmetry: adding or subtracting the logarithm of two to the logarithm of one of these numbers produces the logarithm of another of these numbers. In the given set of numbers themselves, this corresponds to a similarity transformation in which the numbers are multiplied or divided by two.\nPsychology.\nThe intuition for the notion of geometric similarity already appears in human children, as can be seen in their drawings. Certain perceptual categorization models in psychology are based on geometric similarity, assuming that learning involves the storage of specific instances (\"i.e.\" of general object specifications) in memory. The categorization of another object is subsequently based on the similarity of the object to the instances in memory.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39378", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39378", "title": "Distance", "text": "Separation between two points\nDistance is a numerical or occasionally qualitative measurement of how far apart objects, points, people, or ideas are. In physics or everyday usage, distance may refer to a physical length or an estimation based on other criteria (e.g. \"two counties over\"). The term is also frequently used metaphorically to mean a measurement of the amount of difference between two similar objects (such as statistical distance between probability distributions or edit distance between strings of text) or a degree of separation (as exemplified by distance between people in a social network). Most such notions of distance, both physical and metaphorical, are formalized in mathematics using the notion of a metric space.\nIn the social sciences, distance can refer to a qualitative measurement of separation, such as social distance or psychological distance.\nDistances in physics and geometry.\nThe distance between physical locations can be defined in different ways in different contexts.\nStraight-line or Euclidean distance.\nThe distance between two points in physical space is the length of a straight line between them, which is the shortest possible path. This is the usual meaning of distance in classical physics, including Newtonian mechanics. \nStraight-line distance is formalized mathematically as the Euclidean distance in two- and three-dimensional space. In Euclidean geometry, the distance between two points A and B is often denoted formula_1. In coordinate geometry, Euclidean distance is computed using the Pythagorean theorem. The distance between points (\"x\"1, \"y\"1) and (\"x\"2, \"y\"2) in the plane is given by:\nformula_2\nSimilarly, given points (\"x\"1, \"y\"1, \"z\"1) and (\"x\"2, \"y\"2, \"z\"2) in three-dimensional space, the distance between them is:\nformula_3\nThis idea generalizes to higher-dimensional Euclidean spaces.\nMeasurement.\nThere are many ways of measuring straight-line distances. For example, it can be done directly using a ruler, or indirectly with a radar (for long distances) or interferometry (for very short distances). The cosmic distance ladder is a set of ways of measuring extremely long distances.\nShortest-path distance on a curved surface.\nThe straight-line distance between two points on the surface of the Earth is not very useful for most purposes, since we cannot tunnel straight through the Earth's mantle. Instead, one typically measures the shortest path along the surface of the Earth, as the crow flies. This is approximated mathematically by the great-circle distance on a sphere.\nMore generally, the shortest path between two points along a curved surface is known as a geodesic. The arc length of geodesics gives a way of measuring distance from the perspective of an ant or other flightless creature living on that surface.\nEffects of relativity.\nIn the theory of relativity, because of phenomena such as length contraction and the relativity of simultaneity, distances between objects depend on a choice of inertial frame of reference. On galactic and larger scales, the measurement of distance is also affected by the expansion of the universe. In practice, a number of distance measures are used in cosmology to quantify such distances.\nOther spatial distances.\nUnusual definitions of distance can be helpful to model certain physical situations, but are also used in theoretical mathematics:\nMetaphorical distances.\nMany abstract notions of distance used in mathematics, science and engineering represent a degree of difference or separation between similar objects. This page gives a few examples.\nStatistical distances.\nIn statistics and information geometry, statistical distances measure the degree of difference between two probability distributions. There are many kinds of statistical distances, typically formalized as divergences; these allow a set of probability distributions to be understood as a geometrical object called a statistical manifold. The most elementary is the squared Euclidean distance, which is minimized by the least squares method; this is the most basic Bregman divergence. The most important in information theory is the relative entropy (Kullback\u2013Leibler divergence), which allows one to analogously study maximum likelihood estimation geometrically; this is an example of both an \"f\"-divergence and a Bregman divergence (and in fact the only example which is both). Statistical manifolds corresponding to Bregman divergences are flat manifolds in the corresponding geometry, allowing an analog of the Pythagorean theorem (which holds for squared Euclidean distance) to be used for linear inverse problems in inference by optimization theory.\nOther important statistical distances include the Mahalanobis distance and the energy distance.\nEdit distances.\nIn computer science, an edit distance or string metric between two strings measures how different they are. For example, the words \"dog\" and \"dot\", which differ by just one letter, are closer than \"dog\" and \"cat\", which have no letters in common. This idea is used in spell checkers and in coding theory, and is mathematically formalized in a number of different ways, including Levenshtein distance, Hamming distance, Lee distance, and Jaro\u2013Winkler distance.\nDistance in graph theory.\nIn a graph, the distance between two vertices is measured by the length of the shortest edge path between them. For example, if the graph represents a social network, then the idea of six degrees of separation can be interpreted mathematically as saying that the distance between any two vertices is at most six. Similarly, the Erd\u0151s number and the Bacon number\u2014the number of collaborative relationships away a person is from prolific mathematician Paul Erd\u0151s and actor Kevin Bacon, respectively\u2014are distances in the graphs whose edges represent mathematical or artistic collaborations.\nIn the social sciences.\nIn psychology, human geography, and the social sciences, distance is often theorized not as an objective numerical measurement, but as a qualitative description of a subjective experience. For example, psychological distance is \"the different ways in which an object might be removed from\" the self along dimensions such as \"time, space, social distance, and hypotheticality\". In sociology, social distance describes the separation between individuals or social groups in society along dimensions such as social class, race/ethnicity, gender or sexuality.\nMathematical formalization.\nMost of the notions of distance between two points or objects described above are examples of the mathematical idea of a metric. A \"metric\" or \"distance function\" is a function d which takes pairs of points or objects to real numbers and satisfies the following rules:\nAs an exception, many of the divergences used in statistics are not metrics.\nDistance between sets.\nThere are multiple ways of measuring the physical distance between objects that consist of more than one point:\n Even more generally, this idea can be used to define the distance between two subsets of a metric space. The distance between sets A and B is the infimum of the distances between any two of their respective points:formula_5 This does not define a metric on the set of such subsets: the distance between overlapping sets is zero, and this distance does not satisfy the triangle inequality for any metric space with two or more points (consider the triple of sets consisting of two distinct singletons and their union).\nRelated ideas.\nThe word distance is also used for related concepts that are not encompassed by the description \"a numerical measurement of how far apart points or objects are\".\nDistance travelled.\nThe distance travelled by an object is the length of a specific path travelled between two points, such as the distance walked while navigating a maze or the distance marked by a milepost or an odometer. This can even be a closed distance along a closed curve which starts and ends at the same point, such as a ball thrown straight up, or the Earth when it completes one orbit. This is formalized mathematically as the arc length of the curve.\nThe distance travelled may also be signed: a \"forward\" distance is positive and a \"backward\" distance is negative.\nCircular distance is the distance traveled by a point on the circumference of a wheel, which can be useful to consider when designing vehicles or mechanical gears (see also odometry). The circumference of the wheel is 2\u03c0 \u00d7 radius; if the radius is\u00a01, each revolution of the wheel causes a vehicle to travel 2\u03c0 radians.\nDisplacement and directed distance.\nThe displacement in classical physics measures the change in position of an object during an interval of time. While distance is a scalar quantity, or a magnitude, displacement is a vector quantity with both magnitude and direction. In general, the vector measuring the difference between two locations (the relative position) is sometimes called the directed distance. For example, the directed distance from the New York City Main Library flag pole to the Statue of Liberty flag pole has: \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39380", "revid": "50534610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39380", "title": "Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1564 to 1576\nMaximilian II (31 July 1527 \u2013 12 October 1576) was Holy Roman Emperor from 1564 until his death in 1576. A member of the Austrian House of Habsburg, he was crowned King of Bohemia in Prague on 14 May 1562 and elected King of Germany (King of the Romans) on 24 November 1562. On 8 September 1563, he was crowned King of Hungary and Croatia in the Hungarian capital Pressburg (Pozsony in Hungarian; now Bratislava, Slovakia). On 25 July 1564, he succeeded his father Ferdinand I as Holy Roman Emperor.\nMaximilian's rule was shaped by the confessionalization process after the 1555 Peace of Augsburg. Though a Habsburg and a Catholic, he approached the Lutheran Imperial estates with a view to overcome the denominational schism, which ultimately failed. He also was faced with the ongoing Ottoman\u2013Habsburg wars and rising conflicts with his Spanish Habsburg cousins.\nAccording to Fichtner, Maximilian failed to achieve his three major aims: rationalizing the government structure, unifying Christianity, and evicting the Turks from Hungary. Peter Marshall opines that it is wrong to dismiss Maximilian as a failure. According to Marshall, through his religious tolerance as well as his encouragement of arts and sciences, he succeeded in maintaining a precarious peace.\nBiography.\nMaximilian was born in Vienna, Austria, the second child and eldest son of the Habsburg King Ferdinand I, younger brother of Emperor Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, and the Jagiellonian Princess Anne of Bohemia and Hungary (1503\u20131547). He was named after his great-grandfather, Emperor Maximilian I. At the time of his birth, his father Ferdinand succeeded his brother-in-law King Louis II in the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Kingdom of Hungary, greatly expanding the Habsburg monarchy.\nHaving spent his childhood years at his father's court in Innsbruck, Tyrol, Maximilian was educated principally in Italy. Among his teachers were humanist scholars like Kaspar Ursinus Velius and Georg Tannstetter. He also came in contact with the Lutheran teaching and early on corresponded with the Protestant prince Augustus of Saxony. From the age of 17, he gained some experience of warfare during the Italian War campaign of his uncle Charles V against King Francis I of France in 1544, and also during the Schmalkaldic War. Upon Charles' victory in the 1547 Battle of M\u00fchlberg, Maximilian put in a good word for the Schmalkaldic leaders, Elector John Frederick I, Elector of Saxony and Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse, and soon began to take part in Imperial business.\nHeir apparent.\nOn 13 September 1548 Emperor Charles V married Maximilian to Charles's daughter (Maximilian's cousin) Maria of Spain in the Castile residence of Valladolid. Through the marriage, his uncle intended to strengthen the ties with the Spanish branch of the Habsburgs, but also to consolidate his nephew's Catholic faith. Maximilian temporarily acted as the emperor's representative in Spain, but not as stadtholder of the Habsburg Netherlands as he had hoped. To his indignation, King Ferdinand appointed his younger brother Ferdinand II administrator in the Kingdom of Bohemia, but Maximilian's right of succession as the future king was nevertheless recognised in 1549. He returned to Germany in December 1550 in order to take part in the discussion over the Imperial succession.\nMaximilian's relations with his uncle worsened, as Charles V, again embattled by rebellious Protestant princes led by Elector Maurice of Saxony, wished his son Philip II of Spain to succeed him as emperor. However, Charles' brother Ferdinand, who had already been elected as the next occupant of the imperial throne, and his son Maximilian objected to this proposal. Maximilian sought the support of the German princes such as Albert V, Duke of Bavaria and even contacted Protestant leaders like Maurice of Saxony and Christoph, Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg. At length a compromise was reached: Philip was to succeed Ferdinand, but during the former's reign Maximilian, as King of the Romans, was to govern Germany. This arrangement was not carried out, and is only important because the insistence of the emperor seriously disturbed the harmonious relations that had hitherto existed between the two branches of the Habsburg family; an illness that befell Maximilian in 1552 was attributed to poison given to him in the interests of his cousin and brother-in-law, Philip II of Spain.\nThe relationship between the two cousins was uneasy. While Philip had been raised a Spaniard and barely travelled out of the kingdom during his life, Maximilian identified himself as the quintessential German prince and often displayed a strong dislike of Spaniards, whom he considered as intolerant and arrogant. While his cousin was reserved and shy, Maximilian was outgoing and charismatic. His adherence to humanism and religious tolerance put him at odds with Philip who was more committed to the defence of the Catholic faith. Also, he was considered a promising commander, while Philip disliked war and only once personally commanded an army. Nonetheless, the two remained committed to the unity of their dynasty. \nIn 1551 Maximilian attended the Council of Trent and the next year took up his residence at the Hofburg palace in Vienna, celebrated by a triumphal return into the city with a large entourage including the elephant Suleiman. While his father Ferdinand concluded the 1552 Treaty of Passau with the Protestant estates and finally reached the Peace of Augsburg in 1555, Maximilian was engaged mainly in the government of the Austrian hereditary lands and in defending them against Ottoman incursions. In Vienna, he had his Hofburg residence extended with the Renaissance \"Stallburg\" wing, the site of the later Spanish Riding School, and also ordered the construction of Neugeb\u00e4ude Palace in Simmering. In the 1550s, Vienna had more than 50,000 inhabitants, making it the largest city in Central Europe with Prague and before Nuremberg (40,000 inhabitants).\nThe religious views of the future King of Bohemia had always been somewhat uncertain, and he had probably learned something of Lutheranism in his youth; but his amicable relations with several Protestant princes, which began about the time of the discussion over the succession, were probably due more to political than to religious considerations. However, in Vienna he became very intimate with Sebastian Pfauser, a court preacher influenced by Heinrich Bullinger with strong leanings towards Lutheranism, and his religious attitude caused some uneasiness to his father. Fears were freely expressed that he would definitely leave the Catholic Church, and when his father Ferdinand became emperor in 1558 he was prepared to assure Pope Paul IV that his son should not succeed him if he took this step. Eventually Maximilian remained nominally an adherent of the older faith, although his views were tinged with Lutheranism until the end of his life. After several refusals he consented in 1560 to the banishment of Pfauser, and began again to attend the Masses of the Catholic Church.\nReign.\nIn November 1562 Maximilian was chosen King of the Romans, or German king, by the electoral college at Frankfurt, where he was crowned a few days later, after assuring the Catholic electors of his fidelity to their faith, and promising the Protestant electors that he would publicly accept the confession of Augsburg when he became emperor. He also took the usual oath to protect the Church, and his election was afterwards confirmed by the papacy. He was the first King of the Romans not to be crowned in Aachen. In September 1563 he was crowned King of Hungary by the Archbishop of Esztergom, Nicolaus Olahus, and on his father's death, in July 1564, he succeeded to the empire and to the kingdoms of Hungary, Croatia and Bohemia.\nThe new emperor had already shown that he believed in the necessity for a thorough reform of the Church. He was unable, however, to obtain the consent of Pope Pius IV to the marriage of the clergy, and in 1568 the concession of communion in both kinds to the laity was withdrawn. On his part Maximilian granted religious liberty to the Lutheran nobles and knights in Austria, and refused to allow the publication of the decrees of the Council of Trent. Amidst general expectations on the part of the Protestants he met his first summoned Diet of Augsburg in March 1566. He refused to accede to the demands of the Lutheran princes; on the other hand, although the increase of sectarianism was discussed, no decisive steps were taken to suppress it, and the only result of the meeting was a grant of assistance for the war with the Turks, which had just been renewed. Maximilian gathered a large army and marched to fight the Ottomans. The Ottomans besieged and conquered Szigetv\u00e1r in 1566, but their sultan, Suleiman the Magnificent, died of old age during the siege. With neither side winning a decisive engagement, Maximilian's ambassadors Antun Vran\u010di\u0107 and Christoph Teuffenbach met with the Ottoman Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha in Adrianople to negotiate a truce in 1568. The terms of the Treaty of Adrianople required the emperor to recognise Ottoman suzerainty over Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia.\nMeanwhile, the relations between Maximilian and Philip of Spain had improved, and the emperor's increasingly cautious and moderate attitude in religious matters was doubtless because the death of Philip's son, Don Carlos, had opened the way for the succession of Maximilian, or of one of his sons, to the Spanish throne. Evidence of this friendly feeling was given in 1570, when the emperor's daughter, Anna, became the fourth wife of Philip; but Maximilian was unable to moderate the harsh proceedings of the Spanish king against the revolting inhabitants of the Netherlands. In 1570 the emperor met the Diet of Speyer and asked for aid to place his eastern borders in a state of defence, and also for power to repress the disorder caused by troops in the service of foreign powers passing through Germany. He proposed that his consent should be necessary before any soldiers for foreign service were recruited in the empire; but the estates were unwilling to strengthen the imperial authority, the Protestant princes regarded the suggestion as an attempt to prevent them from assisting their co-religionists in France and the Netherlands, and nothing was done in this direction, although some assistance was voted for the defense of Austria. The religious demands of the Protestants were still unsatisfied, while the policy of toleration had failed to give peace to Austria. Maximilian's power was very limited; it was inability rather than unwillingness that prevented him from yielding to the entreaties of Pope Pius V to join in an attack on the Turks both before and after the victory of Lepanto in 1571; and he remained inert while the authority of the empire in north-eastern Europe was threatened.\nIn 1576, Maximilian was elected by the part of Polish and Lithuanian magnates to be the King of Poland in opposition to Stephan IV Bathory, but he did not manage to become widely accepted there and was forced to leave Poland.\nMaximilian died on 12 October 1576 in Regensburg while preparing to invade Poland. On his deathbed he refused to receive the last sacraments of the Church. He is buried in St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague.\nBy his wife Maria he had a family of ten sons and six daughters. He was succeeded by his eldest surviving son, Rudolf, who had been chosen king of the Romans in October 1575. Another of his sons, Matthias, also became emperor; three others, Ernest, Albert and Maximilian, took some part in the government of the Habsburg territories or of the Netherlands. His eldest daughter, Anna, married Philip II of Spain. Another daughter, Elizabeth, married Charles IX of France.\nReligious policies.\nMaximilian's policies of religious neutrality and peace in the empire afforded its Roman Catholics and Protestants a breathing space after the first struggles of the Reformation. His reign also saw the high point of Protestantism in Austria and Bohemia and unlike his successors, Maximilian did not try to suppress it.\nHe disappointed the German Protestant princes by his refusal to invest Lutheran administrators of prince-bishoprics with their imperial fiefs. Yet on a personal basis he granted freedom of worship to the Protestant nobility and worked for reform in the Roman Catholic Church, including the right of priests to marry. This failed because of Spanish opposition.\nMaximilian II was a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.\nPatronage of arts and sciences.\nUnder Ferdinand I and Maximilian II, the imperial court itself became the centre of humanist scholarship. The court held close ties to the University of Vienna but the university, that reached its summit under Maximilian I, had been severely diminished due to wars and civil disturbances.\nIn his court, Catholic and Prostestant scholars equally thrived. Many artists and scholars came from Spain, Italy and Spanish Netherlands. Maximilian employed scholars like the botanist Carolus Clusius and the diplomat Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq. Maximilian's library curated by Hugo Blotius later became the nucleus of the Austrian National Library. He implemented the Roman School of composition with his court orchestra, however, his plans to win Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina as \"Kapellmeister\" foundered on financial reasons.\nMarriage and children.\nOn 13 September 1548, Maximilian married his first cousin Maria of Spain, daughter of Emperor Charles V and Isabella of Portugal. Despite Maria's commitment to Habsburg Spain and her strong Catholic manners, the marriage was a happy one. The couple had sixteen children in just nineteen years, but only nine of them lived to adulthood:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39382", "revid": "37442177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39382", "title": "Infimum and supremum", "text": "Greatest lower bound and least upper bound\nIn mathematics, the infimum (abbreviated inf; pl.: infima) of a subset formula_1 of a partially ordered set formula_2 is the greatest element in formula_2 that is less than or equal to each element of formula_4 if such an element exists. If the infimum of formula_1 exists, it is unique, and if \"b\" is a lower bound of formula_1, then \"b\" is less than or equal to the infimum of formula_1. Consequently, the term \"greatest lower bound\" (abbreviated as GLB) is also commonly used. The supremum (abbreviated sup; pl.: suprema) of a subset formula_1 of a partially ordered set formula_2 is the least element in formula_2 that is greater than or equal to each element of formula_4 if such an element exists. If the supremum of formula_1 exists, it is unique, and if \"b\" is an upper bound of formula_1, then the supremum of formula_1 is less than or equal to \"b\". Consequently, the supremum is also referred to as the \"least upper bound\" (or LUB).\nThe infimum is, in a precise sense, dual to the concept of a supremum. Infima and suprema of real numbers are common special cases that are important in analysis, and especially in Lebesgue integration. However, the general definitions remain valid in the more abstract setting of order theory where arbitrary partially ordered sets are considered.\nThe concepts of infimum and supremum are close to minimum and maximum, but are more useful in analysis because they better characterize special sets which may have no minimum or maximum. For instance, the set of positive real numbers formula_15 (not including formula_16) does not have a minimum, because any given element of formula_15 could simply be divided in half resulting in a smaller number that is still in formula_18 There is, however, exactly one infimum of the positive real numbers relative to the real numbers: formula_19 which is smaller than all the positive real numbers and greater than any other real number which could be used as a lower bound. An infimum of a set is always and only defined relative to a superset of the set in question. For example, there is no infimum of the positive real numbers inside the positive real numbers (as their own superset), nor any infimum of the positive real numbers inside the complex numbers with positive real part.\nFormal definition.\nA lower bound of a subset formula_1 of a partially ordered set formula_21 is an element formula_22 of formula_2 such that\nA lower bound formula_26 of formula_1 is called an infimum (or greatest lower bound, or meet) of formula_1 if\nSimilarly, an upper bound of a subset formula_1 of a partially ordered set formula_21 is an element formula_36 of formula_2 such that\nAn upper bound formula_40 of formula_1 is called a supremum (or least upper bound, or join) of formula_1 if\nWe can also define suprema &amp; infima without restricting to sets. For example, there is no set containing all cardinal numbers (and there is no greatest cardinal number), but the axiom of choice implies that every set of cardinal numbers has a least upper bound among cardinal numbers. The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that every nonempty set of cardinal numbers has a minimum element (which is also the infimum of the set). The empty set of cardinal numbers has many lower bounds but no greatest lower bound among cardinal numbers.\nExistence and uniqueness.\nInfima and suprema do not necessarily exist. Existence of an infimum of a subset formula_1 of formula_2 can fail if formula_1 has no lower bound at all, or if the set of lower bounds does not contain a greatest element. (An example of this is the subset formula_51 of formula_52. It has upper bounds, such as 1.5, but no supremum in formula_52.)\nConsequently, partially ordered sets for which certain infima are known to exist become especially interesting. For instance, a lattice is a partially ordered set in which all nonempty finite subsets have both a supremum and an infimum, and a complete lattice is a partially ordered set in which all subsets have both a supremum and an infimum. More information on the various classes of partially ordered sets that arise from such considerations are found in the article on completeness properties.\nIf the supremum of a subset formula_1 exists, it is unique. If formula_1 contains a greatest element, then that element is the supremum; otherwise, the supremum does not belong to formula_1 (or does not exist). Likewise, if the infimum exists, it is unique. If formula_1 contains a least element, then that element is the infimum; otherwise, the infimum does not belong to formula_1 (or does not exist).\nRelation to maximum and minimum elements.\nThe infimum of a subset formula_1 of a partially ordered set formula_31 assuming it exists, does not necessarily belong to formula_61 If it does, it is a minimum or least element of formula_61 Similarly, if the supremum of formula_1 belongs to formula_4 it is a maximum or greatest element of formula_61\nFor example, consider the set of negative real numbers (excluding zero). This set has no greatest element, since for every element of the set, there is another, larger, element. For instance, for any negative real number formula_66 there is another negative real number formula_67 which is greater. On the other hand, every real number greater than or equal to zero is certainly an upper bound on this set. Hence, formula_16 is the least upper bound of the negative reals, so the supremum is 0. This set has a supremum but no greatest element.\nHowever, the definition of maximal and minimal elements is more general. In particular, a set can have many maximal and minimal elements, whereas infima and suprema are unique.\nWhereas maxima and minima must be members of the subset that is under consideration, the infimum and supremum of a subset need not be members of that subset themselves.\nMinimal upper bounds.\nFinally, a partially ordered set may have many minimal upper bounds without having a least upper bound. Minimal upper bounds are those upper bounds for which there is no strictly smaller element that also is an upper bound. This does not say that each minimal upper bound is smaller than all other upper bounds, it merely is not greater. The distinction between \"minimal\" and \"least\" is only possible when the given order is not a total one. In a totally ordered set, like the real numbers, the concepts are the same.\nAs an example, let formula_1 be the set of all finite subsets of natural numbers and consider the partially ordered set obtained by taking all sets from formula_1 together with the set of integers formula_71 and the set of positive real numbers formula_72 ordered by subset inclusion as above. Then clearly both formula_71 and formula_15 are greater than all finite sets of natural numbers. Yet, neither is formula_15 smaller than formula_71 nor is the converse true: both sets are minimal upper bounds but none is a supremum.\nLeast-upper-bound property.\nThe least-upper-bound property is an example of the aforementioned completeness properties which is typical for the set of real numbers. This property is sometimes called Dedekind completeness.\nIf an ordered set formula_1 has the property that every nonempty subset of formula_1 having an upper bound also has a least upper bound, then formula_1 is said to have the least-upper-bound property. As noted above, the set formula_80 of all real numbers has the least-upper-bound property. Similarly, the set formula_71 of integers has the least-upper-bound property; if formula_1 is a nonempty subset of formula_71 and there is some number formula_84 such that every element formula_85 of formula_1 is less than or equal to formula_87 then there is a least upper bound formula_88 for formula_4 an integer that is an upper bound for formula_1 and is less than or equal to every other upper bound for formula_61 A well-ordered set also has the least-upper-bound property, and the empty subset has also a least upper bound: the minimum of the whole set.\nAn example of a set that lacks the least-upper-bound property is formula_92 the set of rational numbers. Let formula_1 be the set of all rational numbers formula_94 such that formula_95 Then formula_1 has an upper bound (formula_97 for example, or formula_98) but no least upper bound in formula_99: If we suppose formula_100 is the least upper bound, a contradiction is immediately deduced because between any two reals formula_101 and formula_22 (including formula_103 and formula_104) there exists some rational formula_105 which itself would have to be the least upper bound (if formula_106) or a member of formula_1 greater than formula_104 (if formula_109). Another example is the hyperreals; there is no least upper bound of the set of positive infinitesimals.\nThere is a corresponding greatest-lower-bound property; an ordered set possesses the greatest-lower-bound property if and only if it also possesses the least-upper-bound property; the least-upper-bound of the set of lower bounds of a set is the greatest-lower-bound, and the greatest-lower-bound of the set of upper bounds of a set is the least-upper-bound of the set.\nIf in a partially ordered set formula_2 every bounded subset has a supremum, this applies also, for any set formula_111 in the function space containing all functions from formula_112 to formula_31 where formula_114 if and only if formula_115 for all formula_116 For example, it applies for real functions, and, since these can be considered special cases of functions, for real formula_84-tuples and sequences of real numbers.\nThe least-upper-bound property is an indicator of the suprema.\nInfima and suprema of real numbers.\nIn analysis, infima and suprema of subsets formula_1 of the real numbers are particularly important. For instance, the negative real numbers do not have a greatest element, and their supremum is formula_16 (which is not a negative real number).\nThe completeness of the real numbers implies (and is equivalent to) that any bounded nonempty subset formula_1 of the real numbers has an infimum and a supremum. If formula_1 is not bounded below, one often formally writes formula_122 If formula_1 is empty, one writes formula_124\nProperties.\nIf formula_125 is any set of real numbers then formula_126 if and only if formula_127 and otherwise formula_128 \nSet inclusion\nIf formula_129 are sets of real numbers then formula_130 (if formula_131 this reads as formula_132) and formula_133\nImage under functions\nIf formula_134 is a nondecreasing function and formula_1 is a nonempty bounded subset of formula_136, then \nformula_137 and formula_138, where the image is defined as formula_139\nIdentifying infima and suprema\nIf the infimum of formula_125 exists (that is, formula_141 is a real number) and if formula_104 is any real number then formula_143 if and only if formula_104 is a lower bound and for every formula_145 there is an formula_146 with formula_147 \nSimilarly, if formula_148 is a real number and if formula_104 is any real number then formula_150 if and only if formula_104 is an upper bound and if for every formula_145 there is an formula_146 with formula_154\nRelation to limits of sequences\nIf formula_155 is any non-empty set of real numbers then there always exists a non-decreasing sequence formula_156 in formula_1 such that formula_158 Similarly, there will exist a (possibly different) non-increasing sequence formula_159 in formula_1 such that formula_161\nIn particular, the infimum and supremum of a set belong to its closure if formula_162 then formula_163 and if formula_164 then formula_165\nExpressing the infimum and supremum as a limit of a such a sequence allows theorems from various branches of mathematics to be applied. Consider for example the well-known fact from topology that if formula_166 is a continuous function and formula_167 is a sequence of points in its domain that converges to a point formula_168 then formula_169 necessarily converges to formula_170 \nIt implies that if formula_171 is a real number (where all formula_167 are in formula_1) and if formula_166 is a continuous function whose domain contains formula_1 and formula_176 then \nformula_177\nwhich (for instance) guarantees that formula_178 is an adherent point of the set formula_179\nIf in addition to what has been assumed, the continuous function formula_166 is also an increasing or non-decreasing function, then it is even possible to conclude that formula_181 \nThis may be applied, for instance, to conclude that whenever formula_182 is a real (or complex) valued function with domain formula_183 whose sup norm formula_184 is finite, then for every non-negative real number formula_185\nformula_186\nsince the map formula_187 defined by formula_188 is a continuous non-decreasing function whose domain formula_189 always contains formula_190 and formula_191\nAlthough this discussion focused on formula_192 similar conclusions can be reached for formula_193 with appropriate changes (such as requiring that formula_166 be non-increasing rather than non-decreasing). Other norms defined in terms of formula_195 or formula_193 include the weak formula_197 space norms (for formula_198), the norm on Lebesgue space formula_199 and operator norms. Monotone sequences in formula_1 that converge to formula_201 (or to formula_202) can also be used to help prove many of the formula given below, since addition and multiplication of real numbers are continuous operations.\nArithmetic operations on sets.\nThe following formulas depend on a notation that conveniently generalizes arithmetic operations on sets. \nThroughout, formula_203 are sets of real numbers. \nSum of sets\nThe Minkowski sum of two sets formula_125 and formula_205 of real numbers is the set \nformula_206 \nconsisting of all possible arithmetic sums of pairs of numbers, one from each set. The infimum and supremum of the Minkowski sum satisfy, if formula_207\nformula_208 \nand \nformula_209\nProduct of sets\nThe multiplication of two sets formula_125 and formula_205 of real numbers is defined similarly to their Minkowski sum:\nformula_212\nIf formula_125 and formula_205 are nonempty sets of positive real numbers then formula_215 and similarly for suprema formula_216\nScalar product of a set\nThe product of a real number formula_217 and a set formula_205 of real numbers is the set\nformula_219\nIf formula_220 then \nformula_221\nwhile if formula_222 then \nformula_223\nIn the case formula_224,\none has, if formula_225\nformula_226 \nUsing formula_227 and the notation formula_228 it follows that, \nformula_229\nMultiplicative inverse of a set\nFor any set formula_1 that does not contain formula_19 let\nformula_232\nIf formula_233 is non-empty then \nformula_234 \nwhere this equation also holds when formula_235 if the definition formula_236 is used. \nThis equality may alternatively be written as \nformula_237 \nMoreover, formula_238 if and only if formula_239 where if formula_240 then formula_241\nDuality.\nIf one denotes by formula_242 the partially-ordered set formula_2 with the opposite order relation; that is, for all formula_244 declare: \nformula_245\nthen infimum of a subset formula_1 in formula_2 equals the supremum of formula_1 in formula_242 and vice versa.\nFor subsets of the real numbers, another kind of duality holds: formula_250 where formula_251\nExamples.\nSuprema.\nIn the last example, the supremum of a set of rationals is irrational, which means that the rationals are incomplete.\nOne basic property of the supremum is\nformula_269\nfor any functionals formula_166 and formula_271\nThe supremum of a subset formula_1 of formula_273 where formula_274 denotes \"divides\", is the lowest common multiple of the elements of formula_61\nThe supremum of a set formula_1 containing subsets of some set formula_112 is the union of the subsets when considering the partially ordered set formula_278, where formula_2 is the power set of formula_112 and formula_281 is subset.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39383", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39383", "title": "Coordinates", "text": ""}
{"id": "39385", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39385", "title": "Pope Lando", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 913 to 914\nLando (also known as Landus) was the pope from 913 until his death in 914. His short pontificate fell during an obscure period in papal and Roman history, the so-called \"Saeculum obscurum\" (904\u2013964).\nAccording to the \"Liber pontificalis\", Lando was born in the Sabina (Papal States), and his father was a wealthy Lombard count named Taino from Fornovo. The start of his pontificate has been placed as early as July or as late as November 913. The \"Liber\" claims that his pontificate lasted only four months and twenty-two days. A different list of popes, appended to a continuation of the \"Liber pontificalis\" at the Abbey of Farfa and quoted by Gregory of Catino in his \"Chronicon Farfense\" in the twelfth century, gives Lando a pontificate of six months and twenty-six days. This is closer to the duration recorded by Flodoard of Reims, writing in the tenth century, of six months and ten days. The end of his pontificate can be dated to between 5 February 914, when he is mentioned in a document of Ravenna, and late March or early April, when his successor, John X, was elected.\nLando is thought to have been the candidate of Count Theophylact I of Tusculum and Senatrix Theodora, who were the most powerful couple in Rome at the time. The Theophylacti controlled papal finances through their monopoly of the office of \"vestararius\", and also controlled the Roman militia and Senate. During Lando's reign, Arab raiders, operating from their stronghold on the Garigliano river, destroyed the cathedral of San Salvatore in Vescovio in his native diocese. No document of Lando's chancery has survived. The only act of his reign that is recorded is a donation to the diocese of Sabina mentioned in a judicial act of 1431. Lando made the large personal gift in order to restore the cathedral of San Salvatore so that the clergy who were then living at Toffia could return.\nLando was the last pope to have a papal name never used before until Pope John Paul I in 1978, and the last with a unique name requiring no regnal number until Pope Francis in 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39386", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39386", "title": "Engagement", "text": "Promise to wed; period of preparation before marriage\nAn engagement or betrothal is the period of time between the declaration of acceptance of a marriage proposal and the marriage itself (which is typically but not always commenced with a wedding). During this period, a couple is said to be fianc\u00e9s (from the French), \"betrothed\", \"intended\", \"affianced\", \"engaged to be married\", or simply \"engaged\". Future brides and grooms may be called fianc\u00e9e (feminine) or fianc\u00e9 (masculine), \"the betrothed\", \"wife-to-be\" or \"husband-to-be\", respectively. The duration of the courtship varies vastly, and is largely dependent on cultural norms or upon the agreement of the parties involved.\nLong engagements were once common in formal arranged marriages, and it was not uncommon for parents betrothing children to arrange marriages many years before the engaged couple were old enough. This is still done in some countries.\nMany traditional Christian denominations have optional rites for Christian betrothal (also known as \"blessing an engaged couple\" or \"declaration of intention\") that bless and ratify the intent of a couple to marry before God and the Church.\nOrigin.\nThe origins of European engagement in marriage practice are found in the Jewish law (Torah), first exemplified by Abraham, and outlined in the last Talmudic tractate of the Nashim (Women) order, where marriage consists of two separate acts, called \"erusin\" (or \"kiddushin\", meaning \"sanctification\"), which is the betrothal ceremony, and \"nissu'in\" or \"chupah\", the actual ceremony for the marriage. \"Erusin\" changes the couple's interpersonal status, while \"nissu'in\" brings about the legal consequences of the change of status. (However, in the Talmud and other sources of Jewish law there is also a process, called \"shiduchin\", corresponding to what today is called engagement. Marrying without such an agreement is considered immoral. To complicate matters, \"erusin\" in modern Hebrew means engagement, not betrothal.)\nThis was later adopted in ancient Greece as the \"gamos\" and \"engeysis\" rituals, although unlike in Judaism, the contract made in front of witness was only verbal. The giving of a ring was eventually borrowed from Judaism by Roman marriage law, with the fianc\u00e9 presenting it after swearing the oath of marriage intent, and presenting of the gifts at the engagement party.\nBetrothal.\nBetrothal (also called \"espousal\") is a formal state of engagement to be married.\nTypical steps of a match were the following:\nThe exact duration of a betrothal varies according to culture and the participants\u2019 needs and wishes. For adults, it may be anywhere from several hours (when the betrothal is incorporated into the wedding day itself) to a period of several years. A year and a day are common in neo-pagan groups today. In the case of child marriage, betrothal might last from infancy until the age of marriage.\nThe responsibilities and privileges of betrothal vary. In most cultures, the betrothed couple is expected to spend much time together, learning about each other. In some historical cultures (including colonial North America), the betrothal was essentially a trial marriage, with marriage only being required in cases of conception of a child. Almost all cultures are loosening restrictions against physical contact between partners, even in cultures that normally had strong prohibitions against it. The betrothal period was also considered to be a preparatory time, in which the groom built a house, started a business or otherwise proved his readiness to enter adult society.\nIn medieval Europe, in canon law, a betrothal could be formed by the exchange of vows in the future tense (\"I \"will\" take you as my wife/husband\", instead of \"I take you as my wife/husband\"), but sexual intercourse consummated the vows, making a binding marriage rather than a betrothal. Although these betrothals could be concluded with only the vows spoken by the couple, they had legal implications: Richard III of England had his older brother's children declared illegitimate on the grounds their father had been betrothed to another woman when he married their mother.\nA betrothal is considered to be a \"semi-binding\" contract. Normal reasons for invalidation of a betrothal include:\nNormally, either party can break a betrothal, though in certain traditions, a financial penalty (such as forfeit of the bride price) applies. In some common law countries, including England and Wales and many US states, it was once possible for the spurned partner (often only the woman) to sue the other for breach of promise or \"heart-balm\". This provided some protection in an age where virginity at marriage was considered important and having a failed engagement could damage one's reputation, but this tort has become obsolete in most jurisdictions as attitudes to premarital sex have softened and emphasis shifted to allowing people to leave loveless relationships.\nJudaism.\nIn Jewish weddings during Talmudic times (c.1st century BC \u2013 6th century AD), the two ceremonies of betrothal (\"erusin\") and wedding usually took place up to a year apart; the bride lived with her parents until the actual marriage ceremony (\"nissuin\"), which would take place in a room or tent that the groom had set up for her. Since the Middle Ages the two ceremonies have taken place as a combined ceremony performed in public. The \"betrothal\" is now generally part of the Jewish wedding ceremony, accomplished when the groom gives the bride the ring or another object of at least nominal value. As mentioned above, betrothal in Judaism is separate from engagement; breaking a betrothal requires a formal divorce, and violation of betrothal is considered adultery.\nChristianity.\nIn most localities, the Rite of Betrothal (also known as \"blessing an engaged couple\" or \"declaration of intention\") as a precursor to Holy Matrimony is an optional practice in traditional forms of Christianity today that blesses and ratifies the intention of two Christians to marry one another. Many Christian denominations provide liturgies for Christian betrothal, which often feature prayer, Bible readings, a blessing of the engagement rings (in cultures in which rings are used), and a blessing of the couple. A betrothal makes what a couple promises to one another sanctified by God and the Church. A Christian engagement (betrothal) ceremony, which may be followed with a party, is normative in certain parts of the world, as with the Christians of India and Pakistan.\nCatholic Church.\nHistorically, betrothal in Roman Catholicism is a formal contract considered as binding as marriage, and a divorce is necessary to terminate a betrothal. Betrothed couples are regarded legally as husband and wife \u2013 even before their wedding and physical union.\nThe concept of an official engagement period in Western European culture may have begun in 1215 at the Fourth Lateran Council, headed by Pope Innocent III, which decreed that \"marriages are to be\u00a0... announced publicly in the churches by the priests during a suitable and fixed time so that, if legitimate impediments exist, they may be made known.\" Such a formal church announcement of the intent to marry is known as banns. In some jurisdictions, reading the banns may be part of one type of legal marriage.\nProtestant Churches.\nThe Lutheran book of \"Liturgical Forms\" includes the \"Form and Manner of Betrothal in Church\", which can take place in the church or alternatively, in the house of the bride. This rite can be found throughout history, such as in early Lutheran liturgical texts, the Stasbourg C.O. 1604 being an example. \"Liturgical Forms\" states that The Rite of Betrothal is seen as an \"admirable practice of plighting one's troth in church, so in keeping with the holiness and importance of marital betrothal as the \"incipient marital life\".\"\nThe 2019 Book of Common Prayer, used by Anglican Christian denominations such as the Anglican Church in North America, includes a Christian rite of betrothal called \"A Brief Liturgy for the Signing of the Declaration of Intention\" in which a Christian couple ratifies their intention before God and the Church to marry. During this liturgy, the following is signed and dated by the engaged couple after the sign of peace:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cWe, \"N.N.\" and \"N.N.\", desiring to receive the blessing of Holy Matrimony in the Church, do solemnly declare that we hold marriage to be a lifelong union of husband and wife as it is set forth in the Book of Common Prayer. We believe it is established by God for the procreation of children, and their nurture in the knowledge and love of the Lord; for mutual joy, and for the help and comfort given one another in prosperity and adversity; to maintain purity, so that husbands and wives, with all the household of God, might serve as holy and undefiled members of the Body of Christ; and for the upbuilding of Christ\u2019s kingdom in family, church, and society, to the praise of his holy Name. We do engage ourselves, so far as in us lies, to make our utmost effort to establish this relationship and to seek God\u2019s help thereto.\u201d\nFollowing the signing of the declaration of intention, the couple is blessed by the priest:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now that \"N.\" and \"N.\" have declared their intention for a Holy Marriage, and have begun the process of pre-marital preparation, let us pray for their relationship [and for their families]. \nAlmighty God, we thank you for the love of \"N.\" and \"N.\", and we ask your blessing upon them [and their families] during this time of preparation. Open their minds and hearts to one another, enable them faithfully to receive your Word and Sacrament, and help us to support them, that they may rightly prepare for their marriage. And, we pray, give us wisdom to uphold and encourage all who have been united in Holy Matrimony; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.\nThe Lutheran Churches, the Anglican Communion, the Methodist Churches and the Presbyterian Churches have questions and responses for family members in its Rite of Betrothal, which is sometimes incorporated into the Service of Holy Matrimony itself.\nOrthodox Churches.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Rite of Betrothal is traditionally performed in the narthex (entranceway) of the church, to indicate the couple's first entrance into the married estate. The priest blesses the couple and gives them lit candles to hold. Then, after a litany, and a prayer at which everyone bows, he places the bride's ring on the ring finger of the groom's right hand, and the groom's ring on the bride's finger. The rings are subsequently exchanged three times, either by the priest or by the best man, after which the priest says a final prayer. Traditionally, the betrothal service takes place at the time the engagement is announced, though in certain localities it may performed immediately before the wedding ceremony itself. The exchange of rings is not a part of the wedding service in the Eastern Churches, but only occurs at the betrothal ceremony. Traditionally, the groom's ring is gold and the bride's ring is silver.\nEngagement rings.\nCustoms for engagement rings vary according to time, place, and culture. An engagement ring has historically been uncommon, and when such a gift was given, it was separate from the wedding ring.\nThe first instance of the tradition of giving a ring for marriage in the Hebrew Bible is in , when a golden nose ring (Chayei Sarah 24:22) was given by Eliezer of Damascus to Rebecca, with Saadiah Gaon also citing as a possible source of the practice in the phrase in \"be\u2019nei tabbaot\" (children of the rings). The latter case refers to betrothal (see above) rather than engagement; one of the three ways in which betrothal may be effected in Judaism is by the husband giving the bride money or an object of at least nominal value. In fact, it is a long-standing practice within Judaism to contract the betrothal with a ring.\nThe practice of a marriage ring in Byzantine Empire date back to 3rd century CE.\nRomantic rings from the time of the Roman Empire sometimes bore clasped hands symbolizing contract, from which the later Celtic Claddagh symbol (two hands clasping a heart) may have evolved as a symbol of love and commitment between two people. Romans believed the circle was a bond between the two people who were to be married and signified eternity, but was first practiced on the fourth finger/ring finger by the Romans, who believed this finger to be the beginning of the \"vena amoris\" (\"vein of love\"), the vein that leads to the heart. In cultures with European origin, and many other countries, an engagement ring is worn following the practice of the Romans who \"...wore the ring either on the right middle finger or the left ring [4th] finger, from which, according to ancient Egyptian physicians, a nerve led directly to the heart.\" The custom in Continental Europe and other countries is to wear it on the right hand. One historical exception arose in monarchical regimes, in which a nobleman entering into morganatic marriage, a marriage in which the person, usually the woman, of lower rank stayed at the same rank instead of rising ranks, would present their left hand to receive the ring, hence the alternative term \"marriage with the left hand\" (Ger. \"Ehe zur linken Hand\"), the offspring of such marriages considered to be disinherited from birth.\nThe modern Western form of the practice of giving or exchanging engagement rings is traditionally thought to have begun in 1477 when Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, gave Mary of Burgundy a diamond ring as an engagement present.\nIn other countries like Argentina, men and women each wear a ring similar to wedding bands. They are made of silver (\"alianza de plata\") when manifesting an informal \"boyfriend-girlfriend\" relationship, though this first step might not always happen; howbeit depending on finances, this may be the only ring given at all. The gold band (\"\"anillo de compromiso\" or \"alianza de oro\") is given to the bride when the commitment is formal and the [optional] diamond ring (\"cintillo\"\") is reserved for the wedding ceremony when the groom gives it to the bride. The gold band that the groom wore during the engagement \u2013 or a new one, as some men choose not to wear them during engagement \u2013 is then given to the groom by the bride; and the bride receives both the original gold band and the new diamond at the ceremony. The bride's diamond ring is worn on top of the engagement band at the wedding and thereafter, especially at formal occasions or parties; otherwise the engagement band suffices for daily wear for both parties. At the wedding, the rings are swapped from the right to the left hand. In Brazil, they are always made of gold, and there is no tradition for the engagement ring. Both men and women wear the wedding band on their right hand while engaged, and, after they marry, they shift the rings to their left hands.\nIn the modern era, some women's wedding rings are made into two separate pieces. One part is given to her to wear as an engagement ring when she accepts the marriage proposal and the other during the wedding ceremony. When worn together, the two rings look like one piece of jewelry. The engagement ring is not worn during the wedding ceremony, when the wedding ring is put by the groom on the finger of the bride, and sometimes by the bride onto the groom's finger. After the wedding, the engagement ring is put back on, and is usually worn on the outside of the wedding ring.\nEngagement parties.\nIn contemporary American culture some engagements are announced at an engagement party, traditionally hosted by the bride's parents. These parties help introduce both the bride and groom's friends and family to each other in one place prior to the wedding. Often contemporary engagement parties are either cocktail parties or dinners with d\u00e9cor kept to a minimum. Gifts are not often given until either the wedding itself or a bridal shower.\nIn ancient Greece, engagement parties were held without the bride and took place to discuss the legal and economic aspects of the marriage. Later, engagement parties were when both sides announced a legal union prior to marriage where if one side broke the agreement they would have to pay the wronged side. Engagements became non-legally binding and by the early 20th century some couples would announce their engagement in the local paper.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39388", "revid": "50865928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39388", "title": "Manufacturing", "text": "Industrial activity producing goods for sale using labor and machines\nManufacturing is the creation or production of goods with the help of equipment, labor, machines, tools, and chemical or biological processing or formulation. It is the essence of the secondary sector of the economy. The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high-tech, but it is most commonly applied to industrial design, in which raw materials from the primary sector are transformed into finished goods on a large scale. Such goods may be sold to other manufacturers for the production of other more complex products (such as aircraft, household appliances, furniture, sports equipment or automobiles), or distributed via the tertiary industry to end users and consumers (usually through wholesalers, who in turn sell to retailers, who then sell them to individual customers).\nManufacturing engineering is the field of engineering that designs and optimizes the manufacturing process, or the steps through which raw materials are transformed into a final product. The manufacturing process begins with product design, and materials specification. These materials are then modified through manufacturing to become the desired product.\nContemporary manufacturing encompasses all intermediary stages involved in producing and integrating components of a product. Some industries, such as semiconductor and steel manufacturers, use the term fabrication instead.\nThe manufacturing sector is closely connected with the engineering and industrial design industries.\nEtymology.\nThe Modern English word \"manufacture\" is likely derived from the Middle French \"manufacture\" (\"process of making\") which itself originates from the Classical Latin \"man\u016b\" (\"hand\") and the Middle French \"facture\" (\"making\"). Alternatively, the English word may have been independently formed from the earlier English \"manufacture\" (\"made by human hands\") and \"fracture\". Its earliest usage in the English language was recorded in the mid-16th century to refer to the making of products by hand.\nHistory and development.\nPrehistory and ancient history.\nHuman ancestors manufactured objects using stone and other tools long before the emergence of \"Homo sapiens\" about 200,000 years ago. The earliest methods of stone tool making, known as the Oldowan \"industry\", date back to at least 2.3\u00a0million years ago, with the earliest direct evidence of tool usage found in Ethiopia within the Great Rift Valley, dating back to 2.5\u00a0million years ago. To manufacture a stone tool, a \"core\" of hard stone with specific flaking properties (such as flint) was struck with a hammerstone. This flaking produced sharp edges that could be used as tools, primarily in the form of choppers or scrapers. These tools greatly aided the early humans in their hunter-gatherer lifestyle to form other tools out of softer materials such as bone and wood. The Middle Paleolithic, approximately 300,000 years ago, saw the introduction of the prepared-core technique, where multiple blades could be rapidly formed from a single core stone. Pressure flaking, in which a wood, bone, or antler punch could be used to shape a stone very finely was developed during the Upper Paleolithic, beginning approximately 40,000 years ago. During the Neolithic period, polished stone tools were manufactured from a variety of hard rocks such as flint, jade, jadeite, and greenstone. The polished axes were used alongside other stone tools including projectiles, knives, and scrapers, as well as tools manufactured from organic materials such as wood, bone, and antler.\nCopper smelting is believed to have originated when the technology of pottery kiln allowed sufficiently high temperatures. The concentration of various elements such as arsenic increases with depth in copper ore deposits and smelting of these ores yields arsenical bronze, which can be sufficiently work-hardened to be suitable for manufacturing tools. Bronze is an alloy of copper with tin; the latter of which being found in relatively few deposits globally delayed true tin bronze from becoming widespread. During the Bronze Age, bronze was a major improvement over stone as a material for making tools, both because of its mechanical properties like strength and ductility and because it could be cast in molds to make intricately shaped objects. Bronze significantly advanced shipbuilding technology with better tools and bronze nails, which replaced the old method of attaching boards of the hull with cord woven through drilled holes. The Iron Age is conventionally defined by the widespread manufacturing of weapons and tools using iron and steel rather than bronze. Iron smelting is more difficult than tin and copper smelting because smelted iron requires hot-working and can be melted only in specially designed furnaces. The place and time for the discovery of iron smelting is not known, partly because of the difficulty of distinguishing metal extracted from nickel-containing ores from hot-worked meteoritic iron.\nDuring the growth of the ancient civilizations, many ancient technologies resulted from advances in manufacturing. Several of the six classic simple machines were invented in Mesopotamia. The Mesopotamians have been credited with the invention of the wheel. The wheel and axle mechanism first appeared with the potter's wheel, invented in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) during the 5th millennium BC. Egyptian paper made from papyrus, as well as pottery, were mass-produced and exported throughout the Mediterranean basin. Early construction techniques used by the Ancient Egyptians made use of bricks composed mainly of clay, sand, silt, and other minerals.\nMedieval and early modern.\nThe Middle Ages witnessed new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth. Papermaking, a 2nd-century Chinese technology, was carried to the Middle East when a group of Chinese papermakers were captured in the 8th century. Papermaking technology was spread to Europe by the Umayyad conquest of Hispania. A paper mill was established in Sicily in the 12th century. In Europe the fiber to make pulp for making paper was obtained from linen and cotton rags. Lynn Townsend White Jr. credited the spinning wheel with increasing the supply of rags, which led to cheap paper, which was a factor in the development of printing. Due to the casting of cannon, the blast furnace came into widespread use in France in the mid 15th century. The blast furnace had been used in China since the 4th century BC. The stocking frame, which was invented in 1598, increased a knitter's number of knots per minute from 100 to 1000.\nFirst and Second Industrial Revolutions.\nThe Industrial Revolution was the transition to new manufacturing processes in Europe and the United States from 1760 to the 1830s. This transition included going from hand production methods to machines, new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes, the increasing use of steam power and water power, the development of machine tools and the rise of the mechanized factory system. The Industrial Revolution also led to an unprecedented rise in the rate of population growth. Textiles were the dominant industry of the Industrial Revolution in terms of employment, value of output and capital invested. The textile industry was also the first to use modern production methods. Rapid industrialization first began in Britain, starting with mechanized spinning in the 1780s, with high rates of growth in steam power and iron production occurring after 1800. Mechanized textile production spread from Great Britain to continental Europe and the United States in the early 19th century, with important centres of textiles, iron and coal emerging in Belgium and the United States and later textiles in France.\nAn economic recession occurred from the late 1830s to the early 1840s when the adoption of the Industrial Revolution's early innovations, such as mechanized spinning and weaving, slowed down and their markets matured. Innovations developed late in the period, such as the increasing adoption of locomotives, steamboats and steamships, hot blast iron smelting and new technologies, such as the electrical telegraph, were widely introduced in the 1840s and 1850s, were not powerful enough to drive high rates of growth. Rapid economic growth began to occur after 1870, springing from a new group of innovations in what has been called the Second Industrial Revolution. These innovations included new steel making processes, mass-production, assembly lines, electrical grid systems, the large-scale manufacture of machine tools and the use of increasingly advanced machinery in steam-powered factories.\nBuilding on improvements in vacuum pumps and materials research, incandescent light bulbs became practical for general use in the late 1870s. This invention had a profound effect on the workplace because factories could now have second and third shift workers. Shoe production was mechanized during the mid 19th century. Mass production of sewing machines and agricultural machinery such as reapers occurred in the mid to late 19th century. The mass production of bicycles started in the 1880s. Steam-powered factories became widespread, although the conversion from water power to steam occurred in England earlier than in the U.S.\nModern manufacturing.\nElectrification of factories, which had begun gradually in the 1890s after the introduction of the practical DC motor and the AC motor, was fastest between 1900 and 1930. This was aided by the establishment of electric utilities with central stations and the lowering of electricity prices from 1914 to 1917. Electric motors allowed more flexibility in manufacturing and required less maintenance than line shafts and belts. Many factories witnessed a 30% increase in output owing to the increasing shift to electric motors. Electrification enabled modern mass production, and the biggest impact of early mass production was in the manufacturing of everyday items, such as at the Ball Brothers Glass Manufacturing Company, which electrified its mason jar plant in Muncie, Indiana, U.S. around 1900. The new automated process used glass blowing machines to replace 210 craftsman glass blowers and helpers. A small electric truck was now used to handle 150 dozen bottles at a time whereas previously used hand trucks could only carry 6 dozen bottles at a time. Electric mixers replaced men with shovels handling sand and other ingredients that were fed into the glass furnace. An electric overhead crane replaced 36 day laborers for moving heavy loads across the factory.\nMass production was popularized in the late 1910s and 1920s by Henry Ford's Ford Motor Company, which introduced electric motors to the then-well-known technique of chain or sequential production. Ford also bought or designed and built special purpose machine tools and fixtures such as multiple spindle drill presses that could drill every hole on one side of an engine block in one operation and a multiple head milling machine that could simultaneously machine 15 engine blocks held on a single fixture. All of these machine tools were arranged systematically in the production flow and some had special carriages for rolling heavy items into machining positions. Production of the Ford Model T used 32,000 machine tools.\nLean manufacturing, also known as just-in-time manufacturing, was developed in Japan in the 1930s. It is a production method aimed primarily at reducing times within the production system as well as response times from suppliers and to customers. It was introduced in Australia in the 1950s by the British Motor Corporation (Australia) at its Victoria Park plant in Sydney, from where the idea later migrated to Toyota. News spread to western countries from Japan in 1977 in two English-language articles: one referred to the methodology as the \"Ohno system\", after Taiichi Ohno, who was instrumental in its development within Toyota. The other article, by Toyota authors in an international journal, provided additional details. Finally, those and other publicity were translated into implementations, beginning in 1980 and then quickly multiplying throughout the industry in the United States and other countries.\nThe concept of world-class manufacturing is associated with excellence in the manufacturing field. The term has been promoted by author Richard J. Schonberger, although Flynn \"et al.\" note that the term was initially used by R H Hayes and Steven C. Wheelwright, before being taken up by Schonberger.\nMachinery relocation and logistics.\nIn many manufacturing industries, production requires not only raw material supply chains but also the transportation and installation of large industrial machinery. Heavy equipment such as presses, injection molding machines, and CNC tools often need to be moved during plant upgrades, facility relocations, or decommissioning projects. These processes involve specialized logistics, including rigging, tilt-and-load transport, forklifts, and oversize-load permitting. In North America, industry associations such as the https:// provide safety standards and best practices for heavy transport and machinery moving. Independent guides on machinery relocation planning offer strategies for minimizing downtime, such as phasing moves, off-hours relocation, buffer inventory, and detailed site assessments to maintain production continuity during equipment moving.\nManufacturing strategy.\nAccording to a \"traditional\" view of manufacturing strategy, there are five key dimensions along which the performance of manufacturing can be assessed: cost, quality, dependability, flexibility and innovation.\nIn regard to manufacturing performance, Wickham Skinner, who has been called \"the father of manufacturing strategy\", adopted the concept of \"focus\", with an implication that a business cannot perform at the highest level along all five dimensions and must therefore select one or two competitive priorities. This view led to the theory of \"trade offs\" in manufacturing strategy. Similarly, Elizabeth Haas wrote in 1987 about the delivery of value in manufacturing for customers in terms of \"lower prices, greater service responsiveness or higher quality\". The theory of \"trade offs\" has subsequently being debated and questioned, Colin New noted that by 1991 it had become \"somewhat fashionable\" to abandon the trade-off approach, whereas Skinner wrote in 1992 that at that time \"enthusiasm for the concepts of 'manufacturing strategy' [had] been higher\", noting that in academic papers, executive courses and case studies, levels of interest were \"bursting out all over\". \nManufacturing writer Terry Hill has commented that manufacturing is often seen as a less \"strategic\" business activity than functions such as marketing and finance, and that manufacturing managers have \"come late\" to business strategy-making discussions, where, as a result, they make only a reactive contribution.\nKen Platts and Mike Gregory devised a manufacturing audit scheme intended to support the process of formulating a manufacturing strategy. This was popularised in \"Competitive Manufacturing: A Practical Approach to the Development of a Manufacturing Strategy\" in 1998, whose publication was supported by the UK's Department of Trade and Industry.\nIndustrial policy.\nEconomics of manufacturing.\nEmerging technologies have offered new growth methods in advanced manufacturing employment opportunities, for example in the Manufacturing Belt in the United States. Manufacturing provides important material support for national infrastructure and also for national defense.\nOn the other hand, most manufacturing processes may involve significant social and environmental costs. The clean-up costs of hazardous waste, for example, may outweigh the benefits of a product that creates it. Hazardous materials may expose workers to health risks. These costs are now well known and there is effort to address them by improving efficiency, reducing waste, using industrial symbiosis, and eliminating harmful chemicals.\nThe negative costs of manufacturing can also be addressed legally. Developed countries regulate manufacturing activity with labor laws and environmental laws. Across the globe, manufacturers can be subject to regulations and pollution taxes to offset the environmental costs of manufacturing activities. Labor unions and craft guilds have played a historic role in the negotiation of worker rights and wages. Environment laws and labor protections that are available in developed nations may not be available in the third world. Tort law and product liability impose additional costs on manufacturing. These are significant dynamics in the ongoing process, occurring over the last few decades, of manufacture-based industries relocating operations to \"developing-world\" economies where the costs of production are significantly lower than in \"developed-world\" economies.\nFinance.\nFrom a financial perspective, the goal of the manufacturing industry is mainly to achieve cost benefits per unit produced, which in turn leads to cost reductions in product prices for the market towards end customers. This relative cost reduction towards the market, is how manufacturing firms secure their profit margins.\nSafety.\nManufacturing has unique health and safety challenges and has been recognized by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) as a priority industry sector in the National Occupational Research Agenda (NORA) to identify and provide intervention strategies regarding occupational health and safety issues.\nManufacturing and investment.\nSurveys and analyses of trends and issues in manufacturing and investment around the world focus on such things as:\nIn addition to general overviews, researchers have examined the features and factors affecting particular key aspects of manufacturing development. They have compared production and investment in a range of Western and non-Western countries and presented case studies of growth and performance in important individual industries and market-economic sectors.\nOn June 26, 2009, Jeff Immelt, the CEO of General Electric, called for the United States to increase its manufacturing base employment to 20% of the workforce, commenting that the U.S. has outsourced too much in some areas and can no longer rely on the financial sector and consumer spending to drive demand. Further, while U.S. manufacturing performs well compared to the rest of the U.S. economy, research shows that it performs poorly compared to manufacturing in other high-wage countries. A total of 3.2\u00a0million\u00a0\u2013 one in six U.S. manufacturing jobs\u00a0\u2013 have disappeared between 2000 and 2007. In the UK, EEF the manufacturers organisation has led calls for the UK economy to be rebalanced to rely less on financial services and has actively promoted the manufacturing agenda.\nMajor manufacturing nations.\nAccording to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), China is the manufacturer with the highest output worldwide in 2023, producing 28.7% of the total global manufacturing output, followed by the United States of America, Germany, Japan, and India.\nUNIDO also publishes a Competitive Industrial Performance (CIP) Index, which measures the competitive manufacturing ability of different nations. The CIP Index combines a nation's gross manufacturing output with other factors like high-tech capability and the nation's impact on the world economy. Germany topped the 2020 CIP Index, followed by China, South Korea, the United States, and Japan.\nIn 2023, the manufacturing industry in the United States accounted for 10.70% of the total national output, employing 8.41% of the workforce. The total value of manufacturing output reached $2.5 trillion. In 2023, Germany's manufacturing output reached $844.93 billion, marking a 12.25% increase from 2022. The sector employed approximately 5.5 million people, accounting for around 20.8% of the workforce.\nList of countries by manufacturing output.\nThese are the top 50 countries by total value of manufacturing output in U.S. dollars for its noted year according to World Bank:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39389", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39389", "title": "Pine", "text": "Genus of coniferous trees\nA pine is any conifer in the genus Pinus () of the family Pinaceae. \"Pinus\" is the sole genus in the subfamily Pinoideae. The species are evergreen trees or shrubs with their leaves in bunches, usually of 2 to 5 needles. The seeds are carried on woody cones, with two seeds to each cone scale.\nPines are widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere; they occupy large areas of taiga (boreal forest), but are found in many habitats, including the Mediterranean Basin, and dry tropical forests in southeast Asia and Central America. Some are fire-resistant or fire-dependent. \nPine trees provide one of the most extensively used types of timber. The seeds are used to make dishes such as pesto, while retsina wine is flavoured with pine resin.\nDescription.\nTree.\nPine trees are evergreen, coniferous resinous trees (or, rarely, shrubs) growing tall, with the majority of species reaching tall. The smallest are Siberian dwarf pine and Potosi pinyon, and the tallest is an tall sugar pine (\"Pinus lambertiana\") located in Yosemite National Park.\nPines are long lived and typically reach ages of 100\u20131,000 years, some even more. The longest-lived is the Great Basin bristlecone pine (\"Pinus longaeva\"). One individual in the White Mountains of California, dubbed \"Methuselah\", is among the world's oldest living organisms at around 4,800-years old. An older tree near Wheeler Peak, now cut down, was dated at 4,900-years old.\nThe spirals of branches, needles, and cone scales are arranged in Fibonacci number ratios.\nBark.\nThe bark of most pines is thick and scaly, but some species have thin, flaky bark. The branches are produced in \"pseudo-whorls\", actually a very tight spiral but appearing like a ring of branches arising from the same point. Many pines are uninodal, producing just one such whorl of branches each year, from buds at the tip of the year's new shoot, but others are multinodal, producing two or more whorls of branches per year.\nFoliage.\nPines have four types of leaf:\nCones.\nPines are monoecious, having the male and female cones on the same tree. The male cones are small, typically 1\u20135\u00a0cm long, and only present for a short period (usually in spring, though autumn in a few pines), falling as soon as they have shed their pollen. The female cones take 1.5\u20133 years (depending on species) to mature after pollination, with actual fertilisation delayed one year. At maturity, the female cones are 3\u201360\u00a0cm long. Each cone has numerous spirally-arranged scales, with two seeds on each fertile scale; the scales at the base and tip of the cone are small and sterile without seeds.\nThe seeds (pine nuts) are mostly small and winged, and are anemochorous (wind-dispersed). Some are larger, have only a vestigial wing, and are bird-dispersed. Female cones are woody and sometimes armed to protect developing seeds from foragers. At maturity, the cones usually open to release the seeds. In some of the bird-dispersed species, for example whitebark pine, the seeds are only released by the bird breaking the cones open. In others, the seeds are stored in closed cones for many years until an environmental cue triggers the cones to open, releasing the seeds. This is called serotiny. The most common form of serotiny is pyriscence, in which resin binds the cones shut until the resin is melted by a forest fire, for example in \"P.\u00a0radiata\" and \"P.\u00a0muricata\". The seeds are then released after the fire, enabling them to colonise the burnt ground with minimal competition from other plants.\nNaming.\nThe modern English name \"pine\" derives from Latin \"pinus\", traced to the Indo-European base \"*p\u012bt-\" 'resin'. Before the 19th century, pines were often called firs, a name now applied to another genus, \"Abies\". In some European languages, Germanic cognates of the Old Norse name are still in use for pines, as in Danish \"fyr\" and German \"F\u00f6hre\". \nThe genus \"Pinus\" was named by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. \"Pinus sylvestris\", the Scots pine, was later chosen as the type species.\nEvolution.\nFossil history.\nThe Pinaceae, the pine family, first appeared in the Jurassic period. The genus \"Pinus\" first appeared during the Early Cretaceous; the oldest verified fossil is \"Pinus yorkshirensis\" from the Hauterivian-Barremian boundary (~130-125 million years ago) from the Speeton Clay, England. However, there are possible records of the genus from the Jurassic.\nExternal phylogeny.\nBased on transcriptome analysis, \"Pinus\" is most closely related to the genus \"Cathaya\", which in turn is closely related to the genus \"Picea\", the spruces. These genera, with firs and larches, form the pinoid clade of the Pinaceae. \nInternal phylogeny.\nThe evolutionary history of the genus \"Pinus\" has been complicated by hybridisation. Pines are prone to inter-specific breeding. Wind pollination, long life spans, overlapping generations, large population size, and weak reproductive isolation make breeding across species more likely. As the pines have diversified, gene transfer between different species has created a complex history of genetic relatedness. Research using large genetic datasets has clarified these relationships. Two 21st century phylogenies are given below; the differences between them demonstrate these complications:\nTaxonomy.\nPines are gymnosperms. The genus is divided into two subgenera based on the number of fibrovascular bundles in the needle, and the presence or absence of a resin seal on the scales of the mature cones before opening. The subgenera can be distinguished by cone, seed, and leaf characters:\nPhylogenetic evidence indicates that the subgenera diverged anciently from one another. Each subgenus is further divided into sections and subsections.\n\"World Flora Online\" accepts 134 species-rank taxa (119 species and 15 nothospecies) of pines as current, with additional synonyms, and \"Plants of the World Online\" 126 species-rank taxa (113 species and 13 nothospecies), making it the largest genus among the conifers. The highest species diversity of pines is found in Mexico.\nDistribution.\nPines are native to the Northern Hemisphere, with the most species in North America, some in Asia, and a few in Europe. Only two species, \"Pinus sylvestris\" and \"Pinus sibirica\", occur in more than one of those regions (Asia and Europe). They occupy large areas of boreal forest (taiga) in latitudes between 50\u00b0 and 60\u00b0 N; about a third of this biome is in North America and Scandinavia, the rest in Siberia. The northernmost species is Scots pine, reaching just north of 70\u00b0 N in Stabbursdalen National Park in Norway; One species, \"Pinus merkusii\", crosses the equator in Sumatra to 2\u00b0S. In North America, various species occur in regions at latitudes from as far north as 66\u00b0 N to as far south as 12\u00b0N.\nVarious species have been introduced to temperate and subtropical regions of both hemispheres, where they are grown as timber or cultivated as ornamental plants in parks and gardens. A number of such introduced species have become naturalised, and species such as \"Pinus radiata\" are considered invasive in some regions.\nEcology.\nEnvironmental factors.\nPines grow in a very large variety of environments, ranging from semi-arid desert to rainforests, from sea level up to , from the coldest to the hottest environments on Earth. They often occur in mountainous areas with favourable soils.\n\"Pinus contorta\" is a fire-dependent species, requiring wildfires to maintain healthy populations of diverse ages.\n\"Pinus canariensis\" is highly fire-resistant, with adaptations such as growing epicormic sprouts after losing its needles in a fire. Some species such as \"Pinus muricata\" need fire to open their cones, allowing them to disperse their seeds. Other pines such as \"Pinus mugo\" and \"Pinus yunnanensis\" can grow at high elevation. Some pines, such as \"Pinus sabiniana\", are adapted to growth in hot, dry semidesert climates.\nSpecies interactions.\nPine needles serve as food for the caterpillar larvae of several moth species including the pine beauty, a pest of mature stands of pine trees, and the pine hawk-moth, a large species which causes only occasional damage. \nSome moths, notably the pine processionary, whose caterpillars can completely defoliate pine trees, and the pine-tree lappet, are serious pests of commercial forestry.\nSeveral species of pine are attacked by nematodes, causing pine wilt disease, which can quickly kill trees.\nThe sawfly \"Diprion pini\" is likewise a serious commercial pest of pine forestry, especially of \"Pinus sylvestris\". Some birds such as nutcrackers are specialist feeders on pine seeds, and are important in distributing the seeds widely. Crossbills rely on \"Pinus sylvestris\" seeds in Scotland, and similarly help significantly to disperse the seeds, whereas red squirrels feed on the seeds but do little for seed dispersal. Pine pollen may contribute to food webs involving detritivores. Nutrients from pollen aid detritivores in development, growth, and maturation, and may enable fungi to decompose plant litter which is low in nutrients. The edible basidiomycete fungus \"Boletus pinophilus\" (pine bolete) forms an ectomycorrhizal association with pines such as \"P. cembra\", \"P. nigra\", and \"P. sylvestris\". \nUses.\nTimber.\nPines are among the most commercially important tree species, valued for their timber and wood pulp throughout the world. \nIn temperate and tropical regions, they are fast-growing softwoods that grow in relatively dense stands. Commercial pines are grown in plantations for timber that is denser and therefore more durable than spruce (\"Picea\"). Pine wood is widely used in high-value carpentry items such as furniture, window frames, panelling, floors, and roofing due to its abundance and low cost.\nAs pine wood has little resistance to insects or decay after logging, in its untreated state it is generally recommended for indoor construction purposes only, such as indoor drywall framing. It is commonly used in Canadian Lumber Standard graded wood. For outside use, pine needs to be treated with copper azole, chromated copper arsenate or other suitable chemical preservatives.\nOrnamental uses.\nMany pine trees make attractive ornamental plantings for parks and larger gardens, while dwarf cultivars are suitable for smaller spaces. There are at least 818 named cultivars (or trinomials) recognised by the American Conifer Society ACS.\nFood.\nThe seeds (pine nuts) are generally edible; the young male cones can be cooked and eaten, as can the bark of young twigs. Some species have large pine nuts, which are harvested and sold for cooking and baking. They are an ingredient of \"pesto alla genovese\".\nThe soft, moist, white inner bark (cambium) beneath the woody outer bark is edible and very high in vitamins A and C. It can be eaten raw in slices as a snack or dried and ground up into a powder for use as an ersatz flour or thickener in stews, soups, and other foods, such as bark bread. The use of pine cambium gave the Adirondack Indians their name, from the Mohawk Indian word \"atir\u00fa:taks\", meaning \"tree eaters\".\nA herbal tea is made by steeping young, green pine needles in boiling water (known as \"tallstrunt\" in Sweden). In eastern Asia, pine and other conifers are accepted among consumers as a beverage product, and used in teas, as well as wine. \nIn Greece, the wine retsina is flavoured with resin from \"Pinus halepensis\" (Aleppo pine).\nOther uses.\nTurpentine oil, traditionally used as a solvent in paints, resins and varnishes, is extracted from pine resin or pine wood. Pine needles are woven into baskets in Latin America. In traditional Chinese medicine, pine resin is used for burns, wounds and skin complaints. Chinese ink sticks for calligraphy are often made of pine soot, producing a matt black ink when mixed with water. Pine needles have been used by Latvian designer Tamara Orjola to create biodegradable products including paper, furniture, textiles and dyestuffs.\nCulture.\nIn ancient Egypt, the god Osiris was honoured with an image placed in a cavity inside a pine tree. In ancient Greece, the goddess Pitthea was linked with pines, while in ancient Rome, the tree was worshipped in the festival of the god Attis and the goddess Cybele. The Greek god of wine, Dionysus (also called Bacchus), was associated with pine as a symbol of fertility, and his devotees carried a stick topped with a pine cone (a \"thyrsus\"), a phallic symbol. The Buryat people of Siberia revered groves of \"Pinus sylvestris\", while ancient Celtic Druids marked the midwinter solstice with fires of the same species. \nIn 1924, the Italian composer Ottorino Respighi completed his tone poem \"Pines of Rome\". Each of its four movements depicts a pine-clad setting in the city of Rome, namely the Villa Borghese gardens, near a catacomb, on the Janiculum Hill, and along the Appian Way.\nPines are often featured in paintings. A 2021 study lists over a hundred works: many are by artists from the Mediterranean region, such as Paul C\u00e9zanne and Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot; Northern Europe, such as Akseli Gallen-Kallela and James William Giles; and North America, with works by Tom Thomson and others. The paintings often depict \"Pinus pinea\" by the Mediterranean sea; other species include \"P. sylvestris\" and \"P. pinaster\". The pine is a particular motif in Chinese art and literature, which sometimes combines painting and poetry in the same work. The pine symbolises longevity and steadfastness, as it retains its green needles throughout the year. Sometimes the pine and cypress are paired. At other times the pine, plum, and bamboo are considered as the \"Three Friends of Winter\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39391", "revid": "48675950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39391", "title": "Center", "text": "Center or centre may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39393", "revid": "50638037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39393", "title": "Epicureanism", "text": "Philosophical system\nEpicureanism is a system of philosophy founded in 307 BCE and based upon the teachings of Epicurus, an ancient Greek philosopher. Epicurus was an atomist and materialist, following in the steps of Democritus. His materialism led him to religious skepticism and a general attack on superstition and divine intervention. Epicureanism was originally a challenge to Platonism, and its main opponent later became Stoicism. It is a form of hedonism insofar as it declares pleasure to be its sole intrinsic goal. However, the concept that the absence of pain and fear constitutes the greatest pleasure, and its advocacy of a simple life, make it very different from hedonism as colloquially understood.\nFollowing the Cyrenaic philosopher Aristippus, Epicurus believed that the greatest good was to seek modest, sustainable pleasure in the form of a state of \"ataraxia\" (tranquility and freedom from fear) and \"aponia\" (the absence of bodily pain) through knowledge of the workings of the world and limiting desires. Correspondingly, Epicurus and his followers generally withdrew from politics because it could lead to frustrations and ambitions that would conflict with their pursuit of virtue and peace of mind.\nFew writings by Epicurus have survived. Diogenes Laertius has preserved three instructional letters attributed to Epicurus, as well as a list of the Principal Doctrines of Epicureanism. The letters to Herodotus and to Menoeceus are generally accepted as authentic works written by Epicurus himself. However, the letter addressed to Pythocles is often considered to be a compilation by one of his students, likely based on Epicurus\u2019 original writings. There are also independent attestations of his ideas from his later disciples. The epic poem \"De rerum natura\" (Latin for \"On the Nature of Things\") by Lucretius presents the core arguments and theories of Epicureanism in one unified work. Many Epicurean texts have also been found on scrolls unearthed at the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum, mostly works written by the Epicurean philosopher Philodemus or his teacher Zeno of Sidon, along with fragments of works by Epicurus himself. Diogenes of Oenoanda, a wealthy Epicurean in the 2nd century CE, had a portico wall inscribed with tenets of the philosophy erected in Oenoanda, Lycia (present-day Turkey). \nEpicureanism flourished in the Late Hellenistic period and during the Roman era, and many Epicurean communities were established in places such as Antioch, Alexandria, Rhodes, and Herculaneum. By the late 3rd century CE, Epicureanism had all but died out, being opposed by other philosophies (mainly Neoplatonism) that were then in the ascent. Interest in Epicureanism was resurrected in the Age of Enlightenment and continues in the modern era.\nHistory.\nEpicurus, the founder of the Epicurean School, was born in 342/1 BCE on the island of Samos. In his early years, he studied under Pamphilus, a Platonist philosopher in Samos. Later, he received instruction from Nausiphanes of Teos, a follower of Democritus. Although Epicurus would later downplay these early influences, it is generally acknowledged that Nausiphanes had a significant impact on the development of his thought. At the age of eighteen, Epicurus traveled to Athens for military service. After completing his duties, he devoted himself entirely to philosophy while living in Colophon. Epicurus taught and gained followers in Mytilene, the capital of the island Lesbos, and then in Lampsacus. In Athens, Epicurus bought a property for his school called \"Garden\", which later became the name of Epicurus' school. Its members included Hermarchus, Idomeneus, Colotes, Polyaenus, and Metrodorus. Epicurus emphasized friendship as an important ingredient of happiness, and the school seems to have been a moderately ascetic community that rejected the political limelight of Athenian philosophy. They were fairly cosmopolitan by Athenian standards, including women and slaves. Community activities held some importance, particularly the observance of Eikas, a monthly social gathering. Some members were also vegetarians, as, from slight evidence, Epicurus did not eat meat, although no prohibition against eating meat was made.\nThe school's popularity grew and it became, along with Stoicism, Platonism, Peripateticism, and Pyrrhonism, one of the dominant schools of Hellenistic philosophy, lasting strongly through the later Roman Empire. Deciphered carbonized scrolls obtained from the library at the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum contain a large number of works by Philodemus, a late Hellenistic Epicurean, and Epicurus himself, attesting to the school's enduring popularity. Julius Caesar also leaned considerably toward Epicureanism, which led to his plea against the death sentence during the trial against Catiline, during the Catiline conspiracy where he spoke out against the Stoic Cato. His father-in-law, Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus, was also an adept of the school. In the 2nd century CE, comedian Lucian of Samosata and wealthy promoter of philosophy Diogenes of Oenoanda were prominent Epicureans.\nAfter the death of Epicurus, leadership of the school passed to Hermarchus, who was originally from Mytilene. He was succeeded by Polystratus. Among Epicurus' closest students were Hermarchus, Polyaenus, and Metrodorus of Lampsacus. \nOne of the earliest Roman writers espousing Epicureanism was Amafinius, although his work has not survived. The Roman philosopher Cicero later wrote that he had listened to Phaedrus, who served as the head of the Athenian school around 90 BCE and had come to Rome. However, the most well-known follower of Epicureanism was the Roman poet Titus Lucretius Carus (c. 91\u201351 BCE). Lucretius expressed Epicurus' philosophical ideas in his didactic poem \"De Rerum Natura\" (\"On the Nature of Things\"). The main goal of this work was to free people from the fear of the gods and death, and to guide them toward achieving inner peace and tranquility. The Epicurean philosopher Philodemus of Gadara, until the 18th century only known as a poet of minor importance, rose to prominence as much of his work, along with other Epicurean material such as the lectures of Zeno of Sidon, was discovered in the Villa of the Papyri. Another ancient Epicurean is Diogenes of Oenoanda, in the 2nd century CE, who composed a large inscription at Oenoanda in Lycia. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius reports slanderous stories, circulated by Epicurus' opponents.\nBy the late third century CE, however, there was little trace of its existence. \nWith growing dominance of Neoplatonism and Peripateticism, and later, Christianity, Epicureanism declined.\nPhilosophy.\nPhysics.\nIn his letter to Herodotus (not the historian), Epicurus presented three principles as to the nature of the physical world, i.e. that which exists cannot come into being from that which does not exist, that which is destroyed does not cease to exist, and all that exists now always did exist and always will. The object of these principles was to establish the fact that all that constitutes the world is permanent and unchanging. Epicurean physics held that the entire universe consisted of two things: matter and void. Matter is made up of atoms, which are tiny bodies that have only the unchanging qualities of shape, size, and weight. The Epicureans believed that atoms were unchanging because the world was ordered and that changes had to have specific and consistent sources, e.g. a plant species only grows from a seed of the same species, but that in order for the universe to persist, what it is ultimately made up of must not be able to be changed or else the universe would be essentially destroyed.\nEpicurus holds that there must be an infinite supply of atoms, although only a finite number of types of atoms, as well as an infinite amount of void. Epicurus explains this position in his letter to Herodotus:\nMoreover, the sum of things is unlimited both by reason of the multitude of the atoms and the extent of the void. For if the void were infinite and bodies finite, the bodies would not have stayed anywhere but would have been dispersed in their course through the infinite void, not having any supports or counterchecks to send them back on their upward rebound. Again, if the void were finite, the infinity of bodies would not have anywhere to be. Because of the infinite supply of atoms, there are an infinite number of worlds, or \"cosmoi\". Some of these worlds could be vastly different from our own, some quite similar, and all of the worlds were separated from each other by vast areas of void (\"metakosmia\").\nEpicureanism states that atoms are unable to be broken down into any smaller parts because void is necessary for matter to move. Anything that consists of both void and matter can be broken down, while if something contains no void, then it has no way to break apart because no part of the substance could be broken down into a smaller subsection of the substance. Atoms are constantly moving in one of four different ways. Atoms can simply collide with each other and then bounce off of each other. When joined with each other and forming a larger object, atoms can vibrate as they collide into each other while still maintaining the overall shape of the larger object.\nWhen not prevented by other atoms, all atoms move at the same speed naturally downwards in relation to the rest of the world. This downwards motion is natural for atoms; however, as their fourth means of motion, atoms can at times randomly swerve out of their usual downwards path. This swerving motion is what allowed for the creation of the universe, since as more and more atoms swerved and collided with each other, objects were able to take shape as the atoms joined. Without the swerve, the atoms would never have interacted with each other, and simply continued to move downwards at the same speed. Epicurus also felt that the swerve was what accounted for humanity's free will. If it were not for the swerve, humans would be subject to a never-ending chain of cause and effect. This was a point which Epicureans often used to criticize Democritus' atomic theory.\nEpistemology.\nEpicurean philosophy employs an empirical epistemology, one based on the senses.\nSense perception.\nEpicureans believed that the senses also relied on atoms. Every object was continually emitting particles from itself that would then interact with the observer. All sensations, such as sight, smell, or sound, relied on these particles. While the atoms that were emitted did not have the qualities that the senses were perceiving, the manner in which they were emitted caused the observer to experience those sensations, e.g. red particles were not themselves red but were emitted in a manner that caused the viewer to experience the color red. The atoms are not perceived individually, but rather as a continuous sensation because of how quickly they move.\nThe Epicureans believed that all sense perceptions were true, and that errors arise in how we judge those perceptions. When we form judgments about things (\"hupolepsis\"), they can be verified and corrected through further sensory information. For example, if someone sees a tower from far away that appears to be round, and upon approaching the tower they see that it is actually square, they would come to realize that their original judgement was wrong and correct their wrong opinion.\nCriterion of truth.\nEpicurus is said to have proposed three criteria of truth: sensations (\"aisth\u00easis\"), preconceptions (\"prolepsis\"), and feelings (\"path\u00ea\"). A fourth criterion called \"presentational applications of the mind\" (\"phantastikai epibolai t\u00eas dianoias\") was said to have been added by later Epicureans. These criteria formed the method through which Epicureans thought we gained knowledge.\nSince Epicureans thought that sensations could not deceive, sensations are the first and main criterion of truth for Epicureans. Even in cases where sensory input seems to mislead, the input itself is true and the error arises from our judgments about the input. For example, when one places a straight oar in the water, it appears bent. The Epicurean would argue that the image of the oar, that is, the atoms traveling from the oar to the observer's eyes, has been shifted and thus really does arrive at the observer's eyes in the shape of a bent oar. The observer makes the error in assuming that the image he or she receives correctly represents the oar and has not been distorted in some way. In order not to make erroneous judgments about perceivable things and instead verify one's judgment, Epicureans believed that one needed to obtain \"clear vision\" (\"enargeia\") of the perceivable thing by closer examination. This acted as a justification for one's judgements about the thing being perceived. \"Enargeia\" is characterized as sensation of an object that has been unchanged by judgments or opinions and is a clear and direct perception of that object.\nAn individual's preconceptions are his or her concepts of what things are, e.g. what someone's idea of a horse is, and these concepts are formed in a person's mind through sensory input over time. When the word that relates to the preconception is used, these preconceptions are summoned up by the mind into the person's thoughts. It is through our preconceptions that we are able to make judgments about the things that we perceive. Preconceptions were also used by Epicureans to avoid the paradox proposed by Plato in the \"Meno\" regarding learning. Plato argues that learning requires us to already have knowledge of what we are learning, or else we would be unable to recognize when we had successfully learned the information. Preconceptions, Epicureans argue, provide individuals with that pre-knowledge required for learning.\nOur feelings or emotions (\"path\u00ea\") are how we perceive pleasure and pain. They are analogous to sensations in that they are a means of perception, but they perceive our internal state as opposed to external things. According to Diogenes Laertius, feelings are how we determine our actions. If something is pleasurable, we pursue that thing, and if something is painful, we avoid that thing.\nThe idea of \"presentational applications of the mind\" is an explanation for how we can discuss and inquire about things we cannot directly perceive. We receive impressions of such things directly in our minds, instead of perceiving them through other senses. The concept of \"presentational applications of the mind\" may have been introduced to explain how we learn about things that we cannot directly perceive, such as the gods.\nEthics.\nEpicureanism bases its ethics on a hedonistic set of values, seeing pleasure as the chief good in life. Hence, Epicurus advocated living in such a way as to derive the greatest amount of pleasure possible during one's lifetime, yet doing so moderately in order to avoid the suffering incurred by overindulgence in such pleasure. Epicurus actively recommended against passionate love and believed it best to avoid marriage altogether. He viewed recreational sex as a natural, but not necessary, desire that should be generally avoided. Since the political life could give rise to desires that could disturb virtue and one's peace of mind, such as a lust for power or a desire for fame, participation in politics was discouraged. Further, Epicurus sought to eliminate the fear of the gods and of death, seeing those two fears as chief causes of strife in life.\nPleasure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When we say ... that pleasure is the end and aim, we do not mean the pleasures of the prodigal or the pleasures of sensuality, as we are understood to do by some through ignorance, prejudice or wilful misrepresentation. By pleasure we mean the absence of pain in the body and of trouble in the soul. It is not by an unbroken succession of drinking bouts and of revelry, not by sexual lust, nor the enjoyment of fish and other delicacies of a luxurious table, which produce a pleasant life; it is sober reasoning, searching out the grounds of every choice and avoidance, and banishing those beliefs through which the greatest tumults take possession of the soul.\u2014\u200a\nEpicureans had a very specific understanding of what the greatest pleasure was, and the focus of their ethics was on the avoidance of pain rather than seeking out pleasure. As evidence for this, Epicureans say that nature seems to command us to avoid pain, and they point out that all animals try to avoid pain as much as possible. Epicureanism divided pleasure into two broad categories: \"pleasures of the body\" and \"pleasures of the mind\". \"Pleasures of the body\" involve sensations of the body, such as the act of eating delicious food or of being in a state of comfort free from pain, and exist only in the present. One can only experience pleasures of the body in the moment, meaning they only exist as a person is experiencing them. \"Pleasures of the mind\" involve mental processes and states; feelings of joy, the lack of fear, and pleasant memories are all examples of pleasures of the mind. These pleasures of the mind do not only exist in the present, but also in the past and future, since memory of a past pleasant experience or the expectation of some potentially pleasing future can both be pleasurable experiences. Because of this, the pleasures of the mind are considered to be greater than those of the body.\nEmphasis was placed on pleasures of the mind rather than on physical pleasures. The Epicureans further divided each of these types of pleasures into two categories: \"kinetic pleasure\" and \"katastematic pleasure\". Absence of pain, aponia, and lack of disturbance of mind, ataraxia, are two of the katastematic pleasures and often seen as the focal ones to Epicurus. \"Kinetic pleasure\" is the physical or mental pleasures that involve action or change. Eating delicious food, as well as fulfilling desires and removing pain, which is itself considered a pleasurable act, are all examples of kinetic pleasure in the physical sense. According to Epicurus, feelings of joy would be an example of mental kinetic pleasure. \"Katastematic pleasure\" is the pleasure one feels while in a state without pain. Like kinetic pleasures, katastematic pleasures can also be physical, such as the state of not being thirsty, or mental, such as freedom from a state of fear.\nWhile the pursuit of pleasure formed the focal point of the philosophy, this was largely directed to the \"static pleasures\" of minimizing pain, anxiety and suffering. From this understanding, Epicureans concluded that the greatest pleasure a person could reach was the complete removal of all pain, both physical and mental. The ultimate goal then of Epicurean ethics was to reach a state of \"aponia\" and \"ataraxia\".\nDesire.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I learn that your bodily inclination leans most keenly towards sexual intercourse. If you neither violate the laws nor disturb well-established morals nor sadden someone close to you, nor strain your body, nor spend what is needed for necessities, use your own choice as you wish. It is sure difficult to imagine, however, that none of these would be a part of sex because sex never benefitted anyone.\u2014\u200a\nIn order to do this, an Epicurean had to control their desires, because desire itself was seen as painful. Not only will controlling one's desires bring about \"aponia\", as one will rarely suffer from not being physically satisfied, but controlling one's desires will also help to bring about \"ataraxia\" because one will not be anxious about becoming discomforted since one would have so few desires anyway. The Epicureans divide desires into three classes: natural and necessary, natural but not necessary, and vain and empty:\nIf one follows only natural and necessary desires, then, according to Epicurus, one would be able to reach \"aponia\" and \"ataraxia\" and thereby the highest form of happiness. Unnecessary and, especially, artificially produced desires were to be suppressed.\nPolitics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \nThe Epicurean understanding of justice was inherently self-interested. Justice was deemed good because it was seen as mutually beneficial. Individuals would not act unjustly even if the act was initially unnoticed because of possibly being caught and punished. Both punishment and fear of punishment would cause a person disturbance and prevent them from being happy.\nEpicurus was also an early thinker to develop the notion of justice as a social contract, and in part attempts to address issues with the society described in Plato's \"Republic\". The social contract theory established by Epicureanism is based on mutual agreement, not divine decree. He defined justice as an agreement made by people not to harm each other. The point of living in a society with laws and punishments is to be protected from harm so that one is free to pursue happiness. Because of this, laws that do not contribute to promoting human happiness are not just. He gave his own unique version of the ethic of reciprocity, which differs from other formulations by emphasizing minimizing harm and maximizing happiness for oneself and others.\nEpicurean ideas on politics disagree with other philosophical traditions, namely the Stoic, Platonist and Aristotelian traditions. To Epicureans all our social relations are a matter of how we perceive each other, of customs and traditions. No one is inherently of higher value or meant to dominate another. That is because there is no metaphysical basis for the superiority of one kind of person; all people are made of the same atomic material and are thus naturally equal. Epicureans also discourage political participation and other involvement in politics. However, Epicureans are not apolitical; it is possible that some political association could be seen as beneficial by some Epicureans. Some political associations could lead to certain benefits to the individual that would help to maximize pleasure and avoid physical or mental distress.\nFriendship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;of all the things which wisdom has contrived which contribute to a blessed life, none is more important, more fruitful, than friendship\u2014\u200a\nEpicurus laid great emphasis on developing friendships as the basis of a satisfying life. The avoidance or freedom from hardship and fear is ideal to the Epicureans. While this avoidance or freedom could conceivably be achieved through political means, it was insisted by Epicurus that involvement in politics would not release one from fear and he advised against a life of politics. Epicurus also discouraged contributing to political society by starting a family, as the benefits of a wife and children are outweighed by the trouble brought about by having a family. Instead, Epicurus encouraged the formation of a community of friends outside the traditional political state. This community of virtuous friends would focus on internal affairs and justice. However, Epicureanism is adaptable to circumstance, as is the Epicurean approach to politics. The same approaches will not always work in protection from pain and fear. In some situations, it will be more beneficial to have a family, and in other situations, it will be more beneficial to participate in politics. It is ultimately up to the Epicurean to analyse their circumstance and take whatever action befits the situation.\nDeath.\nEpicureanism rejects immortality. It believes in the soul, but suggests that the soul is mortal and material, just like the body. Epicurus rejected any possibility of an afterlife, while still contending that one need not fear death: \"Death is nothing to us; for that which is dissolved, is without sensation, and that which lacks sensation is nothing to us.\" From this doctrine arose the Epicurean Epitaph: \"Non fui, fui, non sum, non curo\" (\"I was not; I was; I am not; I do not care.\"), which is inscribed on the gravestones of his followers and seen on many ancient gravestones of the Roman Empire.\nGods.\nEpicureanism does not deny the existence of the gods; rather, it denies their involvement in the world. According to Epicureanism, the gods do not interfere with human lives or the rest of the universe in any way \u2013 thus, it shuns the idea that frightening weather events are divine retribution. One of the fears the Epicurean ought to be freed from is fear relating to the actions of the gods.\nThe manner in which the Epicurean gods exist is still disputed. Some scholars say that Epicureanism believes that the gods exist outside the mind as material objects (the realist position), while others assert that the gods only exist in our minds as ideals (the idealist position). The realist position holds that Epicureans understand the gods as existing as physical and immortal beings made of atoms that reside somewhere in reality. However, the gods are completely separate from the rest of reality; they are uninterested in it, play no role in it, and remain completely undisturbed by it. Instead, the gods live in what is called the \"metakosmia\", or the space between worlds. Contrarily, the idealist (sometimes called the \"non-realist position\" to avoid confusion) position holds that the gods are just idealized forms of the best human life, and it is thought that the gods were emblematic of the life one should aspire towards. The debate between these two positions was revived by A. A. Long and David Sedley in their 1987 book, \"The Hellenistic Philosophers\", in which the two argued in favour of the idealist position. While a scholarly consensus has yet to be reached, the realist position remains the prevailing viewpoint at this time.\nLegacy.\nLater antiquity.\nThe early Christian writer Lactantius criticizes Epicurus at several points throughout his \"Divine Institutes\" and preserves the \"Riddle of Epicurus\", or \"Problem of evil\", a famous argument against the existence of an all-powerful and providential God or gods. This type of \"trilemma\" argument (God is omnipotent, God is good, but Evil exists) was one favoured by the ancient Greek skeptics, and this argument may have been wrongly attributed to Epicurus by Lactantius, who, from his Christian perspective, regarded Epicurus as an atheist. According to Reinhold F. Glei, it is settled that the argument of \"theodicy\" is from an academical source which is not only not Epicurean, but even anti-Epicurean. The earliest extant version of this \"trilemma\" appears in the writings of the Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus.\nEpikoros is a Jewish term figuratively meaning \"a heretic\", cited in the Mishnah, referring to one who does not have a share in the world to come Although rabbinic literature does not make any specific reference to the Greek philosopher Epicurus, it is apparent that the term is derived from the philosopher's name. \nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nIn Dante Alighieri's \"Divine Comedy\", the Epicureans are depicted as heretics suffering in the sixth circle of hell. In fact, Epicurus appears to represent the ultimate heresy.\nFrancis Bacon wrote an apothegm related to Epicureanism:\nThere was an Epicurean vaunted, that divers of other sects of philosophers did after turn Epicureans, but there was never any Epicurean that turned to any other sect. Whereupon a philosopher that was of another sect, said; The reason was plain, for that cocks may be made capons, but capons could never be made cocks. \nThis echoed what the Academic skeptic philosopher Arcesilaus had said when asked \"why it was that pupils from all the other schools went over to Epicurus, but converts were never made from the Epicureans?\" to which he responded: \"Because men may become eunuchs, but a eunuch never becomes a man.\"\nModern revival.\nIn the 17th century, the French Franciscan priest, scientist and philosopher Pierre Gassendi wrote two books forcefully reviving Epicureanism. Shortly thereafter, and clearly influenced by Gassendi, Walter Charleton published several works on Epicureanism in English. Attacks by Christians continued, most forcefully by the Cambridge Platonists.\nIn modern times, Thomas Jefferson referred to himself as an Epicurean:If I had time I would add to my little book the Greek, Latin and French texts, in columns side by side. And I wish I could subjoin a translation of Gassendi's Syntagma of the doctrines of Epicurus, which, notwithstanding the calumnies of the Stoics and caricatures of Cicero, is the most rational system remaining of the philosophy of the ancients, as frugal of vicious indulgence, and fruitful of virtue as the hyperbolical extravagances of his rival sects.Other modern-day Epicureans were Gassendi, Walter Charleton, Fran\u00e7ois Bernier, Saint-\u00c9vremond, Ninon de l'Enclos, Denis Diderot, Frances Wright and Jeremy Bentham.\nIn France, where perfumer/restaurateur G\u00e9rald Ghislain refers to himself as an Epicurean, Michel Onfray is developing a post-modern approach to Epicureanism. In his 2011 book titled \"The Swerve\", Stephen Greenblatt identified himself as strongly sympathetic to Epicureanism and Lucretius. Humanistic Judaism as a denomination also claims the Epicurean label.\nSimilarities with eastern philosophies.\nSome scholars have drawn parallels between Epicureanism and some eastern philosophies that similarly emphasize atomism or a lack of divine interference, such as Jainism, Charvaka, and Buddhism. Epicureanism also resembles Buddhism in its belief that great excess leads to great dissatisfaction.\nMisconceptions.\nIn modern popular usage, an Epicurean is a connoisseur of the arts of life and the refinements of sensual pleasures; \"Epicureanism\" implies a love or knowledgeable enjoyment especially of good food and drink.\nBecause Epicureanism posits that pleasure is the ultimate good (\"telos\"), it has been commonly misunderstood since ancient times as a doctrine that advocates the partaking in fleeting pleasures such as sexual excess and decadent food. This is not the case. Epicurus regarded \"ataraxia\" (tranquility, freedom from fear) and \"aponia\" (absence of pain) as the height of happiness. He also considered prudence an important virtue and perceived excess and overindulgence to be contrary to the attainment of ataraxia and aponia. Yet Epicurus referred \"the good\", and \"even wisdom and culture\", to the \"pleasure of the stomach\".\nWhile Epicurus sought moderation at meals, he was also not averse to moderation in moderation, that is, to occasional luxury. Called \"The Garden\" for being based in what would have been a kitchen garden, his community also became known for its Eikas (Greek \u03b5\u1f30\u03ba\u03ac\u03c2 from \u03b5\u1f34\u03ba\u03bf\u03c3\u1fd0 \"e\u00edkosi\", \"twenty\"), feasts of the twentieth (of the Greek month), which was otherwise considered sacred to the god Apollo, and also corresponding to the final day of the rites of initiation to the mysteries of Demeter.\nEpicurea.\nThe Epicurea is a collection of texts, fragments, and testimonies by Epicurus that was collected by Hermann Usener in 1887. This work features a collection of writings by Epicurus that explain the values and beliefs of Ancient Epicurian philosophy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39398", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39398", "title": "Robert Estienne", "text": "French printer (1503\u20131559)\nRobert I Estienne (; 1503\u00a0\u2013 7 September 1559), known as \"Robertus Stephanus\" in Latin and sometimes referred to as \"Robert Stephens\", was a French 16th-century printer in Paris. He was the proprietor of the Estienne print shop after the death of his father Henri Estienne, the founder of the Estienne printing firm. Estienne published and republished many classical texts as well as Greek and Latin translations of the Bible. Known as \"Printer to the King\" in Latin, Hebrew, and Greek, Estienne's most prominent work was the \"Thesaurus linguae latinae\" which is considered to be the foundation of modern Latin lexicography. Additionally, he was the first to print the New Testament divided into standard numbered verses.\nRaised a Catholic, he became a Protestant late in his life. Many of his published Bibles included commentary which upset the Catholic theologians of the Sorbonne who sought to censor Estienne's work. Eventually, overcome by the prejudice of the Sorbonne, Estienne and his family fled to Geneva where he continued his printing uncensored, publishing many of the works of John Calvin. In 1556 he became a citizen of Geneva, where he would die on 7 September 1559.\nOf Estienne's four sons, two became accomplished printers, one of whom was Henri Estienne who continued the legacy of his grandfather Estienne's printing firm. Along with other printers, Estienne contributed to the \"Golden Age of French Typography\".\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nRobert Estienne was born in Paris in 1503. The second son of the famous humanist printer Henri Estienne, he became knowledgeable in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. After his father's death in 1520, the Estienne printing establishment was maintained by his father's former partner Simon de Colines who also married Estienne's mother, the widow Estienne. As Estienne was not yet of age at the time of his father's death, Colines and Gilles Nepveu (the husband or fianc\u00e9 of his sister Nicole) became his legal guardians. Estienne and Colines likely collaborated in Estienne print shop for a time. Colines was known for his exquisite type cutting, whereas Estienne was known for his accuracy.\nIn 1526, Robert Estienne assumed control of his father's printing shop while Colines established his own firm nearby. The parties agreed to divide the house, printing equipment, and printing supplies in half. Colines moved his shop down the street from the Estienne shop. Though the nature of their relationship after this is largely unknown, scholars suggest that they had mutual respect for one another and may have continued to collaborate, sharing fonts and materials. Even though Estienne re-established his father's printing shop in 1526, his first independent project as a scholar-printer can be traced back to 1524. He was in the process of publishing a Latin version of the Bible as he searched Paris for manuscripts. He had already printed a New Testament, and some slight alterations which he had introduced into the text brought upon him the censures of the faculty of theology. It was the first of a long series of disputes between him and that body. Around this time, he apparently joined the Reformed Church.\nEstienne married Perrette Badius in 1526 whose father Josse Badius Ascensius owned a print shop, giving Estienne the resources to print that he lacked from his father's materials alone. After her father's death in 1535, Estienne merged the Estienne and Badius printing business. His first \"Biblia\" or version of the Vulgate Bible was published in 1527. While he was working on the Bible, he increased his revenue and reputation by publishing a series of octavos, which in this case were small, inexpensive educational books from scholars such as Cicero and Lucian. Estienne's trade was primarily as printer-bookseller and though he did publish his own prints, he did not publish in partnership with other printers as was a common practice for printers of the time. \nLatin classics.\nWith his title of \"royal typographer\" Robert Estienne promoted the Estienne print shop by his numerous editions of grammatical works and other schoolbooks (among them many of Melanchthon's) and of classical and Patristic authors, such as Dio Cassius, Cicero, Sallust, Julius Caesar, Justin, Socrates Scholasticus, and Sozomen. During the first fifteen years of his career, Estienne focused his printing on five Latin classic authors, specifically, Cicero, Terence, Plautus, Pliny, and Virgil. He printed works from Horace and Persisus, but he printed them far less frequently. He nearly tripled the number of authors' works he published from 1541 to 1545. Scholars suggest that Estienne's trouble with his published Bibles and the Catholic Church led him to publish more authors of Latin Classics as a buffer.\nMany of Estienne's published classics, especially the Greek editions (which were printed with typefaces made by Claude Garamond), were famous for their typographical elegance. The editiones principes issued from Estienne's press were eight in number. He began with the \"Historia ecclesiastica\" (1544) and ended with Appian (1551). The last was completed after Estienne's departure from Paris by his brother Charles and appeared under Charles's name. Estienne also printed numerous editions of Latin classics, of which the folio Virgil of 1532 is the most noteworthy. He printed a large number of Latin grammars and other educational works, many of which were written by Mathurin Cordier, his friend and co-worker in the cause of humanism. He was trained as a punchcutter, but no font has been identified as his. Estienne did, however, oversee the work of the best punchcutters of the time such as Claude Garamond and Guillaume Le B\u00e9. Under Estienne, Garamond designed the Greek type used by the King of France which was used to print the first edition of \"Roman History\". Consequently, Estienne was the first printer granted permission to use the \"grecs du roi\" or Greek types of the king. In the 1530s Estienne's printing represents the first use of apostrophes and grave and acute accents in France. Moreover, Estienne was known as one of the printers responsible for adapting the Aldine roman type in France.\nDictionaries.\nOne of the best printers of his time, Robert Estienne was asked to either compile a dictionary from the best Latin authors or make one himself; in 1531 he published his \"Thesaurus linguae latinae\", which is considered by some scholars to be the foundation of modern Latin lexicography. Moreover, this dictionary made Estienne the \"father of French lexicography\". He had worked on it for two years, with the assistance only of Thierry of Beauvais. It was 964 pages and was improved in 1536 and 1543 in three volumes. Considered his \"greatest monument of Latin scholarship\", he employed research assistants for the 1543 version: Andreas Gruntleus, Gerardus Clericus, and Adam Nodius. \nFrom his work on the \"Thesaurus linguae latinae\", he published \"Dictionarium latino-gallicum\" in 1538 and \"Dictionaire fran\u00e7oislatin\" in 1540. These dictionaries were superior to others at the time because non-classical elements had been edited out; when determining words, they were checked for correctness and applicability in context; and citations were exclusively from classical authors. Furthermore, it applied consistency to word order since lexicographers disagreed about whether words should be ordered alphabetically or etymologically. Estienne's thesaurus was alphabetical based on the first three letters of the word, then grouped etymologically. In the 1540s, he began publishing more concise school dictionaries. Many of these dictionaries were translated into other languages such as German and Flemish. From 1528 to 1580, he published several editions of \"Alphabetum graecum\", a representation of Renaissance Greek orthography.\nReligious texts.\nAlthough Robert Estienne was printing Bibles in Latin as early as 1528, he printed his first Greek New Testament in 1546. Despite its similarity to the works of Erasmus, Estienne did not credit Erasmus and rather claimed to be influenced by ancient codices. The first two are beautiful Greek texts, called \"O mirifica\". The third and most significant is known as the \"Editio Regia\" or the \"Royal Edition\", published in 1550 for King Henri II. Typographically it is significant because the Greek font made by Garamond became the most widely used Greek font for European printers. In it he combined over 15 Greek sources with annotations in the margins. The 1550 version became known as the \"Textus Receptus\", the standard text for many generations. The 1551 edition contains Erasmus's Latin translation and the Vulgate. Scholars have described his editing of the Vulgate as mediocre and lacking in effort or depth. In this edition of the Vulgate, Estienne introduced the division of the New Testament into chapter and verses for the first time. After he finished the Vulgate, he began developing his style. He was interested in working on original texts rather than translations. Additionally, he was interested in writing commentaries to help an average reader understand the academic texts to the point of adding his own interpretation. Moreover, Estienne's commentary in the fourth edition of the Greek New Testament initiated the antagonism of the Sorbonne against Estienne.\nHe published two editions of the Hebrew Bible: one in 13 volumes and another one in 10 volumes. Estienne acquired Vulgate manuscripts while in Paris and printed a number of editions throughout his career. The principal editions are the 1527, 1532, 1540 (one of the ornaments of his press), and 1546. In the 1532 edition, he placed the Acts in between the gospels and epistles of Paul as is standard in most Bibles. Before this, the Acts were usually found at the end. Furthermore, typographer and printing historian Stanley Morison claimed that Estienne's 1532 folio Bible contained, \"what is probably the finest use ever made of [the Garamond] letter.\" Estienne printed this edition of the Bible in a grand folio format; his expected buyers were the nobility and the wealthy rather than the university faculty/students. Though in 1543, his style shifted to that of sextodecimo format, printing Bibles in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which assumes the buyers are students and professors.\nHis editions, especially that of 1546, containing a new translation at the side of the Vulgate, was the subject of sharp and acrimonious criticism from the clergy. In 1539 he received the distinguishing title of \"Printer to the king\" for Latin and Hebrew, and later for Greek. This incited anger from the Sorbonne because Estienne had converted from Catholicism to Protestantism. The Sorbonne was opposed to the humanist ideals of the time and was attempting to censor Estienne's publishing firm. He was protected by Francis I of France with whom he enjoyed strong patronage and friendship; Estienne aided Francis I in printing documents ratifying policies which established and justified his power. Later, Estienne published a document to inform the public how alliances between French royalty, German Protestants, and Turkish royalty were beneficial for European religious peace. In 1538, Francis I requested that Estienne give a copy of every Greek book he had printed to create the royal library, which became the first copyright library. However, after Francis I died in 1547 and was succeeded by Henry II, Estienne fled to Geneva around 1550. With him, he brought his printing material, including his Greek type made by Garamond.\nGeneva.\nOn his arrival at Geneva, Robert Estienne published a defense against the attacks of the Sorbonne in 1552 called his \"R\u00e9ponse\". It was first published in Latin. He later translated it into French and published it again. The central theme of his \"R\u00e9ponse\" is that the Sorbonne had a great ability to persuade or intimidate people. Estienne established his printing firm in Geneva and his brother Charles helped run the firm in Paris. However, after Charles died in a debtors' prison, Robert II (the son of Robert I) took over the business. In Geneva, Estienne issued the French Bible in 1553 and many of John Calvin's writings, including the \"Institutio\" in 1553. His 1556 edition of the Latin Bible contained the translation of the Old Testament by Santes Pagninus and the first edition of Theodore Beza's Latin edition of the New Testament. In 1556 he became a citizen of the Republic of Geneva, where he died on 7 September 1559. Estienne's other sons, Henri II and Fran\u00e7ois, helped Estienne run the shop in Geneva after the death of Estienne. Robert Estienne was one of the most successful printers in the Estienne family, and one of the best scholars of the time. It was in part, due to Estienne that the reign of Francis I was considered the \"Golden Age of French Typography\".\nPressmarks.\nRobert Estienne used several pressmarks or devices on his prints. Estienne's pressmark with an olive branch and a serpent wound around a spear was first seen in 1544 on the title page of \"Preparatio Evangelica\". It was symbolic of wisdom in times of war and peace. The motto below \"\u0392\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6 \u03c4\u2019 \u1f00\u03b3\u03b1\u03b8\u1ff7 \u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u1ff7 \u03c4\u2019 \u03b1\u1f30\u03c7\u03bc\u03b7\u03c4\u1fc7\" translates to \"to the wise king and the valiant warrior\". Another device was called \"Oliva Stephanorum\" or the olive of the Stephens family with the words of Romans 11:20, \"Noli altum sapere\" (\"Do not be proud\") and later \"Noli altum sapere, sed time ...\" (\"Be not high-minded but fear\"). The device shows a man standing by an olive tree. Scholars believe this man is Paul the Apostle who is affirming the importance of faith. This is consistent with Estienne's connection to the Protestant Reformation. The olive tree is meant to represent the tree of knowledge. The device may have been a subtle attack on the Catholic theologians at the Sorbonne for their \"lack of humility\". Pressmarks function best when they are immediately recognized, and scholars criticize Estienne's pressmarks for not being easily recognizable.\nFamily.\nRobert Estienne encouraged his four sons to study and perfect his professions. His will indicated that he wished all of his sons follow in his profession. Two of Robert's sons, Henri and Robert became successful printers. Fran\u00e7ois (born 1540) printed in Geneva from 1562 to 1582. As well as issuing editions of the Bible in Latin and French, he published some of Calvin's works.\nRobert Estienne II (1530\u20131570) studied Hebrew as his father recommended. Uninterested in the Reformation, he stayed in Paris instead of following his father to Geneva, opening his own printing shop in 1556. He earned the title of \"Typographus regius\" in 1563. He printed the New Testament of 1568\u20131569, a reprint of his father's first edition. He printed the Decalogue in Hebrew and Aramaic in 1566. Additionally, Estienne printed books in Hebrew for professors in Paris, but fled to Geneva in 1569, because he worked for Anglican clients. He died in 1570.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nList of Estienne's works with options to read and view the works \nList of Robert Estienne's works (in French) with options to read more about each work and read and view the works themselves \nArchive of Estienne's 1550 Alphabetum Gr\u00e6cum from the Library of Congress, available for reading and viewing"}
{"id": "39399", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39399", "title": "Henri Estienne", "text": "French printer and classical scholar (1528/1531\u20131598)\nHenri Estienne ( , ; 1528 or 1531\u00a0\u2013 1598), also known as Henricus Stephanus ( ), was a French printer and classical scholar. He was the eldest son of Robert Estienne. He was instructed in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew by his father and would eventually take over the Estienne printing firm which his father owned in 1559 when his father died. His best-known work was the \"Thesaurus graecae linguae\", which was printed in five volumes. It became the basis of Greek lexicology; no thesaurus would rival that of Estienne's for three hundred years.\nAmong his many publications of Greek authors, his publications of Plato are the source of Stephanus pagination, which is still used to refer to Plato's works. Estienne was also responsible for the first printed Latin translation of the works of Sextus Empiricus in 1562, which scholars credit for the diffusion of Pyrrhonian skepticism in early modern Europe, and its adoption by highly influential skeptical philosophers such as Michel de Montaigne. Estienne died in Lyon in 1598.\nLife.\nHenri Estienne was born in Paris in 1528 or 1531. His father instructed him in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and typography, and according to a note in his edition of \"Aulus Gellius\" (1585), he picked up some Latin as a child, as that language was used as a in the multi-national household. However, he was primarily instructed in Greek by Pierre Dan\u00e8s. He was also educated by other French scholars such as Adrianus Turnebus. He began working for his father's business at age eighteen and was employed by his father to collate a manuscript of Dionysius of Halicarnassus. In 1547, as part of his training, he traveled to Italy, England, and Flanders, where he learned Spanish and busied himself in collecting and collating manuscripts for his father's press. Around 1551, Robert Estienne fled to Geneva with his family, including Henri Estienne, to escape religious persecution in Paris. The same year, he translated Calvin's catechism into Greek, which was printed in 1554 in his father's printing room.\nEstienne published the \"Anacreon\" in 1554, which was his first independent work. Afterwards, he returned to Italy to assist the Aldine Press in Venice. In Italy, he discovered a copy of Diodorus Siculus in Rome, and returned to Geneva in 1555. In 1557 he likely had a printing establishment of his own, advertising himself as the \"Parisian printer\" (\"typographus parisiensis\"). The following year he assumed the title \"illustris viri Huldrici Fuggeri typographus\" from his patron, Ulrich Fugger who saved him from financial despair after the death of his father. Estienne published the first anthology that included sections from Parmenides, Empedocles, and other Pre-Socratic philosophers.\nIn 1559, on his father's death, Estienne assumed charge of his presses and became Printer of the Republic of Geneva. In the same year he produced his own Latin translation of the works of Sextus Empiricus, and an edition of Diodorus Siculus based on his earlier discoveries. In 1565, he printed a large French Bible. The following year he published his best-known French work, the \"Apologie pour H\u00e9rodote\". Some passages being considered objectionable by the Genevan Consistory, he was compelled to cancel the pages containing them. The book became highly popular, and within sixteen years twelve editions were printed. Estienne used the type he inherited and did not invent any new types.\nHis most celebrated work, the \"Thesaurus graecae linguae\" or Greek thesaurus, appeared in five volumes in 1572. This thesaurus was a sequel to Robert Estienne's Latin thesaurus. The basis of Greek lexicography, a Greek thesaurus to rival that of Estiennes was not printed for over 300 years. This work was begun by his father and served up to the nineteenth century as the basis of Greek lexicography. However, the sale of this thesaurus was impeded due to its high price and the printing of an abridged copy later. In 1576 and 1587, Estienne published two Greek versions of the New Testament. The 1576 version contained the first scientific treatise on the language of the apostolic writers. The 1587 version contained a discussion on the ancient divisions of the text. Estienne's other publications included those of Herodotus, Plato, Horace, Virgil, Plutarch, and Pliny the Elder. He also published an edition of Aeschylus, in which \"Agamemnon\" was printed in its entirety and as a separate play for the first time.\nIn 1578 he published the first and one of the most important editions of the complete works of Plato, translated by Jean de Serres, with commentary. This work is the source of the standard \"Stephanus numbers\" used by scholars today to refer to the works of Plato.\nThe publication in 1578 of his \"Deux Dialogues du nouveau fran\u00e7ois italianiz\u00e9\" brought him into a fresh dispute with the consistory. To avoid their censure he went to Paris, and resided at the French court for a year. On his return to Geneva he was summoned before the consistory and was imprisoned for a week. From this time his life became more and more nomadic. He traveled to Basel, Heidelberg, Vienna, and Pest. He also spent time in Paris and other regions in France. These journeys were undertaken partly in the hope of procuring patrons and purchasers, for the large sums which he had spent on such publications as the Thesaurus and the Plato of 1578 had almost ruined him. He published a concordance of the New Testament in 1594.\nAfter visiting the University of Montpellier, where Isaac Casaubon, his son-in-law, was now professor, he started for Paris. He was taken ill in Lyon, and died there at the end of January 1598.\nFamily.\nHenri Estienne was married three times. He married Marguerite Pillot in 1555, Barbe de Wille in 1556, and Abigail Pouppart in 1586. Estienne had fourteen children, three of whom survived him. His daughter was married to Isaac Casaubon. His son Paul (born 1567) assumed control of the presses in Geneva with Casaubon but he fled to Paris from the authorities. Paul's son Antoine became \"Printer to the King\" in Paris and \"Guardian of the Greek Matrices\"; however his death in 1674 ended the nearly two-century-long Estienne printing business.\nLegacy.\nHenri Estienne is considered by some scholars to be the most prominent printer in the Estienne family. Estienne was one of the \"greatest and last scholarly editors and publishers of the Renaissance.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39401", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39401", "title": "Alkali earth metals", "text": ""}
{"id": "39402", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39402", "title": "Chalcogens", "text": ""}
{"id": "39403", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39403", "title": "Halogens", "text": ""}
{"id": "39406", "revid": "19814917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39406", "title": "Central limit theorem", "text": "Fundamental theorem in probability theory and statistics\nIn probability theory, the central limit theorem (CLT) states that, under appropriate conditions, the distribution of a normalized version of the sample mean converges to a standard normal distribution. This holds even if the original variables themselves are not normally distributed. There are several versions of the CLT, each applying in the context of different conditions.\nThe theorem is a key concept in probability theory because it implies that probabilistic and statistical methods that work for normal distributions can be applicable to many problems involving other types of distributions.\nThis theorem has seen many changes during the formal development of probability theory. Previous versions of the theorem date back to 1811, but in its modern form it was only precisely stated in the 1920s.\nIn statistics, the CLT can be stated as: let formula_1 denote a statistical sample of size formula_2 from a population with expected value (average) formula_3 and finite positive variance formula_4, and let formula_5 denote the sample mean (which is itself a random variable). Then the limit as formula_6 of the distribution of formula_7 is a normal distribution with mean formula_8 and variance formula_4.\nIn other words, suppose that a large sample of observations is obtained, each observation being randomly produced in a way that does not depend on the values of the other observations, and the average (arithmetic mean) of the observed values is computed. If this procedure is performed many times, resulting in a collection of observed averages, the central limit theorem says that if the sample size is large enough, the probability distribution of these averages will closely approximate a normal distribution.\nThe central limit theorem has several variants. In its common form, the random variables must be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). This requirement can be weakened; convergence of the mean to the normal distribution also occurs for non-identical distributions or for non-independent observations if they comply with certain conditions.\nThe earliest version of this theorem, that the normal distribution may be used as an approximation to the binomial distribution, is the de Moivre\u2013Laplace theorem.\nIndependent sequences.\nClassical CLT.\nLet formula_10 be a sequence of i.i.d. random variables having a distribution with expected value given by formula_3 and finite variance given by formula_12 Suppose we are interested in the sample average\nformula_13\nBy the law of large numbers, the sample average converges almost surely (and therefore also converges in probability) to the expected value formula_3 as formula_15\nThe classical central limit theorem describes the size and the distributional form of the stochastic fluctuations around the deterministic number formula_3 during this convergence. More precisely, it states that as formula_2 gets larger, the distribution of the normalized mean formula_18, i.e. the difference between the sample average formula_19 and its limit formula_20 scaled by the factor formula_21, approaches the normal distribution with mean formula_22 and variance formula_12 For large enough formula_24 the distribution of formula_19 gets arbitrarily close to the normal distribution with mean formula_3 and variance formula_27\nThe usefulness of the theorem is that the distribution of formula_18 approaches normality regardless of the shape of the distribution of the individual formula_29 Formally, the theorem can be stated as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLindeberg\u2013L\u00e9vy CLT\u2014\nSuppose formula_30 is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables with formula_31 and formula_32 Then, as formula_2 approaches infinity, the random variables formula_18 converge in distribution to a normal formula_35:\nIn the case formula_37 convergence in distribution means that the cumulative distribution functions of formula_18 converge pointwise to the cdf of the formula_35 distribution: for every real number formula_40\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 is the standard normal cdf evaluated at formula_43 The convergence is uniform in formula_44 in the sense that\nformula_45\nwhere formula_46 denotes the least upper bound (or supremum) of the set.\nLyapunov CLT.\nIn this variant of the central limit theorem the random variables formula_47 have to be independent, but not necessarily identically distributed. The theorem also requires that random variables formula_48 have moments of some order and that the rate of growth of these moments is limited by the Lyapunov condition given below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLyapunov CLT\u2014Suppose formula_49 is a sequence of independent random variables, each with finite expected value formula_50 and variance Define\nformula_51\nIf for some \"Lyapunov\u2019s condition\"\nformula_52\nis satisfied, then a sum of formula_53 converges in distribution to a standard normal random variable, as formula_54 goes to infinity:\nIn practice it is usually easiest to check Lyapunov's condition for \nIf a sequence of random variables satisfies Lyapunov's condition, then it also satisfies Lindeberg's condition. The converse implication, however, does not hold.\nLindeberg (-Feller) CLT.\nIn the same setting and with the same notation as above, the Lyapunov condition can be replaced with the following weaker one (from Lindeberg in 1920).\nSuppose that for every formula_56,\nformula_57\nwhere formula_58 is the indicator function. Then the distribution of the standardized sums\nformula_59\nconverges towards the standard normal distribution \nCLT for the sum of a random number of random variables.\nRather than summing an integer number formula_2 of random variables and taking formula_61, the sum can be of a random number formula_62 of random variables, with conditions on formula_62. For example, the following theorem is Corollary 4 of Robbins (1948). It assumes that formula_62 is asymptotically normal (Robbins also developed other conditions that lead to the same result).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRobbins CLT\u2014Let formula_65 be independent, identically distributed random variables with formula_66 and formula_67, and let formula_68 be a sequence of non-negative integer-valued random variables that are independent of formula_65. Assume for each formula_70 that formula_71 and\nformula_72\nwhere formula_73 denotes convergence in distribution and formula_74 is the normal distribution with mean 0, variance 1.\nThen\nformula_75\nMultidimensional CLT.\nProofs that use characteristic functions can be extended to cases where each individual formula_76 is a random vector in with mean vector formula_77 and covariance matrix formula_78 (among the components of the vector), and these random vectors are independent and identically distributed. The multidimensional central limit theorem states that when scaled, sums converge to a multivariate normal distribution. Summation of these vectors is done component-wise. \nFor formula_79 let\nformula_80\nbe independent random vectors. The sum of the random vectors formula_81 is\nformula_82\nand their average is\nformula_83\nTherefore,\nformula_84\nThe multivariate central limit theorem states that\nformula_85\nwhere the covariance matrix formula_86 is equal to\nformula_87\nThe multivariate central limit theorem can be proved using the Cram\u00e9r\u2013Wold theorem.\nThe rate of convergence is given by the following Berry\u2013Esseen type result:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Let formula_88 be independent formula_89-valued random vectors, each having mean zero. Write formula_90 and assume formula_91 is invertible. Let formula_92 be a formula_93-dimensional Gaussian with the same mean and same covariance matrix as formula_94. Then for all convex sets formula_95,\nformula_96 is necessary.\nThe generalized central limit theorem.\nThe generalized central limit theorem (GCLT) was an effort of multiple mathematicians (Bernstein, Lindeberg, L\u00e9vy, Feller, Kolmogorov, and others) over the period from 1920 to 1937. The first published complete proof of the GCLT was in 1937 by Paul L\u00e9vy in French. An English language version of the complete proof of the GCLT is available in the translation of Gnedenko and Kolmogorov's 1954 book.\nThe statement of the GCLT is as follows:\n\"A non-degenerate random variable\" \"Z\" \"is \"\u03b1\"-stable for some\" 0 &lt; \"\u03b1\" \u2264 2 \"if and only if there is an independent, identically distributed sequence of random variables\" \"X\"1, \"X\"2, \"X\"3, \"... and constants\" \"a\"\"n\" &gt; 0, \"b\"\"n\" \u2208 \u211d \"with\"\n\"a\"\"n\" (\"X\"1 + ... + \"X\"\"n\") \u2212 \"b\"\"n\" \u2192 \"Z\".\n\"Here \u2192 means the sequence of random variable sums converges in distribution; i.e., the corresponding distributions satisfy\" \"F\"\"n\"(\"y\") \u2192 \"F\"(\"y\") \"at all continuity points of\" \"F.\"\nIn other words, if sums of independent, identically distributed random variables converge in distribution to some \"Z\", then \"Z\" must be a stable distribution.\nDependent processes.\nCLT under weak dependence.\nA useful generalization of a sequence of independent, identically distributed random variables is a mixing random process in discrete time; \"mixing\" means, roughly, that random variables temporally far apart from one another are nearly independent. Several kinds of mixing are used in ergodic theory and probability theory. See especially strong mixing (also called \u03b1-mixing) defined by formula_97 where formula_98 is so-called strong mixing coefficient.\nA simplified formulation of the central limit theorem under strong mixing is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Suppose that formula_49 is stationary and formula_100-mixing with formula_101 and that formula_102 and Denote then the limit\nformula_103\nIn fact,\nformula_107\nwhere the series converges absolutely.\nThe assumption formula_104 cannot be omitted, since the asymptotic normality fails for formula_109 where formula_110 are another stationary sequence.\nThere is a stronger version of the theorem: the assumption formula_111 is replaced with X_n\\right and the assumption formula_101 is replaced with\nformula_113\nExistence of such formula_114 ensures the conclusion. For encyclopedic treatment of limit theorems under mixing conditions see .\nMartingale difference CLT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014 Let a martingale formula_115 satisfy\nRemarks.\nProof of classical CLT.\nThe central limit theorem has a proof using characteristic functions. It is similar to the proof of the (weak) law of large numbers.\nAssume formula_120 are independent and identically distributed random variables, each with mean formula_121 and finite variance The sum formula_122 has mean formula_123 and variance Consider the random variable\nformula_124\nwhere in the last step we defined the new random variables each with zero mean and unit variance The characteristic function of formula_125 is given by\nformula_126\nwhere in the last step we used the fact that all of the formula_127 are identically distributed. The characteristic function of formula_128 is, by Taylor's theorem,\nformula_129\nwhere formula_130 is \"little o notation\" for some function of formula_131 that goes to zero more rapidly than By the limit of the exponential function the characteristic function of formula_132 equals\nformula_133\nAll of the higher order terms vanish in the limit The right hand side equals the characteristic function of a standard normal distribution formula_118, which implies through L\u00e9vy's continuity theorem that the distribution of formula_125 will approach formula_136 as Therefore, the sample average\nformula_137\nis such that \nformula_138\nconverges to the normal distribution from which the central limit theorem follows.\nConvergence to the limit.\nThe central limit theorem gives only an asymptotic distribution. As an approximation for a finite number of observations, it provides a reasonable approximation only when close to the peak of the normal distribution; it requires a very large number of observations to stretch into the tails.\nThe convergence in the central limit theorem is uniform because the limiting cumulative distribution function is continuous. If the third central moment formula_139 exists and is finite, then the speed of convergence is at least on the order of formula_140 (see Berry\u2013Esseen theorem). Stein's method can be used not only to prove the central limit theorem, but also to provide bounds on the rates of convergence for selected metrics.\nThe convergence to the normal distribution is monotonic, in the sense that the entropy of formula_125 increases monotonically to that of the normal distribution.\nThe central limit theorem applies in particular to sums of independent and identically distributed discrete random variables. A sum of discrete random variables is still a discrete random variable, so that we are confronted with a sequence of discrete random variables whose cumulative probability distribution function converges towards a cumulative probability distribution function corresponding to a continuous variable (namely that of the normal distribution). This means that if we build a histogram of the realizations of the sum of n independent identical discrete variables, the piecewise-linear curve that joins the centers of the upper faces of the rectangles forming the histogram converges toward a Gaussian curve as n approaches infinity; this relation is known as de Moivre\u2013Laplace theorem. The binomial distribution article details such an application of the central limit theorem in the simple case of a discrete variable taking only two possible values.\nCommon misconceptions.\nStudies have shown that the central limit theorem is subject to several common but serious misconceptions, some of which appear in widely used textbooks. These include: \nRelation to the law of large numbers.\nThe law of large numbers as well as the central limit theorem are partial solutions to a general problem: \"What is the limiting behavior of as n approaches infinity?\" In mathematical analysis, asymptotic series are one of the most popular tools employed to approach such questions.\nSuppose we have an asymptotic expansion of formula_142:\nformula_143\nDividing both parts by \"\u03c6\"1(\"n\") and taking the limit will produce \"a\"1, the coefficient of the highest-order term in the expansion, which represents the rate at which \"f\"(\"n\") changes in its leading term.\nformula_144\nInformally, one can say: \"\"f\"(\"n\") grows approximately as \"a\"1\"\u03c6\"1(\"n\")\". Taking the difference between \"f\"(\"n\") and its approximation and then dividing by the next term in the expansion, we arrive at a more refined statement about \"f\"(\"n\"):\nformula_145\nHere one can say that the difference between the function and its approximation grows approximately as \"a\"2\"\u03c6\"2(\"n\"). The idea is that dividing the function by appropriate normalizing functions, and looking at the limiting behavior of the result, can tell us much about the limiting behavior of the original function itself.\nInformally, something along these lines happens when the sum, Sn, of independent identically distributed random variables, \"X\"1, ..., \"Xn\", is studied in classical probability theory. If each Xi has finite mean \u03bc, then by the law of large numbers, \u2192 \"\u03bc\". If in addition each Xi has finite variance \"\u03c3\"2, then by the central limit theorem,\nformula_146\nwhere \u03be is distributed as \"N\"(0,\"\u03c3\"2). This provides values of the first two constants in the informal expansion\nformula_147\nIn the case where the Xi do not have finite mean or variance, convergence of the shifted and rescaled sum can also occur with different centering and scaling factors:\nformula_148\nor informally\nformula_149\nDistributions \u039e which can arise in this way are called \"stable\". Clearly, the normal distribution is stable, but there are also other stable distributions, such as the Cauchy distribution, for which the mean or variance are not defined. The scaling factor bn may be proportional to nc, for any \"c\" \u2265; it may also be multiplied by a slowly varying function of n.\nThe law of the iterated logarithm specifies what is happening \"in between\" the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem. Specifically it says that the normalizing function , intermediate in size between n of the law of large numbers and of the central limit theorem, provides a non-trivial limiting behavior.\nAlternative statements of the theorem.\nDensity functions.\nThe density of the sum of two or more independent variables is the convolution of their densities (if these densities exist). Thus the central limit theorem can be interpreted as a statement about the properties of density functions under convolution: the convolution of a number of density functions tends to the normal density as the number of density functions increases without bound. These theorems require stronger hypotheses than the forms of the central limit theorem given above. Theorems of this type are often called local limit theorems. See Petrov for a particular local limit theorem for sums of independent and identically distributed random variables.\nCharacteristic functions.\nSince the characteristic function of a convolution is the product of the characteristic functions of the densities involved, the central limit theorem has yet another restatement: the product of the characteristic functions of a number of density functions becomes close to the characteristic function of the normal density as the number of density functions increases without bound, under the conditions stated above. Specifically, an appropriate scaling factor needs to be applied to the argument of the characteristic function.\nAn equivalent statement can be made about Fourier transforms, since the characteristic function is essentially a Fourier transform.\nCalculating the variance.\nLet Sn be the sum of n random variables. Many central limit theorems provide conditions such that converges in distribution to \"N\"(0,1) (the normal distribution with mean 0, variance 1) as . In some cases, it is possible to find a constant \"\u03c3\"2 and function f(n) such that converges in distribution to \"N\"(0,1) as .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLemma\u2014Suppose formula_150 is a sequence of real-valued and strictly stationary random variables with formula_151 for all formula_152, formula_153, and Construct\nformula_154\nis \u03b5n-close to formula_106 in the total variation distance.\nThese two \u03b5n-close distributions have densities (in fact, log-concave densities), thus, the total variance distance between them is the integral of the absolute value of the difference between the densities. Convergence in total variation is stronger than weak convergence.\nAn important example of a log-concave density is a function constant inside a given convex body and vanishing outside; it corresponds to the uniform distribution on the convex body, which explains the term \"central limit theorem for convex bodies\".\nAnother example: \"f\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"xn\") = const \u00b7 exp(\u2212(|\"x\"1|\"\u03b1\" + \u22ef + |\"xn\"|\"\u03b1\")\"\u03b2\") where \"\u03b1\" &gt; 1 and \"\u03b1\u03b2\" &gt; 1. If \"\u03b2\" = 1 then \"f\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"xn\") factorizes into which means \"X\"1, ..., \"Xn\" are independent. In general, however, they are dependent.\nThe condition \"f\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"xn\") = \"f\"(|\"x\"1|, ..., |\"xn\"|) ensures that \"X\"1, ..., \"Xn\" are of zero mean and uncorrelated; still, they need not be independent, nor even pairwise independent. By the way, pairwise independence cannot replace independence in the classical central limit theorem.\nHere is a Berry\u2013Esseen type result.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Let \"X\"1, ..., \"Xn\" satisfy the assumptions of the previous theorem, then\nformula_158\nfor all \"a\" &lt; \"b\"; here C is a universal (absolute) constant. Moreover, for every \"c\"1, ..., \"cn\" \u2208 R such that \"c\" + \u22ef + \"c\" = 1,\nThe distribution of need not be approximately normal (in fact, it can be uniform). However, the distribution of \"c\"1\"X\"1 + \u22ef + \"cnXn\" is close to formula_106 (in the total variation distance) for most vectors (\"c\"1, ..., \"cn\") according to the uniform distribution on the sphere \"c\" + \u22ef + \"c\" = 1.\nLacunary trigonometric series.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem (Salem\u2013Zygmund)\u2014Let U be a random variable distributed uniformly on (0,2\u03c0), and \"Xk\" = \"rk\" cos(\"nkU\" + \"ak\"), where\nThen\nformula_162\nconverges in distribution to formula_163.\nGaussian polytopes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014\nLet \"A\"1, ..., \"A\"\"n\" be independent random points on the plane R2 each having the two-dimensional standard normal distribution. Let Kn be the convex hull of these points, and Xn the area of Kn Then\nformula_164\nconverges in distribution to formula_106 as n tends to infinity.\nThe same also holds in all dimensions greater than 2.\nThe polytope Kn is called a Gaussian random polytope.\nA similar result holds for the number of vertices (of the Gaussian polytope), the number of edges, and in fact, faces of all dimensions.\nLinear functions of orthogonal matrices.\nA linear function of a matrix M is a linear combination of its elements (with given coefficients), M \u21a6 tr(AM) where A is the matrix of the coefficients; see Trace (linear algebra)#Inner product.\nA random orthogonal matrix is said to be distributed uniformly, if its distribution is the normalized Haar measure on the orthogonal group O(\"n\",R); see Rotation matrix#Uniform random rotation matrices.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Let M be a random orthogonal \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix distributed uniformly, and A a fixed \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix such that tr(AA*) = \"n\", and let \"X\" = tr(AM). Then the distribution of X is close to formula_106 in the total variation metric up to .\nSubsequences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014 Let random variables \"X\"1, \"X\"2, ... \u2208 \"L\"2(\u03a9) be such that \"Xn\" \u2192 0 weakly in \"L\"2(\u03a9) and \"X\" \u2192 1 weakly in \"L\"1(\u03a9). Then there exist integers \"n\"1 &lt; \"n\"2 &lt; \u22ef such that\nformula_167\nconverges in distribution to formula_106 as k tends to infinity.\nRandom walk on a crystal lattice.\nThe central limit theorem may be established for the simple random walk on a crystal lattice (an infinite-fold abelian covering graph over a finite graph), and is used for design of crystal structures.\nApplications and examples.\nA simple example of the central limit theorem is rolling many identical, unbiased dice. The distribution of the sum (or average) of the rolled numbers will be well approximated by a normal distribution. Since real-world quantities are often the balanced sum of many unobserved random events, the central limit theorem also provides a partial explanation for the prevalence of the normal probability distribution. It also justifies the approximation of large-sample statistics to the normal distribution in controlled experiments.\nRegression.\nRegression analysis, and in particular ordinary least squares, specifies that a dependent variable depends according to some function upon one or more independent variables, with an additive error term. Various types of statistical inference on the regression assume that the error term is normally distributed. This assumption can be justified by assuming that the error term is actually the sum of many independent error terms; even if the individual error terms are not normally distributed, by the central limit theorem their sum can be well approximated by a normal distribution.\nOther illustrations.\nGiven its importance to statistics, a number of papers and computer packages are available that demonstrate the convergence involved in the central limit theorem.\nHistory.\nDutch mathematician Henk Tijms writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The central limit theorem has an interesting history. The first version of this theorem was postulated by the French-born mathematician Abraham de Moivre who, in a remarkable article published in 1733, used the normal distribution to approximate the distribution of the number of heads resulting from many tosses of a fair coin. This finding was far ahead of its time, and was nearly forgotten until the famous French mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace rescued it from obscurity in his monumental work \"Th\u00e9orie analytique des probabilit\u00e9s\", which was published in 1812. Laplace expanded De Moivre's finding by approximating the binomial distribution with the normal distribution. But as with De Moivre, Laplace's finding received little attention in his own time. It was not until the nineteenth century was at an end that the importance of the central limit theorem was discerned, when, in 1901, Russian mathematician Aleksandr Lyapunov defined it in general terms and proved precisely how it worked mathematically. Nowadays, the central limit theorem is considered to be the unofficial sovereign of probability theory.\nSir Francis Galton described the Central Limit Theorem in this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know of scarcely anything so apt to impress the imagination as the wonderful form of cosmic order expressed by the \"Law of Frequency of Error\". The law would have been personified by the Greeks and deified, if they had known of it. It reigns with serenity and in complete self-effacement, amidst the wildest confusion. The huger the mob, and the greater the apparent anarchy, the more perfect is its sway. It is the supreme law of Unreason. Whenever a large sample of chaotic elements are taken in hand and marshalled in the order of their magnitude, an unsuspected and most beautiful form of regularity proves to have been latent all along.\nThe actual term \"central limit theorem\" (in German: \"zentraler Grenzwertsatz\") was first used by George P\u00f3lya in 1920 in the title of a paper. P\u00f3lya referred to the theorem as \"central\" due to its importance in probability theory. According to Le Cam, the French school of probability interprets the word \"central\" in the sense that \"it describes the behaviour of the centre of the distribution as opposed to its tails\". The abstract of the paper \"On the central limit theorem of calculus of probability and the problem of moments\" by P\u00f3lya in 1920 translates as follows.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The occurrence of the Gaussian probability density 1 \n \"e\"\u2212\"x\"2 in repeated experiments, in errors of measurements, which result in the combination of very many and very small elementary errors, in diffusion processes etc., can be explained, as is well-known, by the very same limit theorem, which plays a central role in the calculus of probability. The actual discoverer of this limit theorem is to be named Laplace; it is likely that its rigorous proof was first given by Tschebyscheff and its sharpest formulation can be found, as far as I am aware of, in an article by Liapounoff. ... \nA thorough account of the theorem's history, detailing Laplace's foundational work, as well as Cauchy's, Bessel's and Poisson's contributions, is provided by Hald. Two historical accounts, one covering the development from Laplace to Cauchy, the second the contributions by von Mises, P\u00f3lya, Lindeberg, L\u00e9vy, and Cram\u00e9r during the 1920s, are given by Hans Fischer. Le Cam describes a period around 1935. Bernstein presents a historical discussion focusing on the work of Pafnuty Chebyshev and his students Andrey Markov and Aleksandr Lyapunov that led to the first proofs of the CLT in a general setting.\nA curious footnote to the history of the Central Limit Theorem is that a proof of a result similar to the 1922 Lindeberg CLT was the subject of Alan Turing's 1934 Fellowship Dissertation for King's College at the University of Cambridge. Only after submitting the work did Turing learn it had already been proved. Consequently, Turing's dissertation was not published.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39407", "revid": "18687219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39407", "title": "Dirac equation", "text": "Relativistic quantum mechanical wave equation\nIn particle physics, the Dirac equation is a relativistic wave equation derived by British physicist Paul Dirac in 1928. In its free form, or including electromagnetic interactions, it describes all spin-1/2 massive particles, called \"Dirac particles\", such as electrons and quarks for which parity is a symmetry. It is consistent with both the principles of quantum mechanics and the theory of special relativity, and was the first theory to fully account for special relativity in the context of quantum mechanics. The equation is validated by its rigorous accounting of the observed fine structure of the hydrogen spectrum and has become vital in the building of the Standard Model.\nThe equation also implied the existence of a new form of matter, \"antimatter\", previously unsuspected and unobserved. \nThe existence of antimatter was experimentally confirmed several years later. It also provided a \"theoretical\" justification for the introduction of several component wave functions in Pauli's phenomenological theory of spin. The wave functions in the Dirac theory are vectors of four complex numbers (known as bispinors), two of which resemble the Pauli wavefunction in the non-relativistic limit, in contrast to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, which described wave functions of only one complex value. Moreover, in the limit of zero mass, the Dirac equation reduces to the Weyl equation. In the context of quantum field theory, the Dirac equation is reinterpreted to describe quantum fields corresponding to spin-1/2 particles.\nDirac did not fully appreciate the importance of his results; however, the entailed explanation of spin as a consequence of the union of quantum mechanics and relativity\u2014and the eventual discovery of the positron\u2014represents one of the great triumphs of theoretical physics. This accomplishment has been described as fully on par with the works of Isaac Newton, James Clerk Maxwell, and Albert Einstein before him. The equation has been deemed by some physicists to be \"the real seed of modern physics\". The Dirac equation has been described as the \"centerpiece of relativistic quantum mechanics\", with it also stated that \"the equation is perhaps the most important one in all of quantum mechanics\".\nHistory.\nEarly attempts at a relativistic formulation.\nThe first phase in the development of quantum mechanics, lasting between 1900-1925, focused on explaining individual phenomena that could not be explained through classical mechanics. The second phase, starting in the mid-1920s, saw the development of two systematic frameworks governing quantum mechanics. The first, known as matrix mechanics, uses matrices to describe physical observables; it was developed in 1925 by Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, and Pascual Jordan The second, known as wave mechanics, uses a wave equation known as the Schr\u00f6dinger equation to describe the state of a system; it was developed the next year by Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger. While these two frameworks were initially seen as competing approaches, they would later be shown to be equivalent.\nBoth these frameworks only formulated quantum mechanics in a non-relativistic setting. This was seen as a deficiency right from the start, with Schr\u00f6dinger originally attempting formulate a relativistic version of Schr\u00f6dinger equation, in the process discovering the Klein\u2013Gordon equation. However, after showing that this equation did not correctly reproduce the relativistic corrections to the hydrogen atom spectrum for which an exact form was known due to Arnold Sommerfeld, he abandoned his relativistic formulation. The Klein\u2013Gordon equation was also found by at least six other authors in the same year.\nDuring 1926 and 1927 there was a widespread effort to incorporate relativity into quantum mechanics, largely through two approaches. The first was to consider the Klein\u2013Gordon as the correct relativistic generalization of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. Such an approach was viewed unfavourably by many leading theorists since it failed to correctly predict numerous experimental results, and more importantly it appeared difficult to reconcile with the principles of quantum mechanics as understood at the time. These conceptual issues primarily arose due to the presence of a second temporal derivative.\nThe second approach introduced relativistic effects as corrections to the known non-relativistic formulas. This provided many provisional answers that were expected to eventually be supplanted by some yet-unknown relativistic formulation of quantum mechanics. One notable result by Heisenberg and Pascual Jordan was the introduction of two terms for spin and relativity into the hydrogen Hamiltonian, allowing them to derive the first-order approximation of the Sommerfeld fine structure formula.\nA parallel development during this time was the concept of spin, first introduced in 1925 by Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck. Shortly after, it was conjectured by Schr\u00f6dinger to be the missing link in acquiring the correct Sommerfeld formula. In 1927 Wolfgang Pauli used the ideas of spin to find an effective theory for a nonrelativistic spin-1/2 particle, the Pauli equation. He did this by taking the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and rather than just assuming that the wave function depends on the physical coordinate, he also assume that it depends on a spin coordinate that can take only two values formula_1. While this was still a non-relativistic formulation, he believed that a fully relativistic formulation possibly required a more complicated model for the electron, one that moved beyond a point particle.\nDirac's relativistic quantum mechanics.\nBy 1927, many physicists no longer considered the fine structure of hydrogen as a crucial puzzle that called for a completely new relativistic formulation since it could effectively be solved using the Pauli equation or by introducing a spin-1/2 angular momentum quantum number in the Klein\u2013Gordon equation. At the fifth Solvay Conference held that year, Paul Dirac was primarily concerned with the logical development of quantum mechanics. However, he realized that many other physicists complacently accepted the Klein\u2013Gordon equation as a satisfactory relativistic formulation, which demanded abandoning basic principles of quantum mechanics as understood at the time, to which Dirac strongly objected. After his return from Brussels, Dirac focused on finding a relativistic theory for electrons. Within two months he solved the problem and published his results on January 2, 1928.\nIn his paper, Dirac was guided by two principles from transformation theory, the first being that the equation should be invariant under transformations of special relativity, and the second that it should transform under the transformation theory of quantum mechanics. The latter demanded that the equation would have to be linear in temporal derivatives, so that it would admit a probabilistic interpretation. His argument begins with the Klein\u2013Gordon equation\nformula_2\ndescribing a particle using the wave function formula_3. Here formula_4 is the square of the momentum, formula_5 is the rest mass of the particle, formula_6 is the speed of light, and formula_7 is the reduced Planck constant. The naive way to get an equation linear in the time derivative is to essentially consider the square root of both sides. This replaces formula_8 with formula_9. However, such a square root is mathematically problematic for the resulting theory, making it unfeasible.\nDirac's first insight was the concept of linearization. He looked for some sort of variables formula_10 that are independent of momentum and spacetime coordinates for which the square root could be rewritten in a linear form\nformula_11\nBy squaring this operator and demanding that it reduces to the Klein\u2013Gordon equation, Dirac found that the variables must satisfy formula_12 and formula_13 if formula_14. Dirac initially considered the formula_15 Pauli matrices as a candidate, but then showed these would not work since it is impossible to find a set of four formula_15 matrices that all anticommute with each other. His second insight was to instead consider four-dimensional matrices. In that case the equation would be acting on a four-component wavefunction formula_17. Such a proposal was much more bold than Pauli's original generalization to a two-component wavefunction in the Pauli equation. This is because in Pauli's case, this was motivated by the demand to encode the two spin states of the particle. In contrast, Dirac had no physical argument for a four-component wavefunction, but instead introduced it as a matter of mathematical necessity. He thus arrived at the Dirac equation\nformula_18\nDirac constructed the correct matrices formula_10 without realizing that they form a mathematical structure known of since the early 1880s, the Clifford algebra. By recasting the equation in a Lorentz invariant form, he also showed that it correctly combines special relativity with his principle of quantum mechanical transformation theory, making it a viable candidate for a relativistic theory of the electron.\nTo investigate the equation further, he examined how it behaves in the presence of an electromagnetic field. To his surprise, this showed that it describe a particle with a magnetic moment arising due to the particle having spin 1/2. Spin directly emerged from the equation, without Dirac having added it in by hand. Additionally, he focused on showing that the equation successfully reproduces the fine structure of the hydrogen atom, at least to first order. The equation therefore succeeds where all previous attempts have failed, in correctly describing relativistic phenomena of electrons from first principles rather than through the ad hoc modification of existing formulas.\nConsequences.\nExcept for his followup paper deriving the Zeeman effect and Paschen\u2013Back effect from the equation in the presences of a magnetic fields, Dirac left the work of examining the consequences of his equation to others, and only came back to the subject in 1930. Once the equation was published, it was recognized as the correct solution to the problem of spin, relativity, and quantum mechanics. At first the Dirac equation was considered the only valid relativistic equation for a particle with mass. Then in 1934 Pauli and Victor Weisskopf reinterpreted the Klein\u2013Gordon equation as the equation for a relativistic spinless particle.\nOne of the first calculations was to reproduce the Sommerfeld fine structure formula exactly, which was performed independently by Charles Galton Darwin and Walter Gordon in 1928. This is the first time that the full formula has been derived from first principles. Further work on the mathematics of the equation was undertaken by Hermann Weyl in 1929. In this work he showed that the massless Dirac equation can be decomposed a pair of Weyl equations.\nThe Dirac equation was also used to study various scattering processes. In particular, the Klein\u2013Nishina formula, looking at photon-electron scattering, was also derived in 1928. Mott scattering, the scattering of electrons off a heavy target such as atomic nuclei, followed the next year. Over the following years it was further used to derive other standard scattering processes such as Moller scattering in 1932 and Bhabha scattering in 1936.\nA problem that gained more focus with time was the presence of negative energy states in the Dirac equation, which led to many efforts to try to eliminate such states. Dirac initially simply rejected the negative energy states as unphysical, but the problem was made more clear when in 1929 Oskar Klein showed that in static fields there exists inevitable mixing between the negative and positive energy states. Dirac's initial response was to believe that his equation must have some sort of defect, and that it was only the first approximation of a future theory that would not have this problem. However, he then suggested a solution to the problem in the form of the Dirac sea. This is the idea that the universe is filled with an infinite sea of negative energy electrons states. Positive energy electron states then live in this sea and are prevented from decaying to the negative energy states through the Pauli exclusion principle.\nAdditionally, Dirac postulated the existence of positively charged holes in the Dirac sea, which he initially suggested could be the proton. However, Oppenheimer showed that in this case stable atoms could not exist and Weyl further showed that the holes would have to have the same mass as the electrons. Persuaded by Oppenheimer's and Weyl's argument, Dirac published a paper in 1931 that predicted the existence of an as-yet-unobserved particle that he called an \"anti-electron\" that would have the same mass and the opposite charge as an electron and that would mutually annihilate upon contact with an electron. He suggested that every particle may have an oppositely charged partner, a concept now called antimatter\nIn 1933 Carl Anderson discovered the \"positive electron\", now called a positron, which had all the properties of Dirac's anti-electron. While the Dirac sea was later superseded by quantum field theory, its conceptual legacy survived in the idea of a dynamical vacuum filled with virtual particles. In 1949 Ernst Stueckelberg suggested and Richard Feynman showed in detail that the negative energy solutions can be interpreted as particles traveling backwards in proper time. The concept of the Dirac sea is also realized more explicitly in some condensed matter systems in the form of the Fermi sea, which consists of a sea of filled valence electrons below some chemical potential.\nSignificant work was done over the following decades to try to find spectroscopic discrepancies compared to the predictions made by the Dirac equation, however it was not until 1947 that Lamb shift was discovered, which the equation does not predict. This led to the development of quantum electrodynamics in 1950s, with the Dirac equation then being incorporated within the context of quantum field theory. Since it describes the dynamics of Dirac spinors, it went on to play a fundamental role in the Standard Model as well as many other areas of physics. For example, within condensed matter physics, systems whose fermions have a near linear dispersion relation are described by the Dirac equation. Such systems are known as Dirac matter and they include graphene and topological insulators, which have become a major area of research since the start of the 21st century.\nThe Dirac equation is inscribed upon a plaque on the floor of Westminster Abbey. Unveiled on 13 November 1995, the plaque commemorates Dirac's life. The equation, in its natural units formulation, is also prominently displayed in the auditorium at the \u2018Paul A.M. Dirac\u2019 Lecture Hall at the Patrick M.S. Blackett Institute (formerly The San Domenico Monastery) of the Ettore Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scientific Culture in Erice, Sicily.\nFormulation.\nCovariant formulation.\nIn its modern field theoretic formulation, the Dirac equation in 3+1 dimensional Minkowski spacetime is written in terms of a \"Dirac field\" formula_20. This is a field that assigns a complex vector from formula_21 to each point in spacetime, where the key property of the field is that it transforms as a Dirac spinor under Lorentz transformations. In natural units where formula_22, the Lorentz covariant formulation of the Dirac equation is given by\nformula_27\nformula_34\nBy taking the hermitian conjugate of the Dirac equation and multiplying it by formula_37 from the right, the adjoint Dirac equation can be found, with this being the equation of motion for the Dirac adjoint formula_38. It is given by\nformula_39\nformula_43\nformula_44\nformula_51\nMeaning of the Dirac fields.\nIn quantum mechanics, the Dirac spinor formula_20 corresponds to a four-component spinor wave function describing the state of a Dirac fermion.{{rp|685}} Its position probability density, the probability of finding the fermion in a region of space, is described by the zeroth component of its vector current, formula_40.{{rp|689}} In the case of a large number of particles, it can also be interpreted as the charge density.{{rp|137}} An appropriate normalization is required to ensure that the total probability across all of space is equal to one, with probability conservation following directly from the conservation of the vector current. The Dirac equation is the relativistic analogue of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the Dirac fermion wavefunction.\nformula_57\nformula_59\nin the sense of the Schwinger\u2013Dyson equations.{{rp|80}} This version of the equation can also be acquired by taking the expectation value of the operator equation.\nformula_75\nformula_77\nformula_78\nformula_80\nProperties.\nLorentz transformations.\nIn this case the Lorentz group element, specified by formula_79, is given by\nformula_82\nUnder a Lorentz transformation, spacetime coordinates transform under the vector representation formula_89, while the spinors transform under the spinor representation\nformula_90\nThe Dirac equation is a Lorentz covariant equation, meaning that it takes the form in all inertial reference frames.{{rp|5}} That is, it takes the same form when for a spinor formula_20 with coordinates formula_92, as well as for a Lorentz transformed spinor formula_93 in the Lorentz transformed coordinates formula_94\nformula_95\nformula_101\nformula_102\nSymmetries.\nThis symmetry is known as the vector symmetry because its current transforms as a vector under Lorentz transformations. Promoting this symmetry to a gauge symmetry gives rise to quantum electrodynamics.\nformula_104\nformula_107\nformula_108\nformula_111\nwhere formula_112 are the spinor representation generators of the Lorentz Lie algebra, used to define how spinors transform under Lorentz transformations.\nformula_114\nformula_115\nformula_119\nformula_122\nformula_123\nformula_124\nformula_128\nformula_130\nRelated equations.\nRelated Dirac equations.\nAdding self-interaction terms to the Dirac action gives rise to the nonlinear Dirac equation, which allows for the fermions to interact with themselves, such as in the Thirring model.{{rp|81}} Interactions between fermions can also be introduced through electromagnetic effects. In particular, the Breit equation describes multi-electron systems interacting electromagnetically to first order in perturbation theory. The two-body Dirac equation is a similar multi-body equation.\nA geometric reformulation of the Dirac equation is known as the Dirac\u2013Hestenes equation. In this formulation all the components of the Dirac equation have an explicit geometric interpretation. Another related geometric equation is the Dirac\u2013K\u00e4hler equation, which is a geometric analogue of the Dirac equation that can be defined on any general pseudo-Riemannian manifold and which acts on differential forms. In the case of a flat manifold, it reduces to four copies of the Dirac equation. However, on curved manifolds this decomposition breaks down and the equation fundamentally differs. This equation is used in lattice field theory to describe the continuum limit of staggered fermions.\nformula_134\nformula_135\nWeyl and Majorana equations.\nIn particular, in the massless limit the Weyl spinors decouple and the Dirac equation is equivalent to a pair of Weyl equations.{{rp|168}}.\nThis decomposition has been proposed as an intuitive explanation of Zitterbewegung, as these massless components would propagate at the speed of light and move in opposite directions, since the helicity is the projection of the spin onto the direction of motion. Here the role of the mass is not to make the velocity less than the speed of light, but instead controls the average rate at which these reversals occur; specifically, the reversals can be modelled as a Poisson process.\nA closely related equation is the Majorana equation, with this formally taking the same form as the Dirac equation except that it acts on Majorana spinors.{{rp|193}} These are spinors that satisfy a reality condition formula_136, where formula_137 is the charge-conjugation operator.{{rp|56}} In higher dimensions, the Dirac equation has similar relations to the equations describing other spinor representations that arise in those dimensions.\nPauli equation.\nIn the non-relativistic limit, the Dirac equation reduces to the Pauli equation,{{rp|332}} which when coupled to electromagnetism has the form\nformula_138\nformula_151\nformula_153\nformula_154\nGauge symmetry.\nGeneral symmetries.\nAny continuous subgroup of formula_162 can then be gauged. In particular, if one wishes to gauge the symmetry acting on all formula_155 components, then the symmetry being gauged must admit an formula_155-dimensional unitary representation acting on the spinors.{{rp|420}} That is, for every formula_166, there exists an formula_167 dimensional matrix representation formula_168 such that\nformula_169\nformula_177\nformula_179\nformula_183\nThe covariant derivative then takes the form\nformula_184\nformula_185\nwhere in the gauge field kinetic term, the Yang\u2013Mills fields strength tensor is defined as\nformula_186"}
{"id": "39411", "revid": "21408729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39411", "title": "XYY syndrome", "text": "Genetic condition in which a male has an extra Y chromosome\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nXYY syndrome, also known as Jacobs syndrome and Superman syndrome, is an aneuploid genetic condition in which a male has an extra Y chromosome. There are usually few symptoms. These may include being taller than average and an increased risk of learning disabilities. The person is generally otherwise normal, including typical rates of fertility.\nThe condition is generally not inherited but rather occurs as a result of a random event during sperm development. Diagnosis is by a chromosomal analysis, but most of those affected are not diagnosed within their lifetime. There are 47 chromosomes, instead of the usual 46, giving a 47,XYY karyotype.\nTreatment may include speech therapy or extra help with schoolwork, and outcomes are generally positive. The condition occurs in about 1 in 1,000 male births. Many people with the condition are unaware that they have it. The condition was first described in 1961.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPhysical traits.\nPeople with the 47,XYY karyotype have an increased growth rate from early childhood, with an average final height approximately above expected final height. In Edinburgh, Scotland, eight 47,XYY boys born 1967\u20131972 and identified in a newborn screening programme had an average height of at age 18\u2014their fathers' average height was , their mothers' average height was . The increased gene dosage of three X/Y chromosome pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) SHOX genes has been postulated as a cause of the increased stature seen in all three sex chromosome trisomies: 47,XXX, 47,XXY, and 47,XYY.\nSevere acne was noted in a very few early case reports, but dermatologists specializing in acne now doubt the existence of a relationship with 47,XYY.\nPrenatal testosterone levels are normal in 47,XYY males. Most 47,XYY males have normal sexual development and have normal fertility.\nCognitive and behavioral traits.\nIn contrast to the other common sex chromosome aneuploidies\u201447,XXX and 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome)\u2014the average of the IQ scores of 47,XYY boys identified by newborn screening programs was not reduced compared to the general population. In a summary of six prospective studies of 47,XYY boys identified by newborn screening programmes, twenty-eight 47,XYY boys had an average 100.76 verbal IQ, 108.79 performance IQ, and 105.00 full-scale IQ. In a systematic review including two prospective studies of 47,XYY boys identified by newborn screening programs and one retrospective study of 47,XYY men identified by screening men over in height, forty-two 47,XYY boys and men had an average 99.5 verbal IQ and 106.4 performance IQ.\nIn prospective studies of 47,XYY boys identified by newborn screening programs, the IQ scores of 47,XYY boys were usually slightly lower than those of their siblings. In Edinburgh, fifteen 47,XYY boys with siblings identified in a newborn screening program had an average 104.0 verbal IQ and 106.7 performance IQ, while their siblings had an average 112.9 verbal IQ and 114.6 performance IQ.\nApproximately half of 47,XYY boys identified by newborn screening programs had learning difficulties\u2014a higher proportion than found among siblings and above-average-IQ control groups. In Edinburgh, 54% of 47,XYY boys (7 of 13) identified in a newborn screening program received remedial reading teaching compared to 18% (4 of 22) in an above-average-IQ control group of 46,XY boys matched by their father's social class. In Boston, USA 55% of 47,XYY boys (6 of 11) identified in a newborn screening program had learning difficulties and received part-time resource room help compared to 11% (1 of 9) in an above-average-IQ control group of 46,XY boys with familial balanced autosomal chromosome translocations.\nDevelopmental delays and behavioral problems are also found, but these characteristics vary widely among affected boys and men, are not unique to 47,XYY and are managed no differently from in 46,XY males. Aggression is not seen more frequently in 47,XYY males.\nPatients with XYY syndrome have been shown to have a higher risk of developing certain diseases such as asthma, seizure problems, and tremors. Some 47,XYY patients have been found to have genitourinary malformations. These include cryptorchidism, hypoplastic scrotum, microphallus, and hypospadias. These men could be diagnosed with infertility as a result of oligospermia or sperm chromosomal abnormalities. According to certain psychological studies, people with XYY syndrome may have problems with impulse control and emotional regulation. Increased testosterone levels were found to be correlated with an increased risk of aggressive behavior in incarcerated males with 47,XYY syndrome. 47,XYY is not inherited; it usually occurs as a random event during the formation of sperm cells. An incident in chromosome separation during anaphase II (of meiosis II) called nondisjunction can result in sperm cells with an extra copy of the Y-chromosome. If one of these atypical sperm cells contributes to the genetic makeup of a child, the child will have an extra Y-chromosome in each of the body's cells.\nIn some cases, the extra Y-chromosome results from nondisjunction during mitosis in early embryonic development. This can produce 46,XY/47,XYY mosaics.\nDiagnosis.\n47,XYY syndrome is not usually diagnosed until learning issues are present. The syndrome is diagnosed in an increasing number of children prenatally by amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in order to obtain a chromosome karyotype, where the abnormality can be observed.\nIt is estimated that only 15\u201320% of children with 47,XYY syndrome are ever diagnosed. Of these, approximately 30% are diagnosed prenatally. For the rest of those diagnosed after birth, around half are diagnosed during childhood or adolescence after developmental delays are observed. The rest are diagnosed after any of a variety of symptoms, including fertility problems (5%) have been seen.\nEpidemiology.\nAround 1 in 1,000 boys are born with a 47,XYY karyotype. The incidence of 47,XYY is not known to be affected by the parents' ages.\nHistory.\n1960s.\nIn April 1956, \"Hereditas\" published the discovery by cytogeneticists Joe Hin Tjio and Albert Levan at Lund University in Sweden that the normal number of chromosomes in diploid human cells was 46\u2014not 48, as had been believed for the preceding thirty years. In the wake of the establishment of the normal number of human chromosomes, 47,XYY was the last of the common sex chromosome aneuploidies to be discovered, two years after the discoveries of 47,XXY, 45,X and 47,XXX in 1959. Even the much less common 48,XXYY had been discovered in 1960, a year before 47,XYY.\nScreening for those X chromosome aneuploidies was possible before the advent of human chromosome analysis by noting the presence or absence of \"female\" sex chromatin bodies (Barr bodies) in the nuclei of interphase cells in buccal smears, a technique developed a decade \"before\" the first reported sex chromosome aneuploidy. An analogous technique to screen for Y-chromosome aneuploidies by noting supernumerary \"male\" sex chromatin bodies was not developed until 1970, a decade \"after\" the first reported male sex chromosome aneuploidy.\nThe first published report of a man with a 47,XYY karyotype was by the American cytogeneticist Avery Sandberg and his colleagues at Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center (then known as Roswell Park Memorial Institute) in Buffalo, New York in 1961. It was an incidental finding in a normal 44-year-old, 6\u00a0ft. [183\u00a0cm] tall man of average intelligence who was karyotyped because he had a daughter with Down syndrome. Only a dozen isolated 47,XYY cases were reported in the medical literature in the four years following the first report by Sandberg.\nThe XYY syndrome, if named after the discoverer, should rightly be termed Sandberg syndrome and not Jacobs syndrome although the British cytogeneticist Patricia Jacobs did indeed contribute meaningfully to medical knowledge of XYY. In December 1965 and March 1966, \"Nature\" and \"The Lancet\" published the first preliminary reports by Jacobs and her colleagues at the MRC Human Genetics Unit at Western General Hospital in Edinburgh of a chromosome survey of 315 male patients at State Hospital in Carstairs, Lanarkshire\u2014Scotland's only special security hospital for developmentally disabled people \u2014that found nine patients, ages 17 to 36, averaging almost 6\u00a0ft. in height (avg. 5'11\", range: 5'7\" to 6'2\"), had a 47,XYY karyotype, and mischaracterized them as aggressive and violent criminals. Over the next decade, almost all published XYY studies were on height-selected, institutionalized XYY males.\nIn January 1968 and March 1968, \"The Lancet\" and \"Science\" published the first U.S. reports of tall, institutionalized XYY males by Mary Telfer, a biochemist, and colleagues at the Elwyn Institute. Telfer found five tall, developmentally disabled XYY boys and men in hospitals and penal institutions in Pennsylvania, and since four of the five had at least moderate facial acne, reached the erroneous conclusion that acne was a defining characteristic of XYY males. After learning that convicted mass murderer Richard Speck had been karyotyped, Telfer not only incorrectly assumed the acne-scarred Speck was XYY, but reached the false conclusion that Speck was the archetypical XYY male\u2014or \"supermale\" as Telfer referred to XYY males outside of peer-reviewed scientific journals.\nIn April 1968, \"The New York Times\"\u2014using Telfer as a main source\u2014introduced the XYY genetic condition to the general public in a three-part series on consecutive days that began with a Sunday front-page story about the planned use of the condition as a mitigating factor in two murder trials in Paris and Melbourne\u2014and falsely reported that Richard Speck was an XYY male and that the condition would be used in an appeal of his murder conviction. The series was echoed the following week by articles\u2014again using Telfer as a main source\u2014in \"Time\" and \"Newsweek\", and six months later in \"The New York Times Magazine\".\nIn December 1968, the \"Journal of Medical Genetics\" published the first XYY review article\u2014by Willam Michael Court Brown (1918\u20131969), director of the MRC Human Genetics Unit\u2014which reported that he had found no overrepresentation of XYY males in nationwide chromosome surveys of prisons and hospitals for developmentally disabled and mentally ill people in Scotland, and concluded that studies confined to institutionalized XYY males may be guilty of selection bias, and that long-term longitudinal prospective studies of newborn XYY boys were needed.\nIn May 1969, at the annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, Telfer and her Elwyn Institute colleagues reported that case studies of the institutionalized XYY and XXY males they had found convinced them that XYY males had been falsely stigmatized and that their behavior may not be significantly different from chromosomally normal 46,XY males.\nIn June 1969, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency held a two-day XYY conference in Chevy Chase, Maryland. In December 1969, with a grant from the NIMH Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency, cytogeneticist Digamber Borgaonkar at Johns Hopkins Hospital began a chromosome survey of (predominantly African-American) boys ages 8 to 18 in all Maryland institutions for delinquent, neglected, or mentally ill juveniles, which was suspended from February\u2013May 1970 due to an American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) lawsuit regarding the study's lack of informed consent.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, screening of consecutive newborns for sex chromosome abnormalities was undertaken at seven centers worldwide: in Denver (Jan 1964\u20131974), Edinburgh (Apr 1967\u2013Jun 1979), New Haven (Oct 1967\u2013Sep 1968), Toronto (Oct 1967\u2013Sep 1971), Aarhus (Oct 1969\u2013Jan 1974, Oct 1980\u2013Jan 1989), Winnipeg (Feb 1970\u2013Sep 1973), and Boston (Apr 1970\u2013Nov 1974). The Boston study, led by Harvard Medical School child psychiatrist Stanley Walzer at Children's Hospital, was unique among the seven newborn screening studies in that it only screened newborn \"boys\" (non-private-ward newborn boys at the Boston Hospital for Women) and was funded in part by grants from the NIMH Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency. The Edinburgh study was led by Shirley Ratcliffe who focused her career on it and published the results in 1999.\n1970s.\nIn December 1969, Lore Zech at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm first reported intense fluorescence of the A T-rich distal half of the long arm of the Y chromosome in the nuclei of metaphase cells treated with quinacrine mustard. In April 1970, Peter Pearson and Martin Bobrow at the MRC Population Genetics Unit in Oxford and Canino Vosa at the University of Oxford reported fluorescent \"male\" sex chromatin bodies in the nuclei of interphase cells in buccal smears treated with quinacrine dihydrochloride, which could be used to screen for Y chromosome aneuploidies like 47,XYY.\nIn December 1970, at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), its retiring president, geneticist H. Bentley Glass, cheered by the legalization of abortion in New York, envisioned a future where pregnant women would be required by the government to abort XYY \"sex deviants\". Mischaracterization of the XYY genetic condition was quickly incorporated into high school biology textbooks and medical school psychiatry textbooks, where misinformation still persists decades later.\nIn 1973, child psychiatrist Herbert Schreier at Children's Hospital told Harvard Medical School microbiologist Jon Beckwith of Science for the People that he thought Walzer's Boston XYY study was unethical; Science for the People investigated the study and, regarding the study, filed an ethics complaint with Harvard Medical School in March 1974. In November 1974, Science for the People went public with their objections to the Boston XYY study in a press conference and a \"New Scientist\" article alleging inadequate informed consent, a lack of benefit (since no specific treatment was available) but substantial risk (by stigmatization with a false stereotype) to the subjects, and that the unblinded experimental design could not produce meaningful results regarding the subjects' behavior. In December 1974, the Harvard Standing Committee on Medical Research issued a report supporting the Boston XYY study, and in March 1975, the faculty voted 199\u201335 to allow continuation of the study. After April 1975, screening of newborns was discontinued\u2014changes to informed consent procedures and pressure from additional advocacy groups, including the Children's Defense Fund, having led to the discontinuation of the last active U.S. newborn screening programs for sex chromosome abnormalities in Boston and Denver.\nIn a paper published in \"New Scientist\" on November 14, 1974 entitled \"XYY syndrome: a dangerous myth\" found no link was found between having an extra Y chromosome and violent behavior. According to the paper, adolescents found to have an extra Y chromosome in a Maryland institution were chemically sterilized to attempt to maintain \"normal behavior,\" despite this the paper found no major behavioral differences between XY and XYY individuals.\nIn August 1976, \"Science\" published a retrospective cohort study by Educational Testing Service psychologist Herman Witkin and colleagues that screened the tallest 16% of men (over 184\u00a0cm (6'0\") in height) born in Copenhagen from 1944 to 1947 for XXY and XYY karyotypes, and found an increased rate of minor criminal convictions for property crimes among sixteen XXY and twelve XYY men may be related to the lower intelligence of those with criminal convictions, but found no evidence that XXY or XYY men were inclined to be aggressive or violent.\n1980s and later.\nThe March of Dimes sponsored five international conferences in June 1974, November 1977, May 1981, June 1984, and June 1989 and published articles from the conferences in book form in 1979, 1982, 1986, and 1991 from seven longitudinal prospective cohort studies on the development of over 300 children and young adults with sex chromosome abnormalities identified in the screening of almost 200,000 consecutive births in hospitals in Denver, Edinburgh, New Haven, Toronto, Aarhus, Winnipeg, and Boston from 1964 to 1975. These seven studies\u2014the only unbiased studies of unselected individuals with sex chromosome abnormalities\u2014have replaced the older, biased studies of institutionalized individuals in understanding the development of individuals with sex chromosome abnormalities.\nIn May 1997, \"Nature Genetics\" published the discovery by Ercole Rao and colleagues of the X/Y chromosome pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) SHOX gene, haploinsufficiency of which leads to short stature in Turner syndrome (45,X). It was subsequently postulated that the increased gene dosage of three SHOX genes leads to tall stature in the sex chromosome trisomies 47,XXX, 47,XXY, and 47,XYY.\nIn July 1999, \"Psychological Medicine\" published a case-control study by Royal Edinburgh Hospital psychiatrist Michael G\u00f6tz and colleagues that found an increased rate of criminal convictions among seventeen XYY men identified in the Edinburgh newborn screening study compared to an above-average-IQ control group of sixty XY men, which multiple logistic regression analysis indicated was mediated mainly through lowered intelligence.\nIn June 2002, the \"American Journal of Medical Genetics\" published results from a longitudinal prospective cohort Denver Family Development Study led by pediatrician and geneticist Arthur Robinson, which found that in fourteen prenatally diagnosed 47,XYY boys (from high socioeconomic status families), IQ scores available for six boys ranged from 100 to 147 with a mean of 120. For the eleven of fourteen boys with siblings, in nine instances their siblings were stronger academically, but in one case the subject was performing equal to, and in another case superior to, his siblings.\nSociety and culture.\nSome medical geneticists question whether the term \"syndrome\" is appropriate for this condition because many people with this karyotype appear normal.\nIn popular culture.\nIn June 1970, \"The XYY Man\" was published\u2014the first of seven Kenneth Royce spy novels whose fictional tall, intelligent, nonviolent XYY hero was a reformed expert cat burglar recruited by British intelligence for dangerous assignments\u2014and later adapted into a thirteen-episode British summer television series broadcast in 1976 and 1977.\nIn other fictional television works, a January 1971 episode \"By the Pricking of My Thumbs ...\" of the British science fiction TV series \"Doomwatch\" featured an XYY boy expelled from school because his genetic condition led him to be falsely accused of nearly blinding another boy. A November 1993 episode of the American police procedural TV series \"Law &amp; Order\", \"Born Bad\", portrays a 14-year-old XYY sociopathic murderer. The May 2007 season finale episode, \"Born To Kill\", of the American police procedural TV series \"\" depicts a 34-year-old XYY serial killer.\nThe false stereotype of XYY boys and men as violent criminals has also been used as a plot device in the horror films \"Il gatto a nove code\" in February 1971 (dubbed into English as \"The Cat o' Nine Tails\" in May 1971) and \"Alien 3\" in May 1992. The main character of the 2005 film \"Neo Ned\" is a neo-nazi who has an extra Y chromosome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39412", "revid": "45911552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39412", "title": "Spoiler effect", "text": "Losing candidate affecting election result\nIn social choice theory and politics, a spoiler effect happens when a losing candidate affects the results of an election simply by participating. Voting rules that are not affected by spoilers are said to be spoilerproof and satisfy independence of irrelevant alternatives.\nThe frequency and severity of spoiler effects depends substantially on the voting method. First-past-the-post voting without winnowing or primary elections is sensitive to spoilers. And so, to a degree, are Instant-runoff or ranked-choice voting (RCV) and the two-round system (TRS). Majority-rule (or Condorcet) methods are only rarely affected by spoilers, which are limited to rare situations called cyclic ties. Rated voting systems are not subject to Arrow's theorem, allowing them to be spoilerproof so long as voters' ratings are consistent across elections.\nSpoiler effects can also occur in some methods of proportional representation, such as the single transferable vote (STV or RCV-PR) and the largest remainders method of party-list representation, where it is called the new states paradox. A new party entering an election causes some seats to shift from one unrelated party to another, even if the new party wins no seats. This kind of spoiler effect is avoided by divisor methods and proportional approval.\nMotivation.\nIn decision theory, \"independence of irrelevant alternatives\" is a fundamental principle of rational choice which says that a decision between two outcomes, A or B, should not depend on the quality of a third, unrelated outcome C. A famous joke by Sidney Morgenbesser illustrates this principle:A man is deciding whether to order apple, blueberry, or cherry pie before settling on apple. The waitress informs him that the cherry pie is very good and a favorite of most customers. The man replies \"in that case, I'll have the blueberry.\"Politicians and social choice theorists have long argued for the unfairness of spoiler effects. The mathematician and political economist Nicolas de Condorcet was the first to study the spoiler effect, in the 1780s.\nManipulation by politicians.\nVoting systems that violate independence of irrelevant alternatives are susceptible to being manipulated by \"strategic nomination\". Such systems may produce an \"incentive to entry\", increasing a candidate's chances of winning if similar candidates join the race, or an \"incentive to exit\", reducing the candidate's chances of winning.\nSome systems are particularly infamous for their ease of manipulation, such as the Borda count, which exhibits a particularly severe entry incentive, letting any party \"clone their way to victory\" by running a large number of candidates. This famously forced de Borda to concede that \"my system is meant only for honest men,\" and eventually led to its abandonment by the French Academy of Sciences.\nOther systems exhibit an exit incentive. The vote splitting effect in plurality voting demonstrates this method's strong exit incentive: if multiple candidates with similar views run in an election, their supporters' votes will be diluted, which may cause a unified opposition candidate to win despite having less support. This effect encourages groups of similar candidates to form an organization to make sure they don't step on each other's toes.\nBy electoral system.\nDifferent electoral systems have different levels of vulnerability to spoilers. In general, spoilers are common with plurality voting, somewhat common in plurality-runoff methods, rare with majoritarian methods, and impossible for most rated voting methods.\nFirst-preference plurality.\nIn cases where there are many similar candidates, spoiler effects occur most often in first-preference plurality (FPP). For example, in the United States, vote splitting is common in primaries, where many similar candidates run against each other. The purpose of a primary election is to eliminate vote splitting among candidates from the same party in the general election by running only one candidate. In a two-party system, party primaries effectively turn FPP into a two-round system.\nVote splitting is the most common cause of spoiler effects in FPP. In these systems, the presence of many ideologically-similar candidates causes their vote total to be split between them, placing these candidates at a disadvantage. This is most visible in elections where a minor candidate draws votes away from a major candidate with similar politics, thereby causing a strong opponent of both to win.\nRunoff systems.\nPlurality-runoff methods like the two-round system and RCV still experience vote-splitting in each round. This produces a kind of spoiler effect called a center squeeze. Compared to plurality without primaries, the elimination of weak candidates in earlier rounds reduces their effect on the final results; however, spoiled elections remain common compared to other systems. As a result, instant-runoff voting still tends towards two-party rule through the process known as Duverger's law. A notable example of this can be seen in Alaska's 2024 race, where party elites pressured candidate Nancy Dahlstrom into dropping out to avoid a repeat of the spoiled 2022 election.\nTournament (Condorcet) voting.\nSpoiler effects rarely occur when using tournament solutions, where candidates are compared in one-on-one matchups to determine relative preference. For each pair of candidates, there is a count for how many voters prefer the first candidate in the pair to the second candidate The resulting table of pairwise counts eliminates the step-by-step redistribution of votes, which is usually the cause for spoilers in other methods. This pairwise comparison means that spoilers can only occur when there is a Condorcet cycle, where there is no single candidate preferred to all others.\nTheoretical models suggest that somewhere between 90% and 99% of real-world elections have a Condorcet winner, and the first Condorcet cycle in a ranked American election was found in 2021. Some systems like the Schulze method and ranked pairs have stronger spoiler resistance guarantees that limit which candidates can spoil an election without a Condorcet winner.\nRated voting.\nRated voting methods ask voters to assign each candidate a score on a scale (e.g. rating them from 0 to 10), instead of listing them from first to last. Highest median and score (highest mean) voting are the two most prominent examples of rated voting rules. Whenever voters rate candidates independently, the rating given to one candidate does not affect the ratings given to the other candidates. Any new candidate cannot change the winner of the race without becoming the winner themselves, which would disqualify them from the definition of a spoiler. For this to hold, in some elections, some voters must use less than their full voting power despite having meaningful preferences among viable candidates.\nThe outcome of rated voting depends on the scale used by the voter or assumed by the mechanism. If the voters use relative scales, i.e. scales that depend on what candidates are running, then the outcome can change if candidates who don't win drop out. Empirical results from panel data suggest that judgments are at least in part relative. Thus, rated methods, as used in practice, may exhibit a spoiler effect caused by the interaction between the voters and the system, even if the system itself passes IIA given an absolute scale.\nProportional representation.\nSpoiler effects can also occur in some methods of proportional representation, such as the single transferable vote (STV or RCV-PR) and the largest remainders method of party-list representation, where it is called a new party paradox. A new party entering an election causes some seats to shift from one unrelated party to another, even if the new party wins no seats. This kind of spoiler effect is avoided by divisor methods and proportional approval.\nSpoiler campaign.\nUnited States.\nA spoiler campaign in the United States is often one that cannot realistically win but can still determine the outcome by pulling support from a more competitive candidate. The two major parties in the United States, the Republican Party and Democratic Party, have regularly won 98% of all state and federal seats. The US presidential elections most consistently cited as having been spoiled by third-party candidates are 1844 and 2000. The 2016 election is more disputed as to whether it contained spoiler candidates or not. For the 2024 presidential election, Republican lawyers and operatives have fought to keep right-leaning third-parties like the Constitution Party off swing state ballots while working to get Cornel West on battleground ballots. Democrats have helped some right-leaning third-parties gain ballot access while challenging ballot access of left-leaning third-parties like the Green Party. According to the \"Associated Press\", the GOP effort to prop up possible spoiler candidates in 2024 appears more far-reaching than the Democratic effort. Barry Burden argues that they have almost no chance of winning the 2024 election but are often motivated by particular issues.\nThird party candidates are always controversial because almost anyone could play spoiler. This is especially true in close elections where the chances of a spoiler effect increase. Strategic voting, especially prevalent during high stakes elections with high political polarization, often leads to a third-party that underperforms its poll numbers with voters wanting to make sure their least favorite candidate is not in power. Third-party campaigns are more likely to result in the candidate a third party voter least wants in the White House. Third-party candidates prefer to focus on their platform than on their impact on the frontrunners.\nNotable unintentional spoilers.\nAn unintentional spoiler is one that has a realistic chance of winning but falls short and affects the outcome of the election. Some third-party candidates express ambivalence about which major party they prefer and their possible role as spoiler or deny the possibility.\n2009 Burlington mayoral election.\nIn Burlington, Vermont's second IRV election, spoiler Kurt Wright knocked out Democrat Andy Montroll in the second round, leading to the election of Bob Kiss, despite the election results showing most voters preferred Montroll to Kiss. The results of every possible one-on-one election can be completed as follows:\nThis leads to an overall preference ranking of:\nMontroll was therefore preferred over Kiss by 54% of voters, over Wright by 56%, and over Smith by 60%. Had Wright not run, Montroll would have won instead of Kiss.\nBecause all ballots were fully released, it is possible to reconstruct the winners under other voting methods. While Wright would have won under plurality, Kiss won under IRV, and would have won under a two-round vote or a traditional nonpartisan blanket primary. Montroll, being the majority-preferred candidate, would have won if the ballots were counted using ranked pairs (or any other Condorcet method).\n2022 Alaska's at-large congressional district special election.\nIn Alaska's first-ever IRV election, Nick Begich was eliminated in the first round to advance Mary Peltola and Sarah Palin. However, the pairwise comparison shows that Begich was the Condorcet winner while Palin was both the Condorcet loser and a spoiler:\nIn the wake of the election, a poll found 54% of Alaskans, including a third of Peltola voters, supported a repeal of RCV. Observers noted such pathologies would have occurred under Alaska's previous primary system as well, leading several to suggest Alaska adopt any one of several alternatives without this behavior.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39413", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39413", "title": "Trisomy", "text": "Abnormal presence of three copies of a particular chromosome\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA trisomy is a type of polysomy in which there are three instances of a particular chromosome, instead of the normal two. A trisomy is a type of aneuploidy (an abnormal number of chromosomes).\nDescription and causes.\nMost organisms that reproduce sexually have pairs of chromosomes in each cell, with one of each type of chromosome inherited from each parent. In such organisms, meiosis creates gamete cells (eggs or sperm) having only one set of chromosomes. The number of chromosomes is different for different species, with humans having 46 chromosomes (23 pairs) and human gametes 23 chromosomes.\nIf the chromosome pairs fail to separate properly during cell division, the egg or sperm may end up with a second copy of one of the chromosomes (non-disjunction). If such a gamete is fertilized with a normal gamete, the resulting embryo may have a total of three copies of the chromosome.\nTerminology.\nThe number of chromosomes in the cell where trisomy occurs is represented as, for example, 2\"n\"+1 if one chromosome shows trisomy, 2\"n\"+1+1 if two show trisomy, etc.\nTrisomies are sometimes characterised as \"autosomal trisomies\" (trisomies of the non-sex chromosomes) and \"sex-chromosome trisomies.\" Autosomal trisomies are described by referencing the specific chromosome that has an extra copy. Thus, for example, the presence of an extra chromosome 21, which is found in Down syndrome, is called trisomy 21.\nHuman trisomy.\nTrisomies can occur with any chromosome, but often result in spontaneous abortion (miscarriage) rather than live birth. For example, Trisomy 16 is most common in human pregnancies, occurring in more than 1%, but the only surviving embryos are those having some normal cells in addition to the trisomic cells (mosaic trisomy 16). Furthermore, even these embryos usually suffer miscarriage in the first trimester.\nThe most common types of human autosomal (non-sex chromosome) trisomy that survive to birth are:\nOf these, Trisomy 21 and Trisomy 18 are the most common. In rare cases, a fetus with Trisomy 13 can survive, giving rise to Patau syndrome. Autosomal trisomy can be associated with birth defects, intellectual disability and shortened life.\n\"Trisomy of sex chromosomes\" can also occur and include:\nCompared to trisomy of the autosomal chromosomes, trisomy of the sex chromosomes normally has less severe consequences. Individuals may show few or no symptoms and have a normal life expectancy.\nTrisomies in other species.\nThe chromosome most similar to human chromosome 21 in mice is mouse chromosome 16. A trisomy in the latter is not viable in mice although it is largely homologous to human chromosome 21.\nOther viable trisomies in animals are known, e.g. in cattle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39418", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39418", "title": "Moore's law", "text": "Observation on the growth of integrated circuit capacity\nMoore's law is the observation that the number of transistors in an integrated circuit (IC) doubles about every two years. Moore's law is an observation and projection of a historical trend. Rather than a law of physics, it is an empirical relationship. It is an experience curve effect, a type of observation quantifying efficiency gains from learned experience in production.\nThe observation is named after Gordon Moore, the co-founder of Fairchild Semiconductor and Intel and former Chief Executive Officer of the latter, who in 1965 noted that the number of components per integrated circuit had been doubling every year, and projected this rate of growth would continue for at least another decade. In 1975, looking forward to the next decade, he revised the forecast to doubling every two years, a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 41%. Moore's empirical evidence did not directly imply that the historical trend would continue; nevertheless, his prediction has held since 1975 and has since become known as a \"law\".\nMoore's prediction has been used in the semiconductor industry to guide long-term planning and to set targets for research and development (R&amp;D). Advancements in digital electronics, such as the reduction in quality-adjusted prices of microprocessors, the increase in memory capacity (Random Access Memory and flash), the improvement of sensors, and even the number and size of pixels in digital cameras, are strongly linked to Moore's law. These ongoing changes in digital electronics have been a driving force of technological and social change, productivity, and economic growth.\nIndustry experts have not reached a consensus on exactly when Moore's law will cease to apply. Microprocessor architects report that semiconductor advancement has slowed industry-wide since around 2010, slightly below the pace predicted by Moore's law. In September 2022, Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang considered Moore's law dead, while Intel's then CEO Pat Gelsinger had the opposite view.\nHistory.\nIn 1959, Douglas Engelbart studied the projected downscaling of integrated circuit (IC) size, publishing his results in the article \"Microelectronics, and the Art of Similitude\". Engelbart presented his findings at the 1960 International Solid-State Circuits Conference, where Moore was present in the audience.\nIn 1965, Gordon Moore, who at the time was working as the director of research and development at Fairchild Semiconductor, was asked to contribute to the thirty-fifth-anniversary issue of \"Electronics\" magazine with a prediction on the future of the semiconductor components industry over the next ten years. His response was a brief article entitled \"Cramming more components onto integrated circuits\". Within his editorial, he speculated that by 1975 it would be possible to contain as many as components on a single quarter-square-inch (~\u00a0) semiconductor.\nThe complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year. Certainly over the short term this rate can be expected to continue, if not to increase. Over the longer term, the rate of increase is a bit more uncertain, although there is no reason to believe it will not remain nearly constant for at least 10 years.\nMoore posited a log\u2013linear relationship between device complexity (higher circuit density at reduced cost) and time. In a 2015 interview, Moore noted of the 1965 article: \"...\u00a0I just did a wild extrapolation saying it's going to continue to double every year for the next 10 years.\" One historian of the law cites Stigler's law of eponymy, to introduce the fact that the regular doubling of components was known to many working in the field.\nIn 1974, Robert H. Dennard at IBM recognized the rapid MOSFET scaling technology and formulated what became known as Dennard scaling, which describes that as MOS transistors get smaller, their power density stays constant such that the power use remains in proportion with area. Evidence from the semiconductor industry shows that this inverse relationship between power density and areal density broke down in the mid-2000s.\nAt the 1975 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting, Moore revised his forecast rate, predicting semiconductor complexity would continue to double annually until about 1980, after which it would decrease to a rate of doubling approximately every two years. He outlined several contributing factors for this exponential behavior:\nShortly after 1975, Caltech professor Carver Mead popularized the term \"Moore's law\". Moore's law eventually came to be widely accepted as a goal for the semiconductor industry, and it was cited by competitive semiconductor manufacturers as they strove to increase processing power. Moore viewed his eponymous law as surprising and optimistic: \"Moore's law is a violation of Murphy's law. Everything gets better and better.\" The observation was even seen as a self-fulfilling prophecy.\nThe doubling period is often misquoted as 18 months because of a separate prediction by Moore's colleague, Intel executive David House. In 1975, House noted that Moore's revised law of doubling transistor count every 2 years in turn implied that computer chip performance would roughly double every 18 months, with no increase in power consumption. Mathematically, Moore's law predicted that transistor count would double every 2 years due to shrinking transistor dimensions and other improvements. As a consequence of shrinking dimensions, Dennard scaling predicted that power consumption per unit area would remain constant. Combining these effects, David House deduced that computer chip performance would roughly double every 18 months. Also due to Dennard scaling, this increased performance would not be accompanied by increased power, i.e., the energy-efficiency of silicon-based computer chips roughly doubles every 18 months. Dennard scaling ended in the 2000s. Koomey later showed that a similar rate of efficiency improvement predated silicon chips and Moore's law, for technologies such as vacuum tubes.\nMicroprocessor architects report that since around 2010, semiconductor advancement has slowed industry-wide below the pace predicted by Moore's law. Brian Krzanich, the former CEO of Intel, cited Moore's 1975 revision as a precedent for the current deceleration, which results from technical challenges and is \"a natural part of the history of Moore's law\". The rate of improvement in physical dimensions known as Dennard scaling also ended in the mid-2000s. As a result, much of the semiconductor industry has shifted its focus to the needs of major computing applications rather than semiconductor scaling. Nevertheless, as of 2019, leading semiconductor manufacturers TSMC and Samsung Electronics claimed to keep pace with Moore's law with 10, 7, and 5\u00a0nm nodes in mass production.\nMoore's second law.\nAs the cost of computer power to the consumer falls, the cost for producers to fulfill Moore's law follows an opposite trend: R&amp;D, manufacturing, and test costs have increased steadily with each new generation of chips. The cost of the tools, principally extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL), used to manufacture chips doubles every 4 years. Rising manufacturing costs are an important consideration for the sustaining of Moore's law. This led to the formulation of Moore's second law, also called Rock's law (named after Arthur Rock), which is that the capital cost of a semiconductor fabrication plant also increases exponentially over time.\nMajor enabling factors.\nNumerous innovations by scientists and engineers have sustained Moore's law since the beginning of the IC era. Some of the key innovations are listed below, as examples of breakthroughs that have advanced integrated circuit and semiconductor device fabrication technology, allowing transistor counts to grow by more than seven orders of magnitude in less than five decades.\nComputer industry technology road maps predicted in 2001 that Moore's law would continue for several generations of semiconductor chips.\nRecent trends.\nOne of the key technical challenges of engineering future nanoscale transistors is the design of gates. As device dimensions shrink, controlling the current flow in the thin channel becomes more difficult. Modern nanoscale transistors typically take the form of multi-gate MOSFETs, with the FinFET being the most common nanoscale transistor. The FinFET has gate dielectric on three sides of the channel. In comparison, the gate-all-around MOSFET (GAAFET) structure has even better gate control.\nMicroprocessor architects report that semiconductor advancement has slowed industry-wide since around 2010, below the pace predicted by Moore's law. Brian Krzanich, the former CEO of Intel, announced, \"Our cadence today is closer to two and a half years than two.\" Intel stated in 2015 that improvements in MOSFET devices have slowed, starting at the 22\u00a0nm feature width around 2012, and continuing at 14\u00a0nm. Pat Gelsinger, former Intel CEO, stated at the end of 2023 that \"we're no longer in the golden era of Moore's Law, it's much, much harder now, so we're probably doubling effectively closer to every three years now, so we've definitely seen a slowing.\"\nThe physical limits to transistor scaling have been reached due to source-to-drain leakage, limited gate metals and limited options for channel material. Other approaches are being investigated, which do not rely on physical scaling. These include the spin state of electron spintronics, tunnel junctions, and advanced confinement of channel materials via nano-wire geometry. Spin-based logic and memory options are being developed actively in labs.\nAlternative materials research.\nThe vast majority of current transistors on integrated circuits are composed principally of doped silicon and its alloys. As silicon is fabricated into single nanometer transistors, short-channel effects adversely changes desired material properties of silicon as a functional transistor. Below are several non-silicon substitutes in the fabrication of small nanometer transistors.\nOne proposed material is indium gallium arsenide, or InGaAs. Compared to their silicon and germanium counterparts, InGaAs transistors are more promising for future high-speed, low-power logic applications. Because of intrinsic characteristics of III\u2013V compound semiconductors, quantum well and tunnel effect transistors based on InGaAs have been proposed as alternatives to more traditional MOSFET designs.\nBiological computing research shows that biological material has superior information density and energy efficiency compared to silicon-based computing.\nVarious forms of graphene are being studied for graphene electronics, e.g., graphene nanoribbon transistors have shown promise since their appearance in publications in 2008. (Bulk graphene has a band gap of zero and thus cannot be used in transistors because of its constant conductivity, an inability to turn off. The zigzag edges of the nanoribbons introduce localized energy states in the conduction and valence bands and thus a bandgap that enables switching when fabricated as a transistor. As an example, a typical GNR of width of 10\u00a0nm has a desirable bandgap energy of 0.4\u00a0eV.) More research will need to be performed, however, on sub-50\u00a0nm graphene layers, as its resistivity value increases and thus electron mobility decreases.\nForecasts and roadmaps.\nIn April 2005, Gordon Moore stated in an interview that the projection cannot be sustained indefinitely: \"It can't continue forever. The nature of exponentials is that you push them out and eventually disaster happens.\" He also noted that transistors eventually would reach the limits of miniaturization at atomic levels:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In terms of size [of transistors] you can see that we're approaching the size of atoms which is a fundamental barrier, but it'll be two or three generations before we get that far\u2014but that's as far out as we've ever been able to see. We have another 10 to 20 years before we reach a fundamental limit. By then they'll be able to make bigger chips and have transistor budgets in the billions.\u2014\u200aIn 2016 the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, after using Moore's Law to drive the industry since 1998, produced its final roadmap. It no longer centered its research and development plan on Moore's law. Instead, it outlined what might be called the More than Moore strategy in which the needs of applications drive chip development, rather than a focus on semiconductor scaling. Application drivers range from smartphones to AI to data centers.\nIEEE began a road-mapping initiative in 2016, Rebooting Computing, named the International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS).\nSome forecasters, including Gordon Moore, predict that Moore's law will end by around 2025. Although Moore's Law will reach a physical limit, some forecasters are optimistic about the continuation of technological progress in a variety of other areas, including new chip architectures, quantum computing, and AI and machine learning. Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang declared Moore's law dead in 2022; several days later, Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger countered with the opposite claim.\nConsequences.\nDigital electronics have contributed to world economic growth in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. The primary driving force of economic growth is the growth of productivity, which Moore's law factors into. Moore (1995) expected that \"the rate of technological progress is going to be controlled from financial realities\". The reverse could and did occur around the late-1990s, however, with economists reporting that \"Productivity growth is the key economic indicator of innovation.\" Moore's law describes a driving force of technological and social change, productivity, and economic growth.\nAn acceleration in the rate of semiconductor progress contributed to a surge in U.S. productivity growth, which reached 3.4% per year in 1997\u20132004, outpacing the 1.6% per year during both 1972\u20131996 and 2005\u20132013. As economist Richard G. Anderson notes, \"Numerous studies have traced the cause of the productivity acceleration to technological innovations in the production of semiconductors that sharply reduced the prices of such components and of the products that contain them (as well as expanding the capabilities of such products).\"\nThe primary negative implication of Moore's law is that obsolescence pushes society up against the Limits to Growth. As technologies continue to rapidly improve, they render predecessor technologies obsolete. In situations in which security and survivability of hardware or data are paramount, or in which resources are limited, rapid obsolescence often poses obstacles to smooth or continued operations.\nOther formulations and similar observations.\nSeveral measures of digital technology are improving at exponential rates related to Moore's law, including the size, cost, density, and speed of components. Moore wrote only about the density of components, \"a component being a transistor, resistor, diode or capacitor\", at minimum cost.\n\"Transistors per integrated circuit\" \u2013 The most popular formulation is of the doubling of the number of transistors on ICs every two years. At the end of the 1970s, Moore's law became known as the limit for the number of transistors on the most complex chips. The graph at the top of this article shows this trend holds true today. As of 2025[ [update]], the commercially available processor possessing one of the highest numbers of transistors is a GB202 graphics processor with more than 92.2\u00a0billion transistors.\n\"Density at minimum cost per transistor\" \u2013 This is the formulation given in Moore's 1965 paper. It is not just about the density of transistors that can be achieved, but about the density of transistors at which the cost per transistor is the lowest.\nAs more transistors are put on a chip, the cost to make each transistor decreases, but the chance that the chip will not work due to a defect increases. In 1965, Moore examined the density of transistors at which cost is minimized, and observed that, as transistors were made smaller through advances in photolithography, this number would increase at \"a rate of roughly a factor of two per year\".\n\"Dennard scaling\" \u2013 This posits that power usage would decrease in proportion to area (both voltage and current being proportional to length) of transistors. Combined with Moore's law, performance per watt would grow at roughly the same rate as transistor density, doubling every 1\u20132 years. According to Dennard scaling transistor dimensions would be scaled by 30% (0.7\u00d7) every technology generation, thus reducing their area by 50%. This would reduce the delay by 30% (0.7\u00d7) and therefore increase operating frequency by about 40% (1.4\u00d7). Finally, to keep electric field constant, voltage would be reduced by 30%, reducing energy by 65% and power (at 1.4\u00d7 frequency) by 50%. Therefore, in every technology generation transistor density would double, circuit becomes 40% faster, while power consumption (with twice the number of transistors) stays the same. Dennard scaling ended in 2005\u20132010, due to leakage currents.\nThe exponential processor transistor growth predicted by Moore does not always translate into exponentially greater practical CPU performance. Since around 2005\u20132007, Dennard scaling has ended, so even though Moore's law continued after that, it has not yielded proportional dividends in improved performance. The primary reason cited for the breakdown is that at small sizes, current leakage poses greater challenges, and also causes the chip to heat up, which creates a threat of thermal runaway and therefore, further increases energy costs.\nThe breakdown of Dennard scaling prompted a greater focus on multicore processors, but the gains offered by switching to more cores are lower than the gains that would be achieved had Dennard scaling continued. In another departure from Dennard scaling, Intel microprocessors adopted a non-planar tri-gate FinFET at 22\u00a0nm in 2012 that is faster and consumes less power than a conventional planar transistor. The rate of performance improvement for single-core microprocessors has slowed significantly. Single-core performance was improving by 52% per year in 1986\u20132003 and 23% per year in 2003\u20132011, but slowed to just seven percent per year in 2011\u20132018.\n\"Quality adjusted price of IT equipment\" \u2013 The price of information technology (IT), computers and peripheral equipment, adjusted for quality and inflation, declined 16% per year on average over the five decades from 1959 to 2009. The pace accelerated, however, to 23% per year in 1995\u20131999 triggered by faster IT innovation, and later, slowed to 2% per year in 2010\u20132013.\nWhile quality-adjusted microprocessor price improvement continues, the rate of improvement likewise varies, and is not linear on a log scale. Microprocessor price improvement accelerated during the late 1990s, reaching 60% per year (halving every nine months) versus the typical 30% improvement rate (halving every two years) during the years earlier and later. Laptop microprocessors in particular improved 25\u201335% per year in 2004\u20132010, and slowed to 15\u201325% per year in 2010\u20132013.\nThe number of transistors per chip cannot explain quality-adjusted microprocessor prices fully. Moore's 1995 paper does not limit Moore's law to strict linearity or to transistor count, \"The definition of 'Moore's Law' has come to refer to almost anything related to the semiconductor industry that on a semi-log plot approximates a straight line. I hesitate to review its origins and by doing so restrict its definition.\"\n\"Hard disk drive areal density\" \u2013 A similar prediction (sometimes called Kryder's law) was made in 2005 for hard disk drive areal density. The prediction was later viewed as over-optimistic. Several decades of rapid progress in areal density slowed around 2010, from 30 to 100% per year to 10\u201315% per year, because of noise related to smaller grain size of the disk media, thermal stability, and writability using available magnetic fields.\n\"Fiber-optic capacity\" \u2013 The number of bits per second that can be sent down an optical fiber increases exponentially, faster than Moore's law. Keck's law, in honor of Donald Keck.\n\"Network capacity\" \u2013 According to Gerald Butters, the former head of Lucent's Optical Networking Group at Bell Labs, there is another version, called Butters' Law of Photonics, a formulation that deliberately parallels Moore's law. Butters' law says that the amount of data coming out of an optical fiber is doubling every nine months. Thus, the cost of transmitting a bit over an optical network decreases by half every nine months. The availability of wavelength-division multiplexing (sometimes called WDM) increased the capacity that could be placed on a single fiber by as much as a factor of 100. Optical networking and dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) is rapidly bringing down the cost of networking, and further progress seems assured. As a result, the wholesale price of data traffic collapsed in the dot-com bubble. Nielsen's Law says that the bandwidth available to users increases by 50% annually.\n\"Pixels per dollar\" \u2013 Similarly, Barry Hendy of Kodak Australia has plotted pixels per dollar as a basic measure of value for a digital camera, demonstrating the historical linearity (on a log scale) of this market and the opportunity to predict the future trend of digital camera price, LCD and LED screens, and resolution.\n\"The great Moore's law compensator (TGMLC)\", also known as Wirth's law, is the principle that successive generations of computer software increase in size and complexity (software bloat), thereby offsetting the performance gains predicted by Moore's law. In a 2008 article in InfoWorld, Randall C. Kennedy, formerly of Intel, introduces this term using successive versions of Microsoft Office between the year 2000 and 2007 as his premise. Despite the gains in computational performance during this time period according to Moore's law, Office 2007 performed the same task at half the speed on a prototypical year 2007 computer as compared to Office 2000 on a year 2000 computer.\n\"Library expansion\" \u2013 was calculated in 1945 by Fremont Rider to double in capacity every 16 years, if sufficient space were made available. He advocated replacing bulky, decaying printed works with miniaturized microform analog photographs, which could be duplicated on-demand for library patrons or other institutions. He did not foresee the digital technology that would follow decades later to replace analog microform with digital imaging, storage, and transmission media. Automated, potentially lossless digital technologies allowed vast increases in the rapidity of information growth in an era that now sometimes is called the Information Age.\n\"Carlson curve\" \u2013 is a term coined by \"The Economist\" to describe the biotechnological equivalent of Moore's law, and is named after author Rob Carlson. Carlson accurately predicted that the doubling time of DNA sequencing technologies (measured by cost and performance) would be at least as fast as Moore's law. Carlson Curves illustrate the rapid (in some cases hyperexponential) decreases in cost, and increases in performance, of a variety of technologies, including DNA sequencing, DNA synthesis, and a range of physical and computational tools used in protein expression and in determining protein structures.\n\"Eroom's law\" \u2013 is a pharmaceutical drug development observation that was deliberately written as Moore's Law spelled backward in order to contrast it with the exponential advancements of other forms of technology (such as transistors) over time. It states that the cost of developing a new drug roughly doubles every nine years.\n\"Experience curve effects\" says that each doubling of the cumulative production of virtually any product or service is accompanied by an approximate constant percentage reduction in the unit cost. The acknowledged first documented qualitative description of this dates from 1885. A power curve was used to describe this phenomenon in a 1936 discussion of the cost of airplanes.\n\"Edholm's law\" \u2013 Phil Edholm observed that the bandwidth of telecommunication networks (including the Internet) is doubling every 18 months. The bandwidths of online communication networks has risen from bits per second to terabits per second. The rapid rise in online bandwidth is largely due to the same MOSFET scaling that enabled Moore's law, as telecommunications networks are built from MOSFETs.\n\"Haitz's law\" predicts that the brightness of LEDs increases as their manufacturing cost goes down.\n\"Swanson's law\" is the observation that the price of solar photovoltaic modules tends to drop 20 percent for every doubling of cumulative shipped volume. At present rates, costs go down 75% about every 10 years.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39419", "revid": "327592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39419", "title": "Pythagorean triangle", "text": ""}
{"id": "39420", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39420", "title": "Right triangle", "text": "Triangle containing a 90-degree angle\nA right triangle or right-angled triangle, sometimes called an orthogonal triangle or rectangular triangle, is a triangle in which two sides are perpendicular, forming a right angle (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 turn or 90 degrees).\nThe side opposite to the right angle is called the \"hypotenuse\" (side formula_1 in the figure). The sides adjacent to the right angle are called \"legs\" (or \"catheti\", singular: \"cathetus\"). Side formula_2 may be identified as the side \"adjacent\" to angle formula_3 and \"opposite\" (or \"opposed to\") angle formula_4 while side formula_5 is the side adjacent to angle formula_6 and opposite angle formula_7\nEvery right triangle is half of a rectangle which has been divided along its diagonal. When the rectangle is a square, its right-triangular half is isosceles, with two congruent sides and two congruent angles. When the rectangle is not a square, its right-triangular half is scalene.\nEvery triangle whose base is the diameter of a circle and whose apex lies on the circle is a right triangle, with the right angle at the apex and the hypotenuse as the base; conversely, the circumcircle of any right triangle has the hypotenuse as its diameter. This is Thales' theorem.\nThe legs and hypotenuse of a right triangle satisfy the Pythagorean theorem: the sum of the areas of the squares on two legs is the area of the square on the hypotenuse, formula_8 If the lengths of all three sides of a right triangle are integers, the triangle is called a Pythagorean triangle and its side lengths are collectively known as a \"Pythagorean triple\".\nThe relations between the sides and angles of a right triangle provides one way of defining and understanding trigonometry, the study of the metrical relationships between lengths and angles.\nPrincipal properties.\nSides.\nThe three sides of a right triangle are related by the Pythagorean theorem, which in modern algebraic notation can be written\nformula_9\nwhere formula_1 is the length of the \"hypotenuse\" (side opposite the right angle), and formula_2 and formula_5 are the lengths of the \"legs\" (remaining two sides). Pythagorean triples are integer values of formula_13 satisfying this equation. This theorem was proven in antiquity, and is proposition I.47 in Euclid's \"Elements\": \"In right-angled triangles the square on the side subtending the right angle is equal to the squares on the sides containing the right angle.\"\nArea.\nAs with any triangle, the area is equal to one half the base multiplied by the corresponding height. In a right triangle, if one leg is taken as the base then the other is height, so the area of a right triangle is one half the product of the two legs. As a formula the area formula_14 is\nformula_15\nwhere formula_2 and formula_5 are the legs of the triangle.\nIf the incircle is tangent to the hypotenuse formula_18 at point formula_19 then letting the semi-perimeter be formula_20 we have formula_21 and formula_22 and the area is given by\nformula_23\nThis formula only applies to right triangles.\nAltitudes.\nIf an altitude is drawn from the vertex, with the right angle to the hypotenuse, then the triangle is divided into two smaller triangles; these are both similar to the original, and therefore similar to each other. From this:\nIn equations,\nformula_24 (this is sometimes known as the right triangle altitude theorem)\nformula_25\nformula_26\nwhere formula_27 are as shown in the diagram. Thus\nformula_28\nMoreover, the altitude to the hypotenuse is related to the legs of the right triangle by\nformula_29\nFor solutions of this equation in integer values of formula_30 see here.\nThe altitude from either leg coincides with the other leg. Since these intersect at the right-angled vertex, the right triangle's orthocenter\u2014the intersection of its three altitudes\u2014coincides with the right-angled vertex.\nInradius and circumradius.\nThe radius of the incircle of a right triangle with legs formula_2 and formula_5 and hypotenuse formula_1 is\nformula_34\nBy Thales's theorem, the hypotenuse is the diameter of the circumcircle, and so the radius of the circumcircle is half the length of the hypotenuse:\nformula_35\nThus the sum of the circumradius and the inradius is half the sum of the legs:\nformula_36\nOne of the legs can be expressed in terms of the inradius and the other leg as\nformula_37\nCharacterizations.\nA triangle formula_38 with sides formula_39, semiperimeter formula_40, area formula_41 altitude formula_42 opposite the longest side, circumradius formula_43 inradius formula_44 exradii formula_45 tangent to formula_46 respectively, and medians formula_47 is a right triangle if and only if any one of the statements in the following six categories is true. Each of them is thus also a property of any right triangle.\nTrigonometric ratios.\nThe trigonometric functions for acute angles can be defined as ratios of the sides of a right triangle. For a given angle, a right triangle may be constructed with this angle, and the sides labeled opposite, adjacent and hypotenuse with reference to this angle according to the definitions above. These ratios of the sides do not depend on the particular right triangle chosen, but only on the given angle, since all triangles constructed this way are similar. If, for a given angle \u03b1, the opposite side, adjacent side and hypotenuse are labeled formula_76 formula_4 and formula_78 respectively, then the trigonometric functions are\nformula_79\nFor the expression of hyperbolic functions as ratio of the sides of a right triangle, see the hyperbolic triangle of a hyperbolic sector.\nSpecial right triangles.\nThe values of the trigonometric functions can be evaluated exactly for certain angles using right triangles with special angles. These include the 30-60-90 triangle which can be used to evaluate the trigonometric functions for any multiple of formula_80 and the isosceles right triangle or 45-45-90 triangle which can be used to evaluate the trigonometric functions for any multiple of formula_81\nKepler triangle.\nLet formula_78 formula_83 and formula_6 be the harmonic mean, the geometric mean, and the arithmetic mean of two positive numbers formula_2 and formula_5 with formula_87 If a right triangle has legs formula_88 and formula_89 and hypotenuse formula_4 then\nformula_91\nwhere formula_92 is the golden ratio. Since the sides of this right triangle are in geometric progression, this is the Kepler triangle.\nThales' theorem.\nThales' theorem states that if formula_93 is the diameter of a circle and formula_6 is any other point on the circle, then formula_38 is a right triangle with a right angle at formula_96 The converse states that the hypotenuse of a right triangle is the diameter of its circumcircle. As a corollary, the circumcircle has its center at the midpoint of the diameter, so the median through the right-angled vertex is a radius, and the circumradius is half the length of the hypotenuse.\nMedians.\nThe following formulas hold for the medians of a right triangle:\nformula_97\nThe median on the hypotenuse of a right triangle divides the triangle into two isosceles triangles, because the median equals one-half the hypotenuse.\nThe medians formula_98 and formula_99 from the legs satisfy\nformula_100\nEuler line.\nIn a right triangle, the Euler line contains the median on the hypotenuse\u2014that is, it goes through both the right-angled vertex and the midpoint of the side opposite that vertex. This is because the right triangle's orthocenter, the intersection of its altitudes, falls on the right-angled vertex while its circumcenter, the intersection of its perpendicular bisectors of sides, falls on the midpoint of the hypotenuse.\nInequalities.\nIn any right triangle the diameter of the incircle is less than half the hypotenuse, and more strongly it is less than or equal to the hypotenuse times formula_101\nIn a right triangle with legs formula_102 and hypotenuse formula_103\nformula_104\nwith equality only in the isosceles case.\nIf the altitude from the hypotenuse is denoted formula_105 then\nformula_106\nwith equality only in the isosceles case.\nOther properties.\nIf segments of lengths formula_107 and formula_108 emanating from vertex formula_109 trisect the hypotenuse into segments of length formula_110 then\nformula_111\nThe right triangle is the only triangle having two, rather than one or three, distinct inscribed squares.\nGiven any two positive numbers formula_112 and formula_113 with formula_114 Let formula_112 and formula_113 be the sides of the two inscribed squares in a right triangle with hypotenuse formula_117 Then\nformula_118\nThese sides and the incircle radius formula_119 are related by a similar formula:\nformula_120\nThe perimeter of a right triangle equals the sum of the radii of the incircle and the three excircles:\nformula_121\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39424", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39424", "title": "Pangea supercontinent", "text": ""}
{"id": "39425", "revid": "33549150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39425", "title": "Primo Levi", "text": "Italian Holocaust survivor and writer (1919\u20131987)\nPrimo Michele Levi (; 31 July 1919 \u2013 11 April 1987) was a Jewish Italian chemist, partisan, Holocaust survivor and writer. He was the author of several books, collections of short stories, essays, poems and one novel. His best-known works include: \"If This Is a Man\" (\"Se questo \u00e8 un uomo\", 1947, published as \"Survival in Auschwitz\" in the United States), his account of the year he spent as a prisoner in the Auschwitz concentration camp in Nazi-occupied Poland; and \"The Periodic Table\" (1975), a collection of mostly autobiographical short stories, each named after a chemical element which plays a role in each story, which the Royal Institution named the best science book ever written.\nLevi died in 1987 from injuries sustained in a fall from a third-storey apartment landing. His death was officially ruled a suicide, although that has been disputed by some of his friends and associates and attributed to an accident.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nLevi was born in 1919 in Turin, Italy, at Corso Re Umberto 75, into a liberal Jewish family. His father, Cesare Levi (1878\u20131942), worked for the manufacturing firm Ganz and spent much of his time working abroad in Hungary, where Ganz was based. Cesare was an avid reader and autodidact. Levi's mother, Esterina (Ester Luzzati Levi, 1895\u20131991), known to everyone as Rina, was well educated, having attended the . She too was an avid reader, played the piano, and spoke fluent French. The marriage between Rina and Cesare had been arranged by Rina's father. On their wedding day, Rina's father, Cesare Luzzati, gave Rina the apartment at , where Primo Levi lived for almost his entire life.\nIn 1921, Anna Maria, Levi's sister, was born, and he remained close to her all her life. In 1925, he entered the primary school in Turin. A thin and delicate child, he was shy and considered himself ugly, but excelled academically. His school record includes long periods of absence during which he was tutored at home, at first by Emilia Glauda and then by Marisa Zini, daughter of philosopher Zino Zini. The children spent summers with their mother in the Waldensian valleys south-west of Turin, where Rina rented a farmhouse. His father remained in the city, partly because of his dislike of the rural life, but also because of his infidelities.\nIn September 1930, Levi entered the Royal Gymnasium a year ahead of normal entrance requirements. In class, he was the youngest, the shortest and the cleverest, as well as being the only Jew. Only two boys there bullied him for being Jewish, but their animosity was traumatic. In August 1932, following two years attendance at the Talmud Torah school in Turin to pick up the elements of doctrine and culture, he sang in the local synagogue for his Bar Mitzvah. In 1933, as was expected of all young Italian schoolboys, he joined the Avanguardisti movement for young Fascists. He avoided rifle drill by joining the ski division, and spent every Saturday during the season on the slopes above Turin. As a young boy, Levi was plagued by illness, particularly chest infections, but he was keen to participate in physical activity. In his teens, Levi and a few friends would sneak into a disused sports stadium and conduct athletic competitions.\nIn July 1934, at the age of 15, he sat the exams for the Liceo Classico D'Azeglio, a lyceum (sixth form or senior high school) specializing in the classics, and was admitted that year. The school was noted for its anti-Fascist teachers, among them the philosopher Norberto Bobbio, and Cesare Pavese, who later became one of Italy's best-known novelists. Levi continued to be bullied during his time at the Lyceum, although six other Jews were in his class. Upon reading \"Concerning the Nature of Things\" by English scientist Sir William Bragg, Levi decided that he wanted to be a chemist.\nIn 1937, he was summoned before the War Ministry and accused of ignoring a draft notice from the Italian Royal Navy. It was one day before he was to write a final examination on Italy's participation in the Spanish Civil War, based on a quote from Thucydides: \"We have the singular merit of being brave to the utmost degree.\" Distracted and terrified by the draft accusation, he failed the exam\u2014the first poor grade of his life\u2014and was devastated. His father was able to keep him out of the Navy by enrolling him in the Fascist militia (\"Milizia Volontaria per la Sicurezza Nazionale\"). He remained a member through his first year of university, until the passage of the Italian Racial Laws of 1938 forced his expulsion. Levi later recounted that series of events in the short story \"Fra Diavolo on the Po\".\nHe retook and passed his final examinations and, in October, enrolled at the University of Turin to study chemistry. As one of 80 candidates, he spent three months taking lectures, and in February, after passing his \"colloquio\" (oral examination), he was selected as one of 20 to move on to the full-time chemistry curriculum.\nDuring the liberal period in Italy, as well as in the first decade of the Fascist regime, Jews held many public positions, and were prominent in literature, science and politics. In 1929, Mussolini signed the Lateran Treaty with the Catholic Church, which established Catholicism as the State religion, allowed the Church to influence many sectors of education and public life, and relegated other religions to the status of \"tolerated cults\". In 1936, Italy's conquest of Ethiopia, and the expansion of what the regime regarded as the Italian \"colonial empire\", brought the question of \"race\" to the forefront. In the context set by those events, and the 1939 alliance with Hitler's Germany, the situation of the Jews of Italy changed radically.\nIn July 1938, a group of prominent Italian scientists and intellectuals published the \"Manifesto of Race\", a mixture of racial and ideological antisemitic theories from ancient and modern sources. The treatise formed the basis of the Italian Racial Laws of October 1938. After their enactment, Italian Jews lost their basic civil rights, positions in public offices, and their assets. Their books were prohibited, and Jewish writers could no longer publish in magazines owned by Aryans. Jewish students who had begun their course of study were permitted to continue, but new Jewish students were barred from entering university. Levi had matriculated a year earlier than scheduled, enabling him to take a degree.\nIn 1939, Levi discovered a passion for mountain hiking. A friend, Sandro Delmastro, taught him how to hike, and they spent many weekends in the mountains above Turin. Levi later wrote about that time in the chapter \"Iron\" in \"The Periodic Table:\" \u201cTo see Sandro in the mountains reconciled you with the world and made you forget the nightmare weighing on Europe [...] He stirred in me a new communion with earth and sky, in which my need for freedom, the fullness of my powers, and the hunger to understand things that had driven me to chemistry converged.\u201d\nIn June 1940, as an ally of Germany, Italy declared war against Britain and France, and the first Allied air raids on Turin began two days later. Levi's studies continued during the bombardments. The family suffered additional strain as his father became bedridden with bowel cancer.\nChemistry.\nBecause of the new racial laws and the increasing intensity of Fascist action, Levi had difficulty finding an advisor for his Ph.D. dissertation, which was on the subject of the Walden inversion, a study of the asymmetry of the carbon atom. Eventually taken on by Dr. Nicol\u00f2 Dallaporta, Levi graduated in mid-1941 with full marks and merit, having submitted additional theses on x-rays and electrostatic energy. His degree certificate bore the remark: \"of Jewish race\". The racial laws prevented Levi from finding a suitable permanent job after graduation.\nIn December 1941, he received an informal job offer from an Italian officer to work as a chemist at an asbestos mine in San Vittore. The project was to extract nickel from the mine spoil, a challenge he accepted with pleasure. Levi later understood that, if successful, he would be aiding the German war effort, which was suffering nickel shortages in the production of armaments. The job required Levi to work under a false name with false papers. Three months later, in March 1942, his father died. Levi left the mine in June to work in Milan for the Swiss pharmaceutical manufacturer Wander AG, on a project to extract an anti-diabetic from vegetable matter. Recruited through a fellow student at Turin University, he took the job in a Swiss company to escape the Italian race laws. It soon became clear that the project had no chance of succeeding, but it was in no-one's interest to say so.\nIn July 1943, King Victor Emmanuel III deposed Mussolini and appointed a new government under Marshal Pietro Badoglio, which prepared to sign the Armistice of Cassibile with the Allies. When the armistice was made public on 8 September, the Germans occupied northern and central Italy, liberated Mussolini from imprisonment, and appointed him as head of the Italian Social Republic, a puppet state in German-occupied northern Italy. Levi returned to Turin to find his mother and sister in refuge in their holiday home called 'Lo Saccarello' (literally, the Sackcloth) in the village of Chieri in the hills outside Turin. The three moved to Saint-Vincent in the Aosta Valley, where they could be hidden. Being pursued as Jews, many of whom had already been interned by the authorities, they moved up the hillside to Amay in the Col de Joux, a rebellious area highly suitable for guerrilla activities.\nItalian resistance movement.\nThe Italian resistance movement became increasingly active in the German-occupied zone. Levi and some comrades took to the foothills of the Alps and, in October, formed a partisan group in the hope of being affiliated with the liberal \"Giustizia e Libert\u00e0\". Untrained for such a venture, he and his companions were arrested by the Fascist militia on 13 December 1943. Believing he would be shot as an Italian partisan, Levi confessed to being Jewish. He was sent to the internment camp at Fossoli near Modena.\nLevi later wrote the following about the conditions at Fossoli:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We were given, on a regular basis, a food ration destined for the soldiers and at the end of January 1944, we were taken to Fossoli on a passenger train. Our conditions in the camp were quite good. There was no talk of executions and the atmosphere was quite calm. We were allowed to keep the money we had brought with us and to receive money from the outside. We worked in the kitchen in turn and performed other services in the camp. We even prepared a dining room, a rather sparse one, I must admit.\nAuschwitz.\nFossoli was taken over by the Germans, who started arranging the deportations of the Jews to eastern concentration and death camps. On 21 February 1944, on the second of the transports, Levi and other inmates were transported in twelve cramped cattle trucks to Monowitz, one of the three main camps in the Auschwitz concentration camp complex. Levi (record number 174517) spent eleven months there before the camp was liberated by the Red Army on 27 January 1945. Before the arrival of the Russians, inmates were sorted according to whether they could work or not. An acquaintance of Levi's said that neither classification would make any difference in the end. He declared he was unable to work and was killed immediately. Of the 650 Italian Jews in his transport, Levi was one of only twenty who left the camps alive. The average life expectancy of a new entrant to the camp was three to four months.\nLevi knew some German from reading German publications on chemistry, and he worked to adjust quickly to life in the camp without attracting the attention of the privileged inmates. He used bread to pay a more experienced Italian prisoner for German lessons and understanding how to cope in Auschwitz. He was given a smuggled soup ration each day by Lorenzo Perrone, an Italian civilian bricklayer who was working at Auschwitz as a forced labourer. Levi's professional qualifications were useful to the Germans and, in mid-November 1944, he secured a position as an assistant in IG Farben's Buna Werke laboratory that was aiming to produce synthetic rubber. By avoiding hard labour in freezing outdoor temperatures he was able to survive, as well as by stealing materials from the laboratory and trading them for extra food. Shortly before the camp was liberated by the Red Army, he fell ill with scarlet fever and was placed in the camp's sanatorium (camp hospital). On 18 January 1945, the SS hurriedly evacuated the camp as the Red Army approached, forcing all but the gravely ill on a long death march to a site further from the front. The march resulted in the deaths of the vast majority of the remaining prisoners, but Levi's illness spared him that fate.\nAlthough liberated on 27 January 1945, Levi did not reach Turin until 19 October 1945. After spending some time in a Soviet camp for former concentration camp inmates, he embarked on an arduous journey home in the company of former Italian prisoners of war who had been part of the Italian Army in Russia. The long railway journey home to Turin took him on a circuitous route from Poland, through Belarus, Ukraine, Romania, Hungary, Austria, and Germany\u00a0\u2013 an arduous journey described especially in his 1963 work \"The Truce\"\u00a0\u2013 noting the millions of displaced people on the roads and trains throughout Europe in that period.\nWriting career.\n1946\u20131960.\nLevi was almost unrecognisable on his return to Turin. Malnutrition edema had bloated his face. Sporting a scrawny beard and wearing an old Red Army uniform, he returned to Corso Re Umberto. The next few months gave him an opportunity to recover physically, re-establish contact with surviving friends and family, and start looking for work. Levi suffered from the psychological trauma of his experiences. Having been unable to find work in Turin, he started to look for work in Milan. On his train journeys, he began to tell people he met stories about his time at Auschwitz.\nAt a Jewish New Year party in 1946, he met Lucia Morpurgo, who offered to teach him to dance, and Levi fell in love with her. At about that time, he started writing poetry about his experiences in Auschwitz.\nOn 21 January 1946, he started work at DUCO, a Du Pont Company paint factory outside Turin. Because of the extremely limited train service, Levi stayed in the factory dormitory during the week, which gave him the opportunity to write undisturbed, and he started the first draft of \"If This Is a Man\". Every day, as memories came to him, he scribbled notes on train tickets and scraps of paper. At the end of February, he had ten pages detailing the last ten days between the German evacuation and the arrival of the Red Army. For the next ten months, the book took shape in his dormitory as he typed up his recollections each night.\nOn 22 December 1946, the manuscript was complete. Lucia, who now reciprocated Levi's love, helped him to edit it, to make the narrative flow more naturally. In January 1947, Levi was taking the finished manuscript around to publishers. It was rejected by Einaudi on the advice of Natalia Ginzburg and, in the United States, it was turned down by Little, Brown and Company on the advice of rabbi Joshua Liebman, an opinion which contributed to the neglect of his work in that country for four decades. The social wounds of the war years were still too fresh, and he had no literary experience to give him a reputation as an author.\nEventually, Levi found a publisher, Franco Antonicelli, through a friend of his sister. Antonicelli was an amateur publisher, but as an active anti-Fascist, he supported the substance of the book.\nAt the end of June 1947, Levi suddenly left DUCO and teamed up with an old friend Alberto Salmoni to run a chemical consultancy from the top floor of Salmoni's parents' house. Many of Levi's experiences of that time found their way into his later writing. He and Salmoni made most of their money from making and supplying stannous chloride for mirror makers, delivering the unstable chemical by bicycle across the city. Attempts to make lipsticks from reptile excreta, and a coloured enamel to coat teeth, were turned into short stories. Accidents in their laboratory filled the Salmoni house with unpleasant smells and corrosive gases.\nIn September 1947, Levi married Lucia and, a month later, on 11 October, \"If This Is a Man\" was published, with a print run of 2,000 copies. In April 1948, with Lucia pregnant with their first child, Levi decided that the life of an independent chemist was too precarious. He agreed to work for Accatti in the family paint business, which traded under the name SIVA. In October 1948, his daughter Lisa was born.\nDuring that period, his friend Lorenzo Perrone's physical and psychological health declined. Lorenzo had been a civilian forced worker in Auschwitz, who for six months had given part of his ration and a piece of bread to Levi without asking for anything in return, and the gesture saved Levi's life. In his memoir, Levi contrasted Lorenzo with everyone else in the camp, prisoners and guards alike, as someone who managed to preserve his humanity. After the war, Lorenzo could not cope with the memories of what he had seen and descended into alcoholism. Levi made several trips to rescue his old friend from the streets but, in 1952, Lorenzo died. In gratitude for his kindness in Auschwitz, Levi named both of his children, Lisa Lorenza and Renzo, after him.\nIn 1950, having demonstrated his chemical talents to Accatti, Levi was promoted to Technical Director at SIVA. As SIVA's principal chemist and troubleshooter, Levi travelled abroad. He made several trips to Germany and carefully engineered his contacts with senior German businessmen and scientists. Wearing short-sleeved shirts, he made sure they saw the concentration camp number tattooed on his arm.\nHe became involved in organisations pledged to remembering and recording the horror of the camps. In 1954, he visited Buchenwald to mark the ninth anniversary of the camp's liberation from the Nazis. Levi dutifully attended many such anniversary events over the years and recounted his own experiences. In July 1957, his son Renzo was born.\nDespite a positive review by Italo Calvino in , only 1,500 copies of \"If This Is a Man\" were sold. In 1958, Einaudi, a major publisher, published it in a revised form and promoted it.\nIn 1958 Stuart Woolf, in close collaboration with Levi, translated \"If This Is a Man\" into English, and it was published in the UK by Orion Press in 1959. Also in 1959, Heinz Riedt, under close supervision by Levi, translated the book into German. Because one of Levi's primary reasons for writing the book was to get the German people to realise what had been done in their name, and to accept at least partial responsibility, that translation was perhaps the most significant to him.\n1961\u20131974.\nLevi began writing \"The Truce\" early in 1961. It was published in 1963, almost 16 years after his first book, and won the first annual Premio Campiello literary award that year. It is often published in one volume with \"If This Is a Man\", because it covers his long return through eastern Europe from Auschwitz. Levi's reputation was growing, and he regularly contributed articles to , the Turin newspaper. He worked to gain a reputation as a writer about subjects other than surviving Auschwitz.\nIn 1963, he suffered his first major bout of depression. At the time he had two young children, and a responsible job at a factory where accidents could and did have terrible consequences. He travelled and became a public figure. But the memory of what happened less than twenty years earlier still burned in his mind. Today, the link between such trauma and depression is better understood. Doctors prescribed several different drugs over the years, but they had variable efficacy and side effects.\nIn 1964, Levi collaborated with the state broadcaster RAI on a radio play based on \"If This Is a Man\" and, in 1966, with a theatre production.\nUnder the pen name of Damiano Malabaila, he published two volumes of science fiction short stories which explored ethical and philosophical questions. They imagined the effects on society of inventions which many would consider beneficial, but which, he saw, would have serious implications. Many of the stories from the two books (\"Natural Histories\", 1966) and (\"Structural Defect\", 1971) were later collected and published in English as \"The Sixth Day and Other Tales\".\nIn 1974, Levi arranged to go into semi-retirement from SIVA in order to have more time to write. He also wanted to escape the burden of responsibility involved in managing the paint plant.\n1975\u20131987.\nIn 1975, a collection of Levi's poetry was published under the title (\"The Bremen Beer Hall\"), which was published in English as \"Shema: Collected Poems\".\nHe wrote two other highly praised memoirs, (\"Moments of Reprieve\", 1978) and (\"The Periodic Table\", 1975). \"Moments of Reprieve\" deals with characters he observed during imprisonment. \"The Periodic Table\" is a collection of mostly autobiographical short stories, and also includes two fictional stories that he wrote in 1941 while being employed at the asbestos mine in San Vittore. Each story is named after a chemical element and the subject matter of each story is related to that element. On 19 October 2006, the Royal Institution in London declared that \"The Periodic Table\" was the best science book ever written.\nIn 1977, at the age of 58, Levi retired as a part-time consultant at the SIVA paint factory to devote himself full-time to writing. Like all his books, \"La chiave a stella\" (1978), published in the US in 1986 as \"The Monkey Wrench\" and in the UK in 1987 as \"The Wrench\", is difficult to categorize. Some reviews describe it as a collection of stories about work and workers, told by a narrator who resembles Levi. Others have called it a novel, created by the linked stories and characters. Set in the Fiat-run Russian company town of Togliattigrad, it portrays the engineer as a hero on whom others depend. The Piedmontese engineer Faussone travelled the world as an expert in erecting cranes and bridges. Most of the stories involve the solution of industrial problems by the use of troubleshooting skills, and many stories come from the author's personal experience. The underlying philosophy is that pride in one's work is necessary for fulfilment. \"The Wrench\" won the Strega Prize in 1979 and brought Levi a wider audience in Italy, though left-wing critics regretted that he did not describe the harsh working conditions on the assembly lines at Fiat.\nIn 1984, Levi published his only novel, \"If Not Now, When?\"\u2014or his second novel, if \"The Monkey Wrench\" is counted. It traces the fortunes of a group of Jewish partisans behind German lines during World War II as they seek to survive and continue their fight against the occupier. With the ultimate goal of reaching Palestine to take part in the development of a Jewish national home, the partisan band reaches Poland and then German territory. There, the surviving members are officially received as displaced persons in territory held by the Western allies. Finally, they succeed in reaching Italy, on their way to Palestine. The novel won both the and the .\nThe book was inspired by events during Levi's train journey home after liberation from the concentration camp, which was narrated in \"The Truce\". At one point in the journey, a band of Zionists hitched their wagon to the refugee train. Levi was impressed by their strength, resolve, organisation and sense of purpose.\nLevi became a major literary figure in Italy, and his books were translated into many other languages. \"The Truce\" became a standard text in Italian schools. In 1985, he flew to the United States for a 20-day speaking tour. Although he was accompanied by Lucia, the trip was very draining for him.\nIn the Soviet Union, his early works were not accepted by censors because he had portrayed Soviet soldiers as slovenly and disorderly rather than heroic. In Israel, a country formed partly by Jewish survivors who lived through horrors similar to those Levi described, many of his works were not translated and published until after his death.\nIn March 1985, he wrote the introduction to the re-publication of the autobiography of Rudolf H\u00f6ss, who was commandant of Auschwitz concentration camp from 1940 to 1943. In it, he writes: \"It's filled with evil ... and reading it is agony.\"\nAlso in 1985, a volume of his essays, previously published in , was published under the title (\"Other People's Trades\"). Levi used to write the stories and hoard them, releasing them to at the rate of about one a week. The essays ranged from book reviews and ponderings about strange things in nature, to fictional short stories.\nIn 1986, his book (\"The Drowned and the Saved\") was published. In it, he tries to analyse why people behaved the way they did at Auschwitz and why some survived whilst others perished. In his typical style, he makes no judgments but presents the evidence and asks the questions. For example, one essay examines what he calls \"the grey zone\": those Jews who did the Germans' dirty work for them and kept the rest of the prisoners in line. He questioned what made a concert violinist behave as a callous taskmaster.\nAlso in 1986, a collection of short stories, previously published in , was assembled and published as , some of which were published in the English volume \"The Mirror Maker\".\nAt the time of his death in April 1987, Levi was working on another selection of essays called \"The Double Bond\", which took the form of letters to . The essays are very personal in nature, and approximately five or six chapters of the manuscript exist. Carole Angier, in her biography of Levi, describes how she tracked some of these essays down. She wrote that others were being kept from public view by Levi's close friends, to whom he gave them, and they might have been destroyed.\nPosthumous publications.\nIn March 2007, \"Harper's Magazine\" published an English translation of Levi's story , about a fictitious weapon that is fatal at close range but harmless more than a meter away. It originally appeared in his 1971 book but was published in English for the first time by \"Harper's\".\n\"A Tranquil Star\", a collection of seventeen stories translated into English by Ann Goldstein and Alessandra Bastagli was published in April 2007.\nIn 2015, Penguin published \"The Complete Works of Primo Levi\", ed. Ann Goldstein. This is the first time that Levi's entire oeuvre has been translated into English.\nDeath.\nLevi died on 11 April 1987 after a fall from the interior landing of his third-story apartment in Turin to the ground floor below. The coroner ruled his death a suicide. Three of his biographers (Angier, Thomson and Anissimov) agreed, but other writers (including at least one who knew him personally) questioned that determination.\nIn his later life, Levi indicated that he was suffering from depression. Factors in that likely included responsibility for his elderly mother and mother-in-law, with whom he was living, and lingering traumatic memories. According to the chief rabbi of Rome Elio Toaff, Levi telephoned him for the first time ten minutes before the incident. Levi said he found it impossible to look at his mother, who was ill with cancer, without recalling the faces of people stretched out on benches in Auschwitz. The Nobel laureate and fellow Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel said, at the time, \"Primo Levi died at Auschwitz forty years later.\"\nHowever, several of Levi's friends and associates have argued otherwise. The Oxford sociologist Diego Gambetta noted that Levi left no suicide note, nor any other indication that he was considering suicide. Documents and testimony suggested that he had plans for both the short- and longer-term at the time. In the days before his death, he had complained to his physician of dizziness due to an operation he had undergone some three weeks earlier. After visiting the apartment complex, Gambetta suggested that Levi lost his balance and fell accidentally. The Nobel laureate Rita Levi-Montalcini, a close friend of Levi, agreed. \"As a chemical engineer,\" she said, \"he might have chosen a better way [of exiting the world] than jumping into a narrow stairwell with the risk of remaining paralyzed.\"\nLegacy.\nHolocaust writing.\nLevi is frequently referred to as a \"Holocaust writer\", a label he disliked. However, he is considered to have authored some of the most important writings about the Holocaust, which has greatly contributed to the memory and understanding of such a horrific time. Philip Roth eulogized him as someone who \"set out systematically to remember the German hell on earth, steadfastly to think it through, and then to render it comprehensible in lucid, unpretentious prose\". Martin Amis has credited Levi's work with assisting him in writing his own novel, \"The Zone of Interest\", calling him \"the visionary of the Holocaust, its presiding spirit and the most perceptive of all writers on this subject.\"\nViews.\nNazi death camps versus Soviet gulags.\nLevi vigorously repudiated historical revisionist attitudes in German historiography that emerged in the \"Historikerstreit\", led by the works of people like Andreas Hillgruber and Ernst Nolte, who drew parallels between Nazism and Stalinism. Levi rejected the idea that the labor camp system depicted in Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's \"The Gulag Archipelago\" and that of the Nazi (; see Nazi concentration camps) were comparable. The death rate in Stalin's gulags was 30% at worst, he wrote, while in the extermination camps, he estimated it to be 90\u201398%.\nHis view was that the Nazi death camps and the attempted annihilation of the Jews were a horror unique in history because the goal was the complete destruction of a race by one that saw itself as superior. He noted that it was highly organized and mechanized, and entailed the degradation of Jews to the point of using their ashes as materials for paths.\nThe purpose of the Nazi extermination camps was not the same as the purpose of Stalin's \"gulags\", Levi wrote in an appendix to \"If This Is a Man\", though it is a \"lugubrious comparison between two models of hell.\" The goal of the was the extermination of the Jewish race in Europe, and no one could renounce Judaism, because the Nazis considered Jews a racial group rather than a religious group. Levi, along with most of Turin's Jewish intellectuals, had not been religiously observant before World War II, but the Italian racial laws and the Nazi camps impressed his identity as a Jew upon him. Of the many children who were deported to the camps, almost all of them were murdered.\nGerman people.\nAccording to biographer Ian Thomson, Levi intentionally excluded from \"If This Is a Man\" any experiences with Germans who helped him and included \"collective condemnations, coloured by the author's rage, of the German people\". Levi's opinion of Germans improved through his friendship with a German woman named Hety Schmitt-Maas. Her father had lost his job and she had been expelled from school due to their anti-Nazi beliefs. For 17 years, Levi and Schmitt-Maas discussed \"their shared hatred of Nazism\" together in their letters to each other until Schmitt-Maas died in 1983.\nAlmost forty years after \"If This Is A Man\" was published, Levi stated that he did not hate German people because hating a whole ethnic group would be too much like Nazism. He also stated that he did not forgive \"the culprits\". According to Levi, the German people largely knew about the concentration camps but did not know the extent of the atrocities occurring there; \"most Germans didn\u2019t know because they didn\u2019t want to know. Because, indeed, they wanted not to know\".\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "39430", "revid": "50660441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39430", "title": "Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse", "text": "Biblical figures\nThe Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are figures in the Book of Revelation in the New Testament of the Bible, a piece of apocalypse literature attributed to John of Patmos, and generally regarded as dating from about AD 95. Similar allusions are contained in the Old Testament books of Ezekiel and Zechariah, written centuries prior. Though the text only provides a name for the fourth horseman, subsequent commentary often identifies them as personifications of Conquest, War, Famine, and Death.\nRevelation 6 tells of a book or scroll in God's right hand that is sealed with seven seals. The Lamb of God/Lion of Judah opens the first four of the seven seals, which summons four beings that ride out on white, red, black, and pale horses. All of the horsemen save for Death are portrayed as being human in appearance.\nIn John's revelation the first horseman rides a white horse, carries a bow, and is given a crown as a figure of conquest, perhaps invoking pestilence, or the Antichrist. The second carries a sword and rides a red horse as the creator of (civil) war, conflict, and strife. The third, a food merchant, rides a black horse symbolizing famine and carries the scales. The fourth and final horse is pale, upon it rides Death, accompanied by Hades. \"They were given authority over a quarter of the Earth, to kill with sword, famine and plague, and by means of the beasts of the Earth.\"\nChristianity typically interprets the Four Horsemen as a vision of harbingers of the Last Judgment, setting a divine end-time upon the world.\nWhite Horse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then I saw when the Lamb broke one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying as with a voice of thunder, \"Come!\" I looked, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it had a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went out conquering and to conquer.\u2014\u200a\nThe above passage is a common English translation of the rider of the White Horse (sometimes referred to as the White Rider). He is thought to carry a bow (Greek \u03c4\u03cc\u03be\u03bf\u03bd, \"t\u00f3xon\") and wear a victor's crown (Greek \u03c3\u03c4\u03ad\u03c6\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2, \"st\u00e9phanos\").\nAs Christ, the Gospel, or the Holy Spirit.\nFor the broad historical interpretation of Christ as the rider of the white horse, it is to be understood that the Antichrist does not appear until the opening of the sixth seal. Events in world history since the founding of Christianity were interpreted as \"horses\" up to the sixth seal event. Therefore, this interpretation can be seen as either partially preterist, or an instance of dual fulfillment.\nIn the New Testament, the Book of Mark indicates that the advance of the gospel may precede and foretell the apocalypse. The colour white also tends to represent righteousness in the Bible, and Christ is portrayed as a conqueror in other instances.\nBesides Christ, the Horseman could represent the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit was understood to have come upon the Apostles at Pentecost after Jesus departed Earth. The appearance of the Lion in Revelation 5 shows the triumphant arrival of Jesus in Heaven, and the first Horseman may represent the sending of the Holy Spirit by Jesus and the advance of the gospel of Jesus Christ.\nAs the Antichrist.\nIn 1866, C. F. Zimpel defended the hypothesis that the first horseman was the Antichrist (and more precisely, according to him, Napoleon Bonaparte). The Antichrist interpretation later found champions in the United States, such as R. F. Franklin in 1898 and W. C. Stevens in 1928. It remains popular in evangelical circles today, for example with Pastor Billy Graham, for whom the horseman represented the Antichrist or false prophets in general.\nAs Roman Empire prosperity.\nIn Edward Bishop Elliott's interpretation, the Four Horsemen represent a prophecy of the Roman Empire's subsequent history; the horse's white colour signifies triumph, prosperity, and health in the Roman political body. For the next 80 or 90 years, succeeding the banishment of the prophet John to the island of Patmos and covering the successive reigns of the emperors Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the two Antonines (Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius), a golden age of prosperity, union, civil liberty and good government unstained with civil blood unfolded. The agents of this prosperity, personified by the rider of the white horse, are these five emperors wearing crowns, who reigned with absolute authority and power under the guidance of virtue and wisdom, the armies being restrained by their firm and gentle hands.\nAccording to this interpretation, this period in Roman history, both at its commencement and close, illustrated the empire's glory where its limits were extended, though not without occasional wars, which were always uniformly triumphant on the frontiers. The triumphs of Emperor Trajan, a Roman Alexander, added to the empire Dacia, Armenia, Mesopotamia, and other provinces during the first 20 years of the period, which deepened the impression on the minds of the barbarians of the invincibility of the Roman Empire. The Roman war progressed triumphantly into the invader's territory, and the total overthrow of those people successfully ended the Parthian war. Roman conquest is demonstrated even in the most mighty of these wars: the Marcomannic Wars, a succession of victories under the second Antonine, unleashed on the German barbarians, who were driven into their forests and reduced to Roman submission.\nAs war.\nIn some commentaries, the white Horseman symbolizes war, which may be decently exercised on moral grounds, hence the white colour. The red Horseman (see below) specifically symbolizes civil war.\nAs infectious disease.\nUnder another interpretation, the first Horseman is called Pestilence and is associated with infectious disease and plague. It appears at least as early as 1906 in the Jewish Encyclopedia. This particular interpretation is common in popular culture references to the Four Horsemen.\nThe origin of this interpretation is unclear. Some translations of the Bible mention \"plague\" (e.g. the New International Version) or \"pestilence\" (e.g. the Revised Standard Version) in connection with the riders in the passage following the introduction of the fourth rider; cf. \"They were given power over a fourth of the Earth to kill by sword, famine, plague, and by the wild beasts of the Earth.\" in the NASB. However, the original Greek does not use the word for \"plague\" or \"pestilence\" here, simply \"death\" (\u03b8\u1fb0\u0301\u03bd\u1fb0\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2, \"th\u00e1natos\"). The use of \"pestilence\" was likely drawn from other parts of the Book of Revelation and included here as another form of death. Also, whether this passage refers to the fourth rider only or the four riders as a whole is a matter of debate.\nVicente Blasco Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez, in his 1916 novel \"The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse\" (filmed in 1921 and in 1962), provides an early example of this interpretation, writing, \"The horseman on the white horse was clad in a showy and barbarous attire. . . . While his horse continued galloping, he was bending his bow in order to spread pestilence abroad. At his back swung the brass quiver filled with poisoned arrows, containing the germs of all diseases\".\nRed Horse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When He broke the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, \"Come\". And another, a red horse, went out; and to him who sat on it, it was granted to take peace from Earth, and that men would slay one another; and a great sword was given to him.\u2014\u200a\nThe rider of the second horse is often taken to represent War (he is often pictured holding a sword upwards as though ready for battle) or mass slaughter. His horse's colour is red (\u03c0\u03c5\u03c1\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2, \"purrh\u00f3s\" from \u03c0\u1fe6\u03c1, fire), and in some translations, the colour is specifically a \"fiery\" red. The colour red, as well as the rider's possession of a great sword (\u03bc\u03ac\u03c7\u03b1\u03b9\u03c1\u03b1, \"m\u00e1khaira\"), suggests blood that is to be spilled. As seen in heraldry, the sword held upward by the second Horseman may represent war or a declaration of war. In military symbolism, swords held upward, especially crossed swords held upward, signify war and entering into battle (see, for example, the historical and modern images and the coat of arms of Joan of Arc). \nThe second Horseman represents civil war as opposed to the war of conquest that the first Horseman is said to bring. Other commentators have suggested that it might also represent the persecution of Christians.\nAs empire division.\nAccording to Edward Bishop Elliott's interpretation of the Four Horsemen as symbolic prophecy of the history of the Roman Empire, the second seal is opened and the Roman nation that experienced joy, prosperity, and triumph is made subject to the red horse which depicts war and bloodshed\u2014civil war. Peace left the Roman Earth, resulting in the killing of one another as insurrection crept into and permeated the Empire, beginning shortly into the reign of Emperor Commodus.\nElliott points out that Commodus, who had nothing to wish for and everything to enjoy, that beloved son of Marcus Aurelius who ascended the throne with neither competitor to remove nor enemies to punish, became the slave of his attendants who gradually corrupted his mind.\nElliott further recites that, after the death of Commodus, a most turbulent period lasting 92 years unfolded, during which time 32 emperors and 27 pretenders to the Empire hurled each other from the throne by incessant civil warfare. The sword was a natural universal badge, among the Romans, of the military profession. The apocalyptic figure armed with a great sword indicated an undue authority and unnatural use of it. Military men in power, whose vocation was war and weapon the sword, rose by it and also fell. The unrestrained military, no longer subject to the Senate, transformed the Empire into a system of pure military despotism.\nBlack Horse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When He broke the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, \"Come\". I looked, and behold, a black horse; and he who sat on it had a pair of scales in his hand. And I heard something like a voice in the center of the four living creatures saying, \"A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius; but do not damage the oil and the wine\".\u2014\u200a\nThe third Horseman rides a black horse and is popularly understood to be Famine, as the Horseman carries a pair of balances or weighing scales (Greek \u03b6\u03c5\u03b3\u03cc\u03bd, \"zug\u00f3n\"), indicating the way that bread would have been weighed during a famine. The rider is typically portrayed as an emaciated man. Other authors interpret the third Horseman as the \"Lord as a Law-Giver\", holding Scales of Justice. In the passage, it is read that the indicated price of grain is about ten times normal (thus the famine interpretation popularity), with an entire day's wages (a denarius) buying enough wheat for only one person (one \"choenix\", about 1.1 litres), or enough of the less nutritious barley for three, so that workers would struggle to feed their families. In the Gospels, the denarius is repeatedly mentioned as a monetary unit; for example, the denarius was the pay of a soldier for one day, and the day labor of a seasonal worker in the harvesting of grapes is also valued at one denarius (). Thus, it is possibly meant that with the approach of the Apocalypse, the most necessary food will rise in price greatly, and the wages earned per day will be enough only for the minimum subsistence for the same day and nothing more.\nOf the Four Horsemen, the black horse and its rider are the only ones whose appearance is accompanied by vocalization. John hears a voice, unidentified but coming from among the four living creatures, that speaks of the prices of wheat and barley, saying, \"and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine\". This suggests that the black horse's famine is to drive up the price of grain but leave oil and wine supplies unaffected (though out of reach of the ordinary worker). One explanation is that grain crops would have been more naturally susceptible to famine years or locust plagues than olive trees and grapevines, which root more deeply.\nThe statement might also suggest a continuing abundance of luxuries for the wealthy, while staples, such as bread, are scarce, though not completely depleted; such selective scarcity may result from injustice and the deliberate production of luxury crops for the wealthy over grain, as would have happened during the time the Book of Revelation was written. Alternatively, the preservation of oil and wine could symbolize the preservation of the Christian faithful, who use oil and wine in their sacraments.\nAs imperial oppression.\nAccording to Edward Bishop Elliott's interpretation, through this third seal, the black horse is unleashed, representing aggravated distress and mourning. The balance in the rider's hand is not associated with a man weighing out bread for his family but with buying and selling corn and other grains. During the time of the apostle John's exile in Patmos, the balance was commonly a symbol of justice since it was used to weigh grains for a set price. The balance of justice held in the hand of the rider of the black horse signified the aggravation of the other previous evil, with the bloodstained red of the Roman aspect morphing into the darker blackness of distress. The black horse rider is instructed not to harm the oil and the wine, which signifies that this scarcity should not fall upon the superfluities, such as oil and wine, which men can live without, but upon the necessities of life\u2014bread.\nThis interpretation also borrows from Edward Gibbon's \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", which claims the Roman Empire suffered as a result of excessive taxation of its citizens, particularly during the reign of Emperor Caracalla, whom history has primarily remembered as a cruel tyrant and among the worst of the Roman emperors. Under the necessity of gratifying the greed and excessive lifestyle which Caracalla had excited in the army, old as well as new taxes, were at the same time levied in the provinces. The land tax, taxes for services, and heavy contributions of corn, wine, oil, and meat were exacted from the provinces for court, army, and capital use.\nAccording to Gibbon, this was exacerbated by the rise to power of Emperor Maximin, who \"attacked the public property at length\". Every city of the empire was destined to purchase corn for the multitudes, as well as supply expenses for the games. By the Emperor's authority, the whole mass of wealth was confiscated for use by the Imperial treasury\u2014temples \"stripped of their most valuable offerings of gold, silver [and statues] which were melted down and coined into money\".\nPale Horse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the Lamb opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, \"Come!\" I looked, and there before me was a pale horse! Its rider was named Death, and Hades was following close behind him. They were given power over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword, famine and plague, and by the wild beasts of the earth.\u2014\u200a\nThe fourth and final Horseman is named Death (Greek: \u0398\u1fb0\u0301\u03bd\u1fb0\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2, \"Th\u00e1natos\", Latin: \"M\u014frs\" or \"Thanatus\").\nDeath, known in Latin as M\u014frs and in Greek as Th\u00e1natos (\u0398\u1fb0\u0301\u03bd\u1fb0\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2), of all the riders, he is the only one to whom the text itself explicitly gives a name. Unlike the other three, he is not described as carrying a weapon or other object, instead, he is followed by \"Hades\" (Greek: \u1f8d\u03b4\u03b7\u03c2, H\u0101\u0301id\u0113s, latinized as H\u0101d\u0113s), which here refers not to the pagan god of death and his abode in Greek mythology, but simply to the place of the dead in the Greek language, and which is called \"\u012anfernus\" (\"[the] Underworld\", a clipping of \u012bnfernus l\u014fcus, \"[the] lower place\") in Latin. However, illustrations commonly depict his carrying a scythe, sword, or another implement, he is no different than typical portrayals of Death, and is the only horseman who doesn\u2019t appear to be a human.\nThe colour of Death's horse is written as \"p\u00e0llidus\" in Latin and as \u03c7\u03bb\u03c9\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2 (\"khl\u014dr\u00f3s\", latinized as \"chl\u014drus\") in the original Koine Greek, which can mean either green/greenish-yellow or pale/pallid in both languages. The colour is often translated as \"pale\", though \"ashen\", \"pale green\", and \"yellowish green\" are other possible interpretations (the Greek word is the root of \"chlorophyll\" and \"chlorine\"). Based on the uses of the word in ancient Greek medical literature, several scholars suggest that the colour reflects the sickly pallor of a corpse. In some modern artistic depictions, the horse is distinctly green.\nThe verse beginning with \"they were given power over a fourth of the Earth\" is generally taken as referring to Death and Hades, although some commentators see it as applying to all four horsemen.\nDestroying an empire.\nThis fourth, pale horse, was the personification of Death, with Hades following him, jaws open and receiving the victims slain by Death. Death's commission was to kill upon the Roman Earth with all of the four judgments of God\u2014with sword, famine, pestilence, and wild beasts. The deadly pale and livid appearance displays a hue symptomatic of approaching empire dissolution. According to Edward Bishop Elliott, an era in Roman history commencing within about 15 years after the death of Severus Alexander (in AD 235)&lt;ref name=\"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica/Alexander Severus\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; strongly marks every point of this terrible emblem.\nEdward Gibbon speaks of a period from the celebration of the great secular games by the Emperor Philip to the death of Gallienus (in AD 268)&lt;ref name=\"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica/Gallienus\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; as the 20 years of shame and misfortune, of confusion and calamity, as a time when the ruined empire approached the last and fatal moment of its dissolution. Every instant of time in every province of the Roman world was afflicted by military tyrants and barbarous invaders\u2014the sword from within and without.\nAccording to Elliott, famine, the inevitable consequence of carnage and oppression, which demolished the present crop as well as the hope of future harvests, produced the environment for an epidemic of diseases, the effects of scanty and unwholesome food. That furious plague (the Plague of Cyprian), which raged from 250 to 265, continued without interruption in every province, city and almost every family in the empire. During a portion of this time, 5000 people died daily in Rome; and many towns that had escaped the attacks of barbarians were entirely depopulated.\nFor a time in the late 260s, the strength of Aurelian crushed the enemies of Rome, yet after his assassination a certain amount of them revived. While the Goths had been destroyed for almost a century and the Empire reunited, the Sassanid Persians were uncowed in the East and, during the following year, hosts of central Asian Alani spread themselves over Pontus, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Galatia, etching their course by the flames of cities and villages they pillaged.\nAs for the wild beasts of the Earth, according to Elliott, it is a well-known law of nature that they quickly occupy the scenes of waste and depopulation\u2014where the reign of man fails and the reign of beasts begins. After the reign of Gallienus and 20 or 30 years had passed, the multiplication of the animals had risen to such an extent in parts of the empire that they made it a 'crying evil'.\nOne notable point of apparent difference between the prophecy and history might seem to be expressly limited to the fourth part of the Roman Earth, but in the history of the period, the devastation of the pale horse extended over all. The fourth seal prophecy seems to mark the malignant climax of the evils of the two preceding seals, to which no such limitation is attached. Turning to a reading in Jerome's Latin Vulgate which reads \"over the four parts of the Earth\", it requires that the Roman Empire should have some kind of quadripartition. Dividing from the central or Italian fourth, three great divisions of the Empire separated into the West, East, and Illyricum under Posthumus, Aureolus, and Zenobia respectively\u2014divisions that were later legitimized by Diocletian.\nDiocletian ended this long period of anarchy, but the succession of civil wars and invasions caused much suffering, disorder and crime, which brought the empire into a state of moral lethargy from which it never recovered. After the plague had abated, the empire suffered from general distress, and its condition was very much like that which followed after the Black Death of the Middle Ages. Talent and art had become extinct in proportion to the desolation of the world.\nInterpretations.\nChristological interpretation.\nBefore the Reformation and the woodcut by Albrecht D\u00fcrer, the usual and more influential commentaries of the Book of Revelation thought there was only one horseman riding successively these four horses, who was the Christ himself. So did some medieval illuminations, and after that some modern commentators: Oecumenius, a Greek exegete writing in the sixth century, Berengaudus a French Benedictine monk of Ferri\u00e8res Abbey at the same period, Luis del Alc\u00e1zar a Spanish Jesuit in 1612, Benito Arias Montano, a Spanish Orientalist, in 1622, Jacques de Bordes, a French capuchin in 1639, Emanuel Swedenborg a Swedish theologian in 1766.\nProphetic interpretation.\nSome Christians interpret the Horsemen as a prophecy of a future Tribulation, during which many on Earth will die as a result of multiple catastrophes. The Four Horsemen are the first in a series of \"Seal\" judgments. This is when God will judge the Earth, and is giving humans a chance to repent before they die. A new beautiful Earth is created for all the people who are faithful to Him and accept him as their Savior.\nJohn Walvoord, a premillennialist, believed the Seals will be opened during the Great Tribulation and coincides with the arrival of the Antichrist as the first horseman, a global war as the second horseman, an economic collapse as the third horseman, and the general die-off of one quarter of the World's population as the fourth horseman; which is followed by a global dictatorship under the Antichrist and the rest of the plagues.\nHistoricist interpretation.\nAccording to E. B. Elliott, the first seal, as revealed to John by the angel, was to signify what was to happen soon after John seeing the visions in Patmos, and that the second, third, and fourth seals in like manner were to have commencing dates each in chronological sequence following the preceding seal. Its general subject is the decline and fall, after a previous prosperous era, of the Empire of Heathen Rome. The first four seals of Revelation, represented by four horses and horsemen, are fixed to events, or changes, within the Roman Earth.\nPreterist interpretation.\nSome modern scholars interpret Revelation from a preterist point of view, arguing that its prophecy and imagery apply only to the events of the first century of Christian history. In this school of thought, Conquest, the white horse's rider, is sometimes identified as a symbol of Parthian forces: Conquest carries a bow, and the Parthian Empire was at that time known for its mounted warriors and their skill with bow and arrow. Parthians were also particularly associated with white horses. Some scholars specifically point to Vologases I, a Parthian shah who clashed with the Roman Empire and won one significant battle in AD 62.\nRevelation's historical context may also influence the depiction of the black horse and its rider, Famine. In AD 92, the Roman emperor Domitian attempted to curb excessive growth of grapevines and encourage grain cultivation instead, but there was a major popular backlash against this effort, and it was abandoned. Famine's mission to make wheat and barley scarce but \"hurt not the oil and the wine\" could be an allusion to this episode. The red horse and its rider, who take peace from the Earth, might represent the prevalence of civil strife at the time Revelation was written; internecine conflict ran rampant in the Roman Empire during and just prior to the 1st century AD.\nLatter-day Saint interpretation.\nMembers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe that Joseph Smith, revealed that the book described by John \"contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this Earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence\" and that the seals describe these things for the seven thousand years of the Earth's temporal existence, each seal representing 1,000 years.\nAbout the first seal and the white horse, LDS Apostle Bruce R. McConkie taught, \"The most transcendent happenings involved Enoch and his ministry. What John saw was not the establishment of Zion and its removal to heavenly spheres, but the unparalleled wars in which Enoch, as a general over the armies of the saints, 'went forth conquering and to conquer' https://; see also https://.\" The second seal and the red horse represent the period from approximately 3,000 BC to 2,000 BC, including the wickedness and violence leading to the Great Flood.\nThe third seal and black horse describe the period of ancient Joseph, son of Israel, who was sold into Egypt, and the famines that swept that period (see Genesis https://\u2013https://; https://; https://). The fourth seal and the pale horse are interpreted to represent the thousand years leading up to the birth of Jesus Christ, both the physical death brought about by great warring empires and the spiritual death through apostasy among the Lord's chosen people.\nOther interpretations.\nArtwork which shows the Horsemen as a group, such as the famous woodcut by Albrecht D\u00fcrer, suggests an interpretation where all four horsemen represent different aspects of the same tribulation.\nAmerican Protestant Evangelical interpreters regularly see ways in which the horsemen, and Revelation in general, speak to contemporary events. Some who believe Revelation applies to modern times can interpret the horses based on the various ways their colours are used. Red, for example, often represents Communism, the white horse and rider with a crown representing Catholicism, Black has been used as a symbol of Capitalism, while Green represents the rise of Islam. Pastor Irvin Baxter Jr. of Endtime Ministries espoused such a belief.\nSome equate the Four Horsemen with the angels of the four winds. (See Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel, angels often associated with four cardinal directions).\nSome speculate that when the imagery of the Seven Seals is compared to other eschatological descriptions throughout the Bible, the themes of the horsemen draw remarkable similarity to the events of the Olivet Discourse. The signs of the approaching end of the world are likened to birth pains, indicating that they would occur more frequently and with greater intensity the nearer the event of Christ's return. With this perspective the horsemen represent the rise of false religions, false prophets, and false messiahs; the increase of wars and rumours of wars; the escalation of natural disasters and famines; and the growth of persecution, martyrdom, betrayal, and loss of faith.\nAccording to Anatoly Fomenko, a new chronologist, the Book of Revelation is largely astrological in nature. The 'Four Horsemen' represent the planets Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn.\nOther Biblical references.\nZechariah.\nThe Book of Zechariah twice mentions coloured horses; in the first passage there are three colours (red, speckled/brown, and white), and in the second there are four teams of horses (red, black, white, and finally dappled/\"grisled and bay\") pulling chariots. The second set of horses are referred to as \"the four spirits of heaven, going out from standing in the presence of the Lord of the whole world.\" They are described as patrolling the Earth and keeping it peaceful. It may be assumed by some Christian interpretations that when the tribulation begins, the peace is taken away, so their job is to terrify the places in which they patrol.\nEzekiel.\nThe four living creatures of Revelation 4:6\u20138 are written similarly to the four living creatures in Ezekiel 1:5\u201312. In Revelation, each of the living creatures summons a horseman, where in Ezekiel the living creatures follow wherever the spirit leads, without turning.\nIn Ezekiel 14:21, the Lord enumerates His \"four disastrous acts of judgment\" (ESV), sword, famine, wild beasts, and pestilence, against the idolatrous elders of Israel. A symbolic interpretation of the Four Horsemen links the riders to these judgments, or the similar judgments in 6:11\u201312.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39431", "revid": "38205273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39431", "title": "New Scientist", "text": "British science magazine\nNew Scientist is a popular science magazine covering all aspects of science and technology. Based in London, it publishes weekly English-language editions in the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia. An editorially separate organisation publishes a monthly Dutch-language edition. First published on 22 November 1956, \"New Scientist\" has been available in online form since 1996.\nSold in retail outlets (paper edition) and on subscription (paper and/or online), the magazine covers news, features, reviews and commentary on science, technology and their implications. \"New Scientist\" also publishes speculative articles, ranging from the technical to the philosophical.\n\"New Scientist\" was acquired by Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT) in March 2021.\nHistory.\nOwnership.\nThe magazine was founded in 1956 by Tom Margerison, Max Raison and Nicholas Harrison as \"The New Scientist\", with Issue 1 on 22 November 1956, priced at one shilling (). An article in the magazine's 10th anniversary issues provides anecdotes on the founding of the magazine. The British monthly science magazine \"Science Journal\", published from 1965 until 1971, was merged with \"New Scientist\" to form \"New Scientist and Science Journal\". In 1970, the Reed Group, which became Reed Elsevier, acquired \"New Scientist\" when it merged with IPC Magazines. Reed retained the magazine when it sold most of its consumer titles in a management buyout to what is now TI Media. In April 2017 \"New Scientist\" changed ownership when RELX Group, formerly known as Reed Elsevier, sold the magazine to Kingston Acquisitions, a group established by Sir Bernard Gray, Louise Rogers and Matthew O'Sullivan to acquire \"New Scientist\". Kingston Acquisitions then renamed itself New Scientist Ltd. The \"New Scientist\" was subsequently sold to the Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT) for \u00a370 million in March 2021; DMGT guaranteed the magazine's editorial independence, and ruled out staff cuts and the sharing of editorial content.\nIn December 2021, DMGT announced that both \"New Scientist\" and the DMGT-owned daily \"i\" newspaper would be moved to a new division of the company, to be called Harmsworth Media.\nGeneral history.\nOriginally, the cover of \"New Scientist\" listed articles in plain text. Initially, page numbering followed academic practice with sequential numbering for each quarterly volume. So, for example, the first page of an issue in March could be 649 instead of 1. Later issues numbered issues separately. From the beginning of 1961 \"The\" was dropped from the title. From 1965, the front cover was illustrated. Until the 1970s, colour was not used except on the cover.\nSince its first issue, \"New Scientist\" has written about the applications of science, through its coverage of technology. For example, the first issue included an article \"Where next from Calder Hall?\" on the future of nuclear power in the UK, a topic that it has covered throughout its history. In 1964, there was a regular \"Science in British Industry\" section with several items.\nThroughout most of its history, \"New Scientist\" has published cartoons as light relief and comment on the news, with contributions from regulars such as Mike Peyton and David Austin. The \"Grimbledon Down\" comic strip, by cartoonist Bill Tidy, appeared from 1970 to 1994. The Ariadne pages in \"New Scientist\" commented on the lighter side of science and technology and included contributions from David E. H. Jones, Daedalus. The fictitious inventor devised plausible but impractical and humorous inventions, often developed by the (fictitious) DREADCO corporation. Daedalus later moved to \"Nature\".\nIn the first half of 2013, the international circulation of \"New Scientist\" averaged 125,172. While this was a 4.3% reduction on the previous year's figure, it was a much smaller reduction in circulation than many mainstream magazines of similar or greater circulation. UK circulation fell by 3.2% in 2014, but stronger international sales increased the circulation to 129,585.\nA monthly Dutch edition of \"New Scientist\" was launched in June 2015. It replaced the former \"Natuurwetenschap &amp; Techniek (NWT)\" magazine, adopting its staff and subscribers. The editorially independent magazine is published by Veen Media. It contains mainly translations of articles in the English-language edition, but also its own articles. These are typically focused on research in the Netherlands and Belgium, the main countries where it is purchased.\nModern format.\nIn the 21st century, until May 2019, \"New Scientist\" contained the following sections: Leader, News (Upfront), Technology, Opinion (interviews, point-of-view articles and letters), Features (including cover article), CultureLab (book and event reviews), Feedback (humour), The Last Word (questions and answers) and Jobs &amp; Careers. A Tom Gauld cartoon appears on the Letters page. A readers' letters section discusses recent articles and discussions also take place on the website. Readers contribute observations on examples of pseudoscience to Feedback, and offer questions and answers on scientific and technical topics to Last Word. \"New Scientist\" has produced a series of books compiled from contributions to Last Word.\nFrom issue 3228 of 4 May 2019, \"New Scientist\" introduced a \"slightly updated design, with ... a fresher, brighter feel\". A dedicated \"Views\" section was added between news reports and in-depth features, including readers' letters, comment, and reviews on science, culture and society. Regular columnists were introduced, and columns in the culture pages. The light-hearted \"Back Pages\" includes the long-standing Feedback and The Last Word, puzzles, and a Q&amp;A section.\nSpin-offs.\n\"New Scientist\" has published books derived from its content, many of which are selected questions and answers from the \"Last Word\" section of the magazine and website:\nSince 2016 \"New Scientist\" has held an annual science festival in London. Styled \"New Scientist Live\", the event has attracted high-profile scientists and science presenters.\nCriticism.\nGreg Egan's criticism of the EmDrive article.\nIn September 2006, \"New Scientist\" was criticised by science fiction writer Greg Egan, who wrote that \"a sensationalist bent and a lack of basic knowledge by its writers\" was making the magazine's coverage sufficiently unreliable \"to constitute a real threat to the public understanding of science\". In particular, Egan found himself \"gobsmacked by the level of scientific illiteracy\" in the magazine's coverage of Roger Shawyer's \"electromagnetic drive\", where \"New Scientist\" allowed the publication of \"meaningless double-talk\" designed to bypass a fatal objection to Shawyer's proposed space drive, namely that it violates the law of conservation of momentum. Egan urged others to write to \"New Scientist\" and pressure the magazine to raise its standards, instead of \"squandering the opportunity that the magazine's circulation and prestige provides\". The editor of \"New Scientist\", then Jeremy Webb, replied defending the article, saying that it is \"an ideas magazine\u2014that means writing about hypotheses as well as theories\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39432", "revid": "49487920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39432", "title": "Stephen Cook", "text": "American-Canadian computer scientist, contributor to complexity theory\nStephen Arthur Cook (born December 14, 1939) is an American-Canadian computer scientist and mathematician who has made significant contributions to the fields of complexity theory and proof complexity. He is a university professor emeritus at the University of Toronto, Department of Computer Science and Department of Mathematics.\nHe is considered one of the forefathers of computational complexity theory.\nBiography.\nCook received his bachelor's degree in 1961 from the University of Michigan, and his master's degree and PhD from Harvard University, respectively in 1962 and 1966, from the Mathematics Department. He joined the University of California, Berkeley, mathematics department in 1966 as an assistant professor, and stayed there until 1970 when he was denied reappointment. In a speech celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Berkeley electrical engineering and computer sciences department, fellow Turing Award winner and Berkeley professor Richard Karp said that, \"It is to our everlasting shame that we were unable to persuade the math department to give him tenure.\" Cook joined the faculty of the University of Toronto, Computer Science and Mathematics Departments in 1970 as an associate professor, where he was promoted to professor in 1975 and Distinguished Professor in 1985.\nResearch.\nDuring his PhD, Cook worked on complexity of functions, mainly on multiplication. In his seminal 1971 paper \"The Complexity of Theorem Proving Procedures\", Cook formalized the notions of polynomial-time reduction (also known as Cook reduction) and NP-completeness, and proved the existence of an NP-complete problem by showing that the Boolean satisfiability problem (usually known as SAT) is NP-complete. This theorem was proven independently by Leonid Levin in the Soviet Union, and has thus been given the name the Cook\u2013Levin theorem. The paper also formulated the most famous problem in computer science, the P vs. NP problem. Informally, the \"P vs. NP\" question asks whether every optimization problem whose answers can be efficiently verified for correctness/optimality can be solved optimally with an efficient algorithm. Given the abundance of such optimization problems in everyday life, a positive answer to the \"P vs. NP\" question would likely have profound practical and philosophical consequences.\nCook conjectures that there are optimization problems (with easily checkable solutions) that cannot be solved by efficient algorithms, i.e., P is not equal to NP. This conjecture has generated a great deal of research in computational complexity theory, which has considerably improved our understanding of the inherent difficulty of computational problems and what can be computed efficiently. Yet, the conjecture remains open and is among the seven famous Millennium Prize Problems.\nIn 1982, Cook received the Turing Award for his contributions to complexity theory. His citation reads:\nFor his advancement of our understanding of the complexity of computation in a significant and profound way. His seminal paper, \"The Complexity of Theorem Proving Procedures,\" presented at the 1971 ACM SIGACT Symposium on the Theory of Computing, laid the foundations for the theory of NP-Completeness. The ensuing exploration of the boundaries and nature of NP-complete class of problems has been one of the most active and important research activities in computer science for the last decade.\nIn his \"Feasibly Constructive Proofs and the Propositional Calculus\" paper published in 1975, he introduced the equational theory PV (standing for Polynomial-time Verifiable) to formalize the notion of proofs using only polynomial-time concepts. He made another major contribution to the field in his 1979 paper, joint with his student Robert A. Reckhow, \"The Relative Efficiency of Propositional Proof Systems\", in which they formalized the notions of p-simulation and efficient propositional proof system, which started an area now called propositional proof complexity. They proved that the existence of a proof system in which every true formula has a short proof is equivalent to NP = coNP. Cook co-authored a book with his student Phuong The Nguyen in this area titled \"Logical Foundations of Proof Complexity\".\nHis main research areas are complexity theory and proof complexity, with excursions into programming language semantics, parallel computation, and artificial intelligence. Other areas that he has contributed to include bounded arithmetic, bounded reverse mathematics, complexity of higher type functions, complexity of analysis, and lower bounds in propositional proof systems.\nSome other contributions.\nHe named the complexity class NC after Nick Pippenger. The complexity class SC is named after him. The definition of the complexity class AC0 and its hierarchy AC are also introduced by him.\nAccording to Don Knuth the KMP algorithm was inspired by Cook's automata for recognizing concatenated palindromes in linear time.\nAwards and honors.\nCook was awarded an NSERC E.W.R. Steacie Memorial Fellowship in 1977, a Killam Research Fellowship in 1982, and received the CRM-Fields-PIMS prize in 1999. He has won John L. Synge Award and Bernard Bolzano Medal of the Czech Academy of Sciences (2008), and is a fellow of the Royal Society of London and Royal Society of Canada. Cook was elected to membership in the National Academy of Sciences (United States) and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is a corresponding member of the G\u00f6ttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities.\nCook won the ACM Turing Award in 1982. \nAssociation for Computing Machinery honored him as a Fellow of ACM in 2008 for his\n\"fundamental contributions to the theory of computational complexity\".\nHe was selected by the Association for Symbolic Logic to give the G\u00f6del Lecture in 1999.\nThe Government of Ontario appointed him to the Order of Ontario in 2013, the highest honor in Ontario. He has won the 2012 Gerhard Herzberg Canada Gold Medal for Science and Engineering, the highest honor for scientists and engineers in Canada. The Herzberg Medal is awarded by NSERC for \"both the sustained excellence and overall influence of research work conducted in Canada in the natural sciences or engineering\". He was named an Officer of the Order of Canada in 2015.\nCook was granted the BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award 2015 in the Information and Communication Technologies category \"for his important role in identifying what computers can and cannot solve efficiently,\" in the words of the jury's citation. His work, it continues, \"has had a dramatic impact in all fields where complex computations are crucial.\"\nCook has supervised numerous MSc students, and 36 PhD students have completed their degrees under his supervision.\nPersonal life.\nCook lives with his wife in Toronto. They have two sons, one of whom is Olympic sailor Gordon Cook.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39433", "revid": "68", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39433", "title": "Stephen A. Cook", "text": ""}
{"id": "39434", "revid": "30594091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39434", "title": "Tony Hoare", "text": "British computer scientist\nSir Charles Antony Richard Hoare ( ; born 11 January 1934), also known as C. A. R. Hoare, is a British computer scientist who has made foundational contributions to programming languages, algorithms, operating systems, formal verification, and concurrent computing. His work earned him the Turing Award, usually regarded as the highest distinction in computer science, in 1980.\nHoare developed the sorting algorithm quicksort in 1959\u20131960. He developed Hoare logic, an axiomatic basis for verifying program correctness. In the semantics of concurrency, he introduced the formal language communicating sequential processes (CSP) to specify the interactions of concurrent processes, and along with Edsger Dijkstra, formulated the dining philosophers problem. Since 1977, he has held positions at the University of Oxford and Microsoft Research in Cambridge.\nEducation and early life.\nTony Hoare was born in Colombo, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) to British parents; his father was a colonial civil servant and his mother was the daughter of a tea planter. Hoare was educated in England at the Dragon School in Oxford and the King's School in Canterbury. He then studied Classics and Philosophy (\"Greats\") at Merton College, Oxford. On graduating in 1956 he did 18 months National Service in the Royal Navy, where he learned Russian. He returned to the University of Oxford in 1958 to study for a postgraduate certificate in statistics, and it was here that he began computer programming, having been taught Autocode on the Ferranti Mercury by Leslie Fox. He then went to Moscow State University as a British Council exchange student, where he studied machine translation under Andrey Kolmogorov.\nResearch and career.\nIn 1960, Hoare left the Soviet Union and began working at Elliott Brothers Ltd, a small computer manufacturing firm located in London. There, he implemented a compiler for the language ALGOL 60 and began developing major algorithms.\nHe was involved with developing international standards in programming and informatics, as a member of the International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Working Group 2.1 on Algorithmic Languages and Calculi, which specified, maintains, and supports the languages ALGOL 60 and ALGOL 68.\nHe became the Professor of Computing Science at the Queen's University of Belfast in 1968, and in 1977 returned to Oxford as the Professor of Computing to lead the Programming Research Group in the Oxford University Computing Laboratory (now Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford), following the death of Christopher Strachey. He became the first Christopher Strachey Professor of Computing on its establishment in 1988 until his retirement at Oxford in 2000. He is now an Emeritus Professor there, and is also a principal researcher at Microsoft Research in Cambridge, England.\nHoare's most significant work has been in the following areas: his sorting and selection algorithm (Quicksort and Quickselect), Hoare logic, the formal language communicating sequential processes (CSP) used to specify the interactions between concurrent processes (and implemented in various programming languages such as occam), structuring computer operating systems using the monitor concept, and the axiomatic specification of programming languages.\nSpeaking at a software conference in 2009, Tony Hoare hyperbolically apologized for inventing the null reference:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I call it my billion-dollar mistake. It was the invention of the null reference in 1965. At that time, I was designing the first comprehensive type system for references in an object oriented language (ALGOL W). My goal was to ensure that all use of references should be absolutely safe, with checking performed automatically by the compiler. But I couldn't resist the temptation to put in a null reference, simply because it was so easy to implement. This has led to innumerable errors, vulnerabilities, and system crashes, which have probably caused a billion dollars of pain and damage in the last forty years.\nFor many years under his leadership, Hoare's Oxford department worked on formal specification languages such as CSP and Z. These did not achieve the expected take-up by industry, and in 1995 Hoare was led to reflect upon the original assumptions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ten years ago, researchers into formal methods (and I was the most mistaken among them) predicted that the programming world would embrace with gratitude every assistance promised by formalisation to solve the problems of reliability that arise when programs get large and more safety-critical. Programs have now got very large and very critical \u2013 well beyond the scale which can be comfortably tackled by formal methods. There have been many problems and failures, but these have nearly always been attributable to inadequate analysis of requirements or inadequate management control. It has turned out that the world just does not suffer significantly from the kind of problem that our research was originally intended to solve.\nA commemorative article was written in tribute to Hoare for his 90th birthday.\nAwards and honours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPersonal life.\nIn 1962, Hoare married Jill Pym, a member of his research team.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u00a0This article incorporates https:// available under the license.\""}
{"id": "39435", "revid": "2861093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39435", "title": "1 E5 J", "text": ""}
{"id": "39437", "revid": "8771785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39437", "title": "Types of government", "text": ""}
{"id": "39442", "revid": "42163068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39442", "title": "Anahuac (Aztec)", "text": "Term for historical Mexican geography\nAnahuac (Spanish: ; Nahuatl: ', transl.\u2009\"land next to the water(s)\") is a Nahuatl name which means \"close to water.\" It can be broken down as ' + ', where ' means \"water\" and the suffix \"\" is a relational word that can be affixed to a noun, meaning \"next to\" or \"close to.\" Anahuac is sometimes used interchangeably with \"Valley of Mexico\", but Anahuac properly designates the south-central part of the valley, where well-developed pre-Hispanic culture traits had created distinctive landscapes now hidden by the urban sprawl of Mexico City. In the sense of modern geomorphological terminology, \"Valley of Mexico\" is misnamed.\nBoundaries.\nAccording to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition, An\u00e1huac (\"sic\") is \"limited by the traditional and vaguely defined boundaries of an ancient American empire or confederation of that name previous to the Spanish conquest.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The word is said to signify \"country by the waters\" in Nahuatl, the old Aztec language; hence the theory that Anahuac was located on the sea coast. One of the theories relating to the location of Anahuac describes it as all the plateau region of Mexico, with an area equal to three-fourths of the republic, and extending between the eastern and western coast ranges from Rio Grande to the isthmus of Tehuantepec. A more exact and more commonly used description, however, limits it to the great plateau valley in which the city of Mexico is located, between 18\u00b040' and 20\u00b030'N latitude, about long by wide, with an average elevation of 2300 meters (7500 feet), and a mean temperature of 17\u00b0C (62\u00b0F). The accepted meaning of the name fits this region as well as any on the sea coast, as the lakes of this valley formerly covered one-tenth of its area. The existence of the name in southern Utah, United States, and on the gulf coast of Mexico, has given rise to theories of other locations and wider bounds for the old Indian empire.\nOne of the possible etymologies proposed for the name \"Nicaragua\" is that it is derived from any of the following Nahuatl words: ', which meant \"Anahuac reached this far\", or \"the Nahuas came this far\", or \"those who come from Anahuac came this far\"; ', which meant \"here are the Nahuas\"; or \"\", which meant \"here by the water\" or \"surrounded by water\". The first two explanations would have a bearing on the above issue of the borders.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39443", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39443", "title": "Aragon", "text": "Autonomous community of Spain\nAragon ( , ; Spanish and ; ) is an autonomous community in Spain, coextensive with the medieval Kingdom of Aragon. In northeastern Spain, the Aragonese autonomous community comprises three provinces (from north to south): Huesca, Zaragoza, and Teruel. Its capital is Zaragoza. The current Statute of Autonomy declares Aragon a \"historic nationality\" of Spain.\nCovering an area of , the region's terrain ranges diversely from permanent glaciers to verdant valleys, rich pasture lands and orchards, through to the arid steppes of the central lowlands. Aragon is home to many rivers\u2014most notably, the river Ebro, Spain's largest river in volume, which runs west\u2013east across the entire region through the province of Zaragoza. It is also home to the highest mountains of the Pyrenees.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], the population of Aragon was 1,351,591, with slightly over half living in the capital city, Zaragoza. In 2023, the economy of Aragon generated a GDP of \u20ac46,674 million, which represents 3.1% of Spain's national GDP, and is currently 5th in per capita production behind Madrid, Basque Country, Navarre and Catalonia.\nIn addition to its three provinces, Aragon is subdivided into 33 comarcas or counties. All comarcas of Aragon have a rich geopolitical and cultural history from its pre-Roman, Celtic and Roman days, four centuries of Islamic rule as Marca Superior of Al-Andalus or kingdom (or taifa) of Saraqusta, as lands that once belonged to the Frankish Marca Hispanica, counties that later formed the Kingdom of Aragon, and eventually the Crown of Aragon.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nThe area of Aragon is of which belong to the province of Huesca, to the province of Zaragoza and to the province of Teruel. The total represents a 9.43% of the surface of Spain, being thus the fourth autonomous community in size behind Castile and Le\u00f3n, Andalusia, and Castile-La Mancha.\nIt is located in the northeast of the Iberian Peninsula, at a latitude between 39\u00ba and 43\u00ba'N in the temperate zone. Its boundaries and borders are in the north with France (the regions of Nouvelle-Aquitaine and Occitanie), in the west with the autonomous communities of Castile-La Mancha (provinces of Guadalajara and Cuenca), Castile and Le\u00f3n (province of Soria), La Rioja and Navarre, and in the east with the autonomous communities of Catalonia (provinces of Lleida and Tarragona) and the Valencian Community (provinces of Castell\u00f3n and Valencia).\nRelief.\nThe orography of the community has as the central axis the Ebro valley (with heights between 150 and 300 meters approx.) which transits between two foothill areas, the Pyrenean and the Iberian, preambles of two mountain formations, the Pyrenees to the north and the Sistema Ib\u00e9rico mountain range to the south; the Community has the highest peaks of both mountain ranges, the Aneto and the Moncayo respectively.\nPyrenees.\nThe Aragonese Pyrenees are located in the north of the province of Huesca and are arranged longitudinally in three large units: High Pyrenees, Internal Depressions and Outer Ranges.\nThe Aragonese High Pyrenees contains the maximum heights of all the Pyrenees mountainous chain. The High Pyrenees is formed in turn by the axial Pyrenees and the Inland Ranges.\nIn the axial Pyrenees are the oldest materials: granites, quartzites, slates and limestones and the highest peaks like: the Aneto (), Maladeta () and the Perdiguero (). The inner Pre-Pyrenees, composed of more modern rocks (limestones) also has large mountains such as Monte Perdido (), Collarada () and Tende\u00f1era ().\nThe main Pyrenean valleys are formed by the rivers that are born there, which are:\nThe intrapirenaic depression is a broad perpendicular corridor. Its best represented section is the Canal de Berd\u00fan, which limits on the south with the reliefs of San Juan de la Pe\u00f1a () and Oroel Rock (), modeled on conglomerates of the Campodarbe Formation.\nThe pre-Pyrenean outer ranges are in the Huescan foothills and constitute the southernmost unit of the Pyrenees; formed by predominantly calcareous materials, reach heights between and meters. The Sierra de Guara, one of the most important mountain ranges of the Spanish Pre-Pyrenees, stands out; its summit, the Guara Peak, reaches metres. The Mallos de Riglos, near the town of Ayerbe, stand out for their beauty.\nDepression of the Ebro.\nThe Aragonese central depression includes a wide lowland area, which is also the central part of the Depression of the Ebro. North of the river there is the Sierra de Alcubierre ranges () one of the typical limestone plateaus of the valley.\nThe Ebro Valley is a tectonic pit filled with sedimentary materials, accumulated in the Tertiary age in horizontal series. In the center, fine materials such as clays, plasters and limestones were deposited. To the south of the Ebro there are the limestone plateaus of Borja and of Zaragoza.\nSistema Ib\u00e9rico.\nThe Aragonese section of the Sistema Ib\u00e9rico straddles the provinces of Zaragoza and Teruel. It is a set of hills without a clear structural unit, which can be divided into two zones: Sistema Ib\u00e9rico del Jal\u00f3n and Sistema Ib\u00e9rico turolense. In the first, the Moncayo stands out with , formed by Paleozoic quartzites and slates, partly covered by Mesozoic limestones. The second is formed by elevated terrain (from to in general), but flattened and massive. To the southwest of the depression the summits of the Sierra de Albarrac\u00edn range are reached above , southeast the are reached in the Sierra de Javalambre range and finally the Sierra de G\u00fadar range () transitions to the Maestrazgo area in the Valencian Community.\nClimate and vegetation.\nThere are two main types of climate in Arag\u00f3n, the Semi-arid climate and the Oceanic climate. Its irregular orography creates several microclimates throughout the entire community. From the High mountain Alpine climate of the central Pyrenees to the north, with perpetual ice (glaciers), to the Humid subtropical climate (which is very common in Huesca's lower altitude areas) to the steppe or semi-desert zones, such as the Monegros Desert, passing through the intense continental climate of the Teruel-Daroca area and the Mediterranean climate in the southern areas bordering Castilla La Mancha and the Valencian Community.\nThe main characteristics of the Aragonese climate are:\nTemperatures are very dependent on the altitude. In the Ebro Valley the winters are relatively moderate, although the frosts are very common and the thermal sensation can decrease a lot with the \"cierzo\". Temperatures in summer can exceed 40\u00a0\u00b0C in the central areas. In mountain areas winters are long and rigorous, average temperatures can be up to 10\u00a0\u00b0C lower than in the valley.\nThe two most important winds of Aragon are the \"cierzo\" and the \"bochorno\" or levant. The first is a cold and dry wind that crosses the Ebro Valley from northwest to southeast and that can become quite strong. The second is a warm wind, more irregular and smooth, coming from the south-east.\nThe vegetation follows the oscillations of relief and climate. There is a great variety, both in natural vegetation and in crops. In the high areas there are forests (pines, firs, beech trees, oaks), bush and meadows, and in the central Ebro Valley, evergreen oak and juniper are the most common trees.\nHydrography.\nMost Aragonese rivers are tributaries of the Ebro River, which is the largest river in Spain and divides the community in two. Of the tributaries of the left bank of the river, the ones originating in the Pyrenees, the Arag\u00f3n River stands out. Its headwaters are in Huesca, but it ends at the community of Navarre, the G\u00e1llego and the Cinca, which joins the Segre just before emptying into the Ebro at the height of Mequinenza. On the right bank, the Jal\u00f3n, Huerva and Guadalope stand out.\nIn the stream bed of the Ebro river, near the border with Catalonia, the Mequinenza Reservoir, of and a length of about 110\u00a0km; it is popularly known as the \"Sea of Aragon\".\nThe small Pyrenean mountain lakes called ibones merit special mention. These lakes are very scenic, originating during the last glaciation, and are usually found above .\nThe Autonomous Community lies within three hydrographic regions, the Ebro River, the Tagus River (which originates in the Sierra de Albarrac\u00edn range), and the J\u00facar, which has as its main river in this community the Turia.\nProtected spaces.\nIn Aragon, protected natural spaces are managed through the Red Natural de Arag\u00f3n, an entity created in 2004 to protect all elements with ecological, landscape and cultural value and at the same time coordinate and establish common standards that contribute to their conservation and sustainable use. In this entity are integrated national parks, natural parks, nature reserves, biosphere reserves and other protected natural areas that have been declared by the autonomous community, the Ramsar Convention or the Natura 2000.\nWithin the protected areas is the only national park of Aragon: the Ordesa y Monte Perdido National Park, the second national park created in Spain, in 1918, it is found in the Pyrenees in the comarca of Sobrarbe, occupies an area of , a part of the of the peripheral area of protection. It also enjoys other figures of protection like the Biosphere Reserve of Ordesa-Vi\u00f1amala and is cataloged as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.\nIn addition there are 4 other natural parks: the Moncayo Natural Park with an extension of , the Sierra y Ca\u00f1ones de Guara Natural Park with and of peripheral area of protection, the Posets-Maladeta Natural Park with and of peripheral area of protection, and the Valles Occidentales Natural Park with and of peripheral area of protection.\nThere are also three nature reserves, five natural monuments and three protected landscapes.\nAiguabarreig Segre-Cinca-Ebro.\nAt the confluence of the Segre and Ebro rivers, the Aiguabarreig Ebro-Segre-Cinca is a space with great natural wealth and a great variety of ecosystems that range from Mediterranean steppes to impenetrable riverside forests, making this space a paradise for biodiversity. Territorially, the Aiguabarreig is at the center of the Middle Depression of the Ebro. It borders to the west with the Monegros, to the east with the Tossals de Montmeneu and Almatret and to the south with the tail of the Ribarroja reservoir. This space is named with Catalan word of origin that designates the place where two or more water streams meet and form one. The Segre and Cinca form a first Aiguabarreig between the towns of La Granja d'Escarp, Massalcoreig and Torrente de Cinca, a few kilometers downstream they converge with the waters of the Ebro, already in the municipality of Mequinenza, forming one of the largest river confluences of the entire Iberian Peninsula.\nHistory.\nAragon, occupying the northeast of the Iberian Peninsula has served as a bridge between the Mediterranean Sea, the peninsular center and the coasts of the Cantabrian Sea. The human presence in the lands that today form the autonomous community date back several millennia, but present-day Aragon, like many of the current historical nationalities, was formed during the Middle Ages.\nPrehistory.\nThe oldest testimonies of human life in the lands that today make up Aragon go back to the time of the glaciations, in the Pleistocene, some years ago. This population left the Acheulean industry that found its best weapons in the hand axes of flint or the cleavers of quartzite.\nIn the Upper Palaeolithic appeared two new cultures: Solutrean and Magdalenian.\nThe Epipaleolithic was centered in Lower Aragon, occupying the epoch between the 7th and the 5th millennium.\nIn the first half of the 5th millennium BCE, Neolithic remains are found in the Huescan Outer Ranges and in Lower Aragon.\nThe Eneolithic was characterized in the province of Huesca presenting two important megalithic nuclei: the Pre-Pyrenees of the Outer Ranges and the High Pyrenean valleys.\nThe Late Bronze Age begins in Aragon around 1100 BCE with the arrival of the Urnfield culture. They are Indo-European people, with an alleged origin in Central Europe, who incinerate their dead by placing the ashes in a funeral urn. There are examples in the Cave del Moro of Olvena, the Masada del Rat\u00f3n in Fraga, Palermo and the Cabezo de Monle\u00f3n in Caspe.\nFrom the metallurgical point of view there seems to be a boom given the increase in foundry molds that are located in the populations.\nThe Iron Age is the most important, since throughout the centuries it is the true substratum of the Aragonese historical population.\nThe arrival of Central Europeans during the Bronze Age by Pyrenees until reaching the Lower Aragon area, supposed an important ethnic contribution that prepared the way to the invasions of Iron Age.\nAncient history.\nThe Mediterranean contributions represented a commercial activity that will constitute a powerful stimulus for the iron metallurgy, promoting the modernization of the tools and the indigenous armament, replacing the old bronze with the iron. There is presence of Phoenician, Greek and Etruscan products.\nIn the 6th century BCE there are six groups with different social organization: Vascones, Suessetani, Sedetani, Iacetani, Ilergetes and Citerior Celtiberians.\nThey are Iberized groups with a tendency towards stability, fixing their habitat in durable populations, with dwellings that evolve towards more enduring and stable models. There are many examples in Aragon, among them Cabezo de Monle\u00f3n in Caspe, Puntal of Fraga, Roquizal del Rullo or Loma de los Brunos.\nThe type of social organization was based on the family group, consisting of four generations. Self-sufficient societies in which the greater part of the population was dedicated to agricultural and livestock activities. In the Iberian scope the power was monarchical, exercised by a king; there was a democratic assembly with participation of the male population.\nThere were visible social differentiations and established legal-political statutes.\nThe Romans arrived and progressed easily into the interior.\nIn the territorial distribution that Rome made of Hispania, the current Aragon was included in the Hispania Citerior. In the year 197 BCE, Sempronius Tuditanus is the praetor of the Citerior and had to face a general uprising in their territories that ended with the Roman defeat and the own death of Tuditanus. In view of these facts the Senate sent the consul Marcus Porcius Cato with an army of men. The indigenous peoples of the area were rebelling, except for the Ilergetes who negotiated peace with Cato.\nThere were different uprisings of the Iberian peoples against the Romans, in 194 BCE sees a general uprising with elimination of half of the Roman army, in 188 BCE Manlius Acidinus Fulvianus, praetor of the Citerior, must confront in Calagurris (Calahorra) with the Celtiberians, in the 184 BCE Terentius Varro did it with the Suessetani, to those who took the capital, Corbio.\nIn the 1st century BCE Aragon was the scene of the civil war to seize the power of Rome where the governor Quintus Sertorius made Osca (Huesca) the capital of all the territories controlled by them.\nAlready in the 1st century BCE, the today Aragonese territory became part of the province Tarraconensis and there was the definitive romanization of it creating roads and consolidating ancient Celtiberian and Iberian cities such as Caesaraugusta (Zaragoza), Turiaso (Tarazona), Osca (Huesca) or Bilbilis (Calatayud).\nIn the middle of the 3rd century the decay of the Roman Empire began. Between the years 264 and 266 the Franks and the Alemanni, two Germanic peoples who passed through the Pyrenees and came to Tarazona, which they sacked. In the agony of the Empire groups of bandits emerged who were dedicated to pillage. The Ebro Valley was ravaged in the 5th century by several gangs of evildoers called Bagaudae.\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the disintegration of the Western Roman Empire, the current area of Aragon was occupied by the Visigoths, forming the Visigothic Kingdom.\nIn the year 714 muslims from North Africa conquered the central area of Aragon, converting to Islam the ancient Roman cities such as Saraqusta (Zaragoza) or Wasqa (Huesca). It was at this time that an important Muwallad family arose, the Banu Qasi (\u0628\u0646\u0648 \u0642\u0627\u0633\u064a), their domains were located in the Ebro Valley between the 8th and 10th centuries.\nAfter the disappearance of the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba at the beginning of the 11th century, the Taifa of Zaragoza arose, one of the most important Taifas of Al-Andalus, leaving a great artistic, cultural and philosophical legacy.\nThe name of Aragon is documented for the first time during the Early Middle Ages in the year 828, when the small County of Aragon of Frankish origin, would emerge between the rivers that bear its name, the Arag\u00f3n river, and its brother the Arag\u00f3n Subord\u00e1n river.\nThat County of Aragon would be linked to the Kingdom of Pamplona until 1035, and under its wing it would grow to form a dowry of Garc\u00eda S\u00e1nchez III of Pamplona until the death of the king Sancho \"the Great\", in a period characterized by Muslim hegemony over almost the entire Iberian Peninsula. During the reign of Ramiro I of Aragon the borders would be extended following the annexation of the counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza (year 1044), after having incorporated the populations of the historical comarca of Cinco Villas.\nIn 1076, on the death of Sancho IV of Pamplona, Aragon incorporated part of the Navarrese kingdom into its territories while Castile did the same with the western area of the former domains of Sancho \"the Great\". During the reigns of Sancho Ram\u00edrez and Peter I of Aragon and Pamplona, the kingdom extended its borders to the south, established threatening fortresses in the capital of Zaragoza in El Castellar and Juslibol and took Huesca, which became the new capital.\nThe reign of Alfonso I of Aragon saw the conquering of the lowlands of the middle Ebro Valley for Aragon: Ejea de los Caballeros, Valtierra, Calatayud, Tudela and Zaragoza, the capital of the Taifa of Saraqusta. Upon his death the nobles would choose his brother Ramiro II of Aragon, who left his religious life to assume the royal scepter and perpetuate the dynasty, which he achieved with the dynastic union of the House of Aragon with the owner of the County of Barcelona in 1137, year in which the union of both patrimonies would give rise to the Crown of Aragon and would add the forces that would make the conquests of the Kingdom of Majorca and the Kingdom of Valencia possible. The Crown of Aragon would become the hegemonic power of the Mediterranean, controlling territories as important as Sicily, Corsica, Sardinia or Naples.\nThe monarch was known as King of Aragon and also held the titles of King of Valencia, King of Majorca (for a time), Count of Barcelona, Lord of Montpellier, and (temporarily) Duke of Athens and Neopatria. Each of these titles gave him sovereignty over the specific region, and the titles changed as territories were lost and won.\nAccording to Aragonese law, the monarch had to swear allegiance to the kingdom's laws before being accepted as king. Like other Pyrenean and Basque realms, the Aragonese justice and decision-making system was based on Pyrenean consuetudinary law, the King was considered \"primus inter pares\" ('first among equals') within the nobility. A nobleman with the title \"Chustizia d'Arag\u00f3n\" acted as ombudsman and was responsible for ensuring that the King obeyed the Aragonese laws. An old saying goes, \"en Arag\u00f3n antes de Rey hubo Ley\" (\"in Aragon Law came before King\"), similar to the saying in Navarre, \"antes fueron Leyes que Reyes\", with much the same meaning.\nThe subsequent legend made the Aragonese monarchy eligible and created a phrase for the coronation of the king that would be perpetuated for centuries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We, who are worth as much as you we make you our King and Lord, as long as you keep our fueros and liberties, and if not, not.\u2014\u200a\nThis situation would be repeated in the Commitment of Caspe (1412), which avoids a war that had dismembered the Crown of Aragon when a good handful of aspirants to the throne emerged after the death of Martin of Aragon a year after the death of his first-born, Martin I of Sicily. Ferdinand I of Aragon is the chosen one, of the Castilian House of Trast\u00e1mara, but also directly connected with the Aragonese king Peter IV of Aragon, through his mother Eleanor of Aragon.\nAragon was already a large-scale political entity: the Crown, the Cortes, the Deputation of the Kingdom and the Foral Law constituted its nature and its character. The marriage of Ferdinand II of Aragon with Isabella I of Castile, celebrated in 1469 in Valladolid, derived later in the union of the crowns of Aragon and Castile, creating the basis of the Modern State.\nEarly Modern Age c. 1500\u20131789.\nThe Early Modern Age was marked by increasing tension between the power of the Spanish Monarchy and those of the regions. The appointment of a Castilian as Viceroy in 1590, contrary to the agreement all Royal officials be Aragonese caused widespread unrest; when the Madrid authorities attempted to arrest the Aragonese writer and politician Antonio Perez in May 1591, it caused street violence in Zaragossa and a revolt known as the Alterations of Aragon. The unrest was largely confined to Zaragossa and quickly suppressed, with Perez going into exile. Philip then ordered a reduction in the proportion of taxes retained by the Generality of Aragon to lessen their capacity to raise an army against him.\nThe decay of independent institutions meant political activity focused instead on the preservation of Aragonese history, culture and art. The Archive of the Kingdom of Aragon preserved legal documents and records from the Justiciar and the Palace of Deputation or Parliament, largely destroyed by the French in the battles of 1809. Debates on the causes of the 1590/91 revolt became a contest between opposing views of history that arguably persist in modern Spain.\nThe new emphasis on Aragonese history led to the creation of the position of Chronicler or Historian of Aragon; its holders included Jer\u00f3nimo Zurita y Castro, the De Argensola brothers, Bartolom\u00e9 and Lupercio, Juan Costa and Jer\u00f3nimo Martel. Much of the work produced by Aragonese writers challenged Philip II's version of events and were censored by the central government. In retaliation, the Generality of Aragon ordered the work of Castilian historian Antonio de Herrera y Tordesillas to be burned and commissioned Vicencio Blasco de Lanuza to write an alternative. His 'History of Aragon' was published in two volumes, 1616 and 1619 respectively; the urgency shows the importance placed on responding to Herrera. Other works commissioned at this time for the same purpose include a \"History of the Aragonese Deputation\" by Lorenzo Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Aoiz and a detailed cartography of the Kingdom of Aragon by Jo\u00e3o Baptista Lavanha.\nIn 1590\u20131591, the Spanish monarchy was at the height of its strength but during the 17th century Spanish power declined for a number of reasons. Famine, disease and almost continuous warfare, largely in the Spanish Netherlands drained money, energy and men and weakened the economy; it is estimated the population of Spain fell nearly 25% between 1600 and 1700.\nWar and economic decline inevitably led to increases in taxes, with predictable results; the refusal of the Catalan Cortes to contribute their share of the 1626 Union of Arms eventually led to a full-scale revolt in 1640. While Aragon itself remained relatively peaceful, it had to be treated with care by the Madrid government; during the reign of Charles II from 1665 to 1700, it provided his half-brother John of Austria with a power base in his battle for control of government with the Queen Regent Mariana of Austria.\nDuring the 1701\u20131714 War of the Spanish Succession, Aragon, Catalonia, Valencia and Majorca supported the Austrian claimant Charles. The victory of Philip V accelerated the trend towards greater centralisation; the \"Nueva Planta\" decrees of 1707 abolished the \"fueros\" and Aragonese political structures with their powers transferred to the Deputation of the Kingdom in Madrid; Aragon and Valencia were brought into the system in 1712, Catalonia and Majorca following in 1767.\n1790\u20131936.\nThe French invasion of 1808 that made Joseph Bonaparte King led to the outbreak of the \"Guerra de la Independencia Espa\u00f1ola\" or War of Independence in May. Zaragoza was largely destroyed in February 1809 during the Second Siege of Zaragoza, bringing a halt to its economic development. The 1812 Constitution proposed a number of reforms, including the creation of provincial territories and dividing Aragon into the four provinces of Calatayud, Teruel, Soria and Guadalajara. However, these reforms were delayed by Ferdinand VII's refusal to accept the constitution and finally implemented in 1822 during the 1820\u201323 Trienio Liberal. When Ferdinand was restored by French Bourbon forces in 1823, he abolished the Constitution along with the provincial reforms. When he died in 1833, the provincial division of 1833 divided Aragon into its current three provinces.\nThroughout the 19th century, Aragon was a stronghold of the Carlists, who offered to restore the \"fueros\" and other rights associated with the former Kingdom of Aragon. This period saw a massive exodus from the countryside into the larger cities of Aragon such as Huesca, Zaragoza, Teruel or Calatayud and other nearby regions, such as Catalonia or Madrid.\nThe history of Aragon in the first half of the 20th century was similar to that of the rest of Spain; the building of infrastructure and reforms made by Miguel Primo de Rivera led to a brief economic boom, with new civil and individual liberties during the Second Spanish Republic. In June 1936, a draft Statute of Autonomy of Aragon was presented to the Cortes Generales but the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War prevented the development of this autonomist project.\nSpanish Civil War 1936\u20131939.\nDuring the 1936\u20131939 Civil War, Aragon was divided between both sides. The eastern area closer to Catalonia was run by the Republican Regional Defence Council of Aragon, while the larger western area was controlled by the Nationalists. Some of the most important battles of the war were fought in or near Aragon, including Belchite, Teruel and Ebro. After the defeat of the Republic in April 1939, Aragon and the rest of Spain was governed by the Francoist dictatorship.\nAragon was a stronghold for the Spanish Revolution, which was a workers' social revolution that began at the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and for two to three years resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and, more broadly, libertarian socialist organizational principles throughout various portions of the country.\nIn Aragon, agrarian collectives were formed that were structured by work groups of between five and ten members. To each work group, the community assigned a piece of land for which it was responsible. Each group elected a delegate who represented their views at community meetings. A management committee was responsible for the day-to-day running of the community. This committee was in charge of obtaining materials, carrying out exchanges with other areas, organizing the distribution of production, and the public works that were necessary. Its members were elected in general assemblies in which all the people who made up the community participated.\nEven during the second phase of the revolution when some revolutionary structures were subordinated to the government, giving rise to the dissolution or beginning of absorption, appropriation, and intervention of the revolutionary structures by the republican state government, Aragon remained a stronghold of anarcho-syndicalist labor.\n1939\u2013present.\nEspecially during the 1960s, there were large migrations, with a depopulation of the rural areas, towards the industrial areas like the provincial capitals, other areas of Spain, and other European countries. In 1964, one of the so-called Development Poles was created in Zaragoza.\nIn the 1970s, the old town of Mequinenza was demolished almost completely due to the construction of the Ribarroja reservoir. The inhabitants of Mequinenza had to leave their homes to move to the new town on the banks of the River Segre. Some left for more industrial areas such as Barcelona or Zaragoza or even abroad to continue working in mining industries. By the end of 1974 all of the population had already abandoned the Old Town of Mequinenza and was living in the new town.\nIn the 1970s a period of transition as in the rest of the country was experienced, after the extinction of the previous regime, with the recovery of democratic normality and the creation of a new constitutional framework.\nIt began to demand an own political autonomy, for the Aragonese historical territory; sentiment that was reflected in the historic manifestation of April 23, 1978 that brought together more than aragoneses through the streets of Zaragoza.\nNot having plebiscited, in the past, affirmatively a draft Statute of autonomy (second transitory provision of the constitution) and not making use of the difficult access to autonomy by Article 151 whose aggravated procedure required, apart from the initiative of the process autonomic follow the steps of article 143, which was ratified by three quarters of the municipalities of each of the affected provinces that represent at least the majority of the electoral census, and that this initiative was approved by referendum by the affirmative vote of the majority absolute of the electors of each province, Aragon acceded to the self-government by the slow way of article 143 obtaining lower competence top, and less self-management of resources, during more than 20 years.\nOn August 10, 1982, Aragon's autonomy statute was approved by the Cortes Generales, signed by the then president of the Government, Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo, and sanctioned by His Majesty Juan Carlos I of Spain.\nOn May 7, 1992, a Special Commission of the Aragonese Corts, elaborated a reformed text that was approved by the Aragonese Corts and by the Spanish Cortes. Again, a small statutory reform in the year 1996 extended the competence framework, forcing a definitive comprehensive review for several years, a new statutory text was approved in 2007, by majority but without reaching total unanimity.\nIn the 1990s the Aragonese society increases a significant qualitative step in the quality of life due to the economic progress of the State at all levels.\nAt the beginning of the 21st century, a significant increase in infrastructures was established, such as the arrival of the High Speed Train (AVE), the construction of the new dual carriageway Somport-Sagunto and the promotion of the two airports in the Autonomous Community, Zaragoza and Huesca-Pirineos. At the same time, large technological projects are being undertaken, such as the Walqa Technology Park and the implementation of a telematic network throughout the community.\nIn 2007 the Statute of Autonomy of Aragon was reformed again -which was approved by a broad consensus in the Aragonese Corts, having the support of the PSOE, the PP, the PAR and the IU, whereas CHA abstained- granting the Autonomous Community the recognition of historical nationality (since the Organic Law of 1996 reform of the statute, it had the condition of nationality), includes a new title on the Administration of Chustizia and another on the rights and duties of the Aragoneses and guiding principles of public policies, the possibility of creating an own tax agency in collaboration with that of the State, and also the obligation to public authorities to ensure to avoid transfers from watersheds such as transfer of the Ebro, among many other modifications of the Statute of Autonomy.\nThe designation of Zaragoza as the venue for the 2008 International Exhibition, whose thematic axis was water and sustainable development, represented a series of changes and accelerated growth for the autonomous community. In addition, two anniversaries were celebrated that year: the bicentennial of Sieges of Zaragoza of the War of Independence against the Napoleonic invasion, occurred in 1808, and the centenary of the Hispano-French Exposition of 1908 that it supposed as a modern event, to demonstrate the cultural and economic thrust of Aragon and at the same time serve to strengthen ties and staunch wounds with the French neighbors after the events of the Napoleonic Wars of the previous century.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2015[ [update]], half of Aragon's population, 50.45%, live in the capital city of Zaragoza. Huesca is the only other city in the region with a population greater than .\nThe majority of Aragonese citizens, 71.8%, live in the province of Zaragoza. 17.1% live in the province of Huesca, and 11.1% in the province of Teruel. The population density of the region is the second lowest in Spain after Castilla-La Mancha: only 26.8/km2. The most densely populated areas are around the valley of the river Ebro, particularly around Zaragoza, and in the Pyrenean foothills, while the areas with the fewest inhabitants tend to be those that are higher up in the Pyrenean mountains, and in most of the southern province of Teruel.\nOnly four cities have a population of more than : Zaragoza , Huesca , Teruel , and Calatayud .\nLanguages.\nSpanish is the native language in most of Aragon, and it is the only official language, understood and spoken by virtually everyone in the region. In addition to it, the Aragonese language continues to be spoken in several local varieties in the mountainous northern counties of the Pyrenees, particularly in western Ribagorza, Sobrarbe, Jacetania and Somontano; it is enjoying a resurgence of popularity as a tool for regional identity. In the easternmost areas of Aragon, along the border with Catalonia, varieties of the Catalan language are spoken, including the comarcas of eastern Ribagorza, La Litera, Bajo Cinca, Bajo Arag\u00f3n-Caspe, Bajo Arag\u00f3n and Matarra\u00f1a. The strip-shaped Catalan-speaking area in Aragon is often called \"La Franja\".\nThe Declaration of Mequinenza (Declaraci\u00f3 de Mequinensa in Catalan) was a document signed on February 1, 1984, in Mequinenza by the mayors of 17 municipalities of the Aragonese Catalan-speaking area together with Jos\u00e9 Bada Paniello (Minister of Culture of Government of Aragon at the time). Following the declaration, and complying with one of the proposals contained therein, on October 1, 1985, an agreement between the Government of Aragon and the Ministry of Education and Science was implemented for the teaching of the Catalan language as a voluntary and assessable subject in schools in the area.\nThe Languages Acts of Aragon of 2009 and 2013 have been passed to try to regulate the languages in this autonomous community. An update of these laws was announced but as of 2019 it has not been carried out.\nCulture.\nSome medieval monuments of Teruel and Zaragoza are protected by UNESCO as part of the World Heritage Sites \"Mud\u00e9jar Architecture of Aragon\".\nThe traditional dance of Aragon is known as jota and is one of the faster Spanish dances. It is also the most widespread in Aragon and the exact style and music depend on the area.\nThere are other less popular dances named \"paloteaos\" similar to the sword/stick dances of other regions.\nThe music to one local dance, \"The Dance of Majordomos\" of Benasque, was so enjoyed by Rafael del Riego on a visit to the town that he ordered it to be copied resulting in the \"Hymn of Riego\".\nTypical Aragonese instruments include the stringed drum or \"Chicot\u00e9n\", bagpipes such as the \"gaita de boto\", oboes such as the \"Dulzaina\", and small flutes like the \"Chiflo\". Some instruments have been lost, such as the \"trompa de Ribagorza\", although there have been efforts to reconstruct them. In contrast to other Pyrenean regions, the \"Chicot\u00e9n\" and \"Chiflo\" never have stopped being played.\nThe Carnival of Bielsa (Huesca) has ancient origins and includes a group of men carrying long sticks, wearing skirts, cowbells and boucard/goat-like horns and skins with black-painted faces called \"Trangas\" symbolising \"virility\" who surround another man wearing skins playing the part of a bear called \"l'onso\". In Aragonese mythology the bear carried souls between the world of the living and the world of the dead. Trangas dance with young females named \"madamas\" symbolising \"purity\" and wearing colourful dresses. Other traditional figures include a horse rider named \"Caball\u00e9\".\nCuisine.\nWith its lush Pyrenean pastures, lamb, beef, and dairy products are, not surprisingly, predominant in Aragonese cuisine. Also of note is its ham from Teruel; olive oil from Empeltre and Arbequina; longaniza from Graus; rainbow trout and salmon, boar, truffles and wild mushrooms from the upper river valleys of the Jacetania, Gallego, Sobrarbe, and Ribagorza regions; and wines from Cari\u00f1ena, Somontano, Calatayud, and Campo de Borja; and fruit, especially peaches, from its fertile lower valleys. The region also features a unique local haggis, known as chireta, several interesting seafood dishes, including various crab pastes, which developed from an old superstition that crabs help prevent illness, and sweets such as \"Adoquines del Pilar\" and \"Frutas de Arag\u00f3n\". There are also other sweets like \"Tortas de alma\" from Teruel and \"Trenza de Almudevar\" or \"Casta\u00f1as de Huesca\" from Huesca.\nResearch.\nThe University of Zaragoza is the largest university in Aragon, which conduct research in various disciplines. Of the Nationally recognized Unique Scientific and Technical Infrastructure research institutes, Aragon hosts the following:\nEconomy.\nGDP per capita in Aragon is above average for Spain. The Gross domestic product (GDP) of the autonomous community was 37.0\u00a0billion euros in 2018, accounting for 3.1% of Spanish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 30,200 euros or 100% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 101% of the EU average.\nThe traditional agriculture-based economy from the mid-20th century has been greatly transformed in the past several decades and now service and industrial sectors are the backbone of the economy in the region.\nThe well-developed irrigation system around the Ebro has greatly supported the productive agriculture. The most important crops include wheat, barley, rye, fruit and grapes. Livestock-breeding is essential especially in the northern areas, where the lush meadows provide excellent conditions for sheep and cattle. As of November 2020 the regional livestock includes 8.8 million pigs (around six pigs per person), and, as of January 2021, 73.1 million gallifowls. Also as of November 2020, there were more than 1.6 million sheep and about 50,000 goats, as well as about 400,000 head of cattle, most of them in Huesca province. According to Greenpeace, 30% of the Aragonese territory is endangered by liquid manure from intensive farming, putting aquifers and other water reserves at risk.\nThe chief industrial centre is the capital Zaragoza, where the largest factories are located. The largest plant is the Opel automotive plant with employees and production of per year. It supports many related industries in the area. Other large plants in the city include factories for trains and household appliances. Mining of iron ore and coal is developed to the south, near Ojos Negros. Electricity production is concentrated to the north where numerous hydro power plants are located along the Pyrenean rivers and in the Teruel Power Plant. There is an aluminium refinery in the town of Sabi\u00f1\u00e1nigo. The main centres of electronics industry are Zaragoza, Huesca and Benabarre. Chemical industry is developed in Zaragoza, Sabi\u00f1\u00e1nigo, Monz\u00f3n, Teruel, Ojos Negros, Fraga, Benabarre and others.\nThe transport infrastructure has been greatly improved. There are more than 900 km of motorways which run from Zaragoza to Madrid, Teruel, Basque country, Huesca and Barcelona. The condition of the other roads is also good. As of 2016[ [update]] there are cars in Aragon. Through the territory of the province runs the new high-speed railway between Madrid and Barcelona with siding from Zaragoza to Huesca, which is going to be continued to the French border. There is an International Airport at Zaragoza and a smaller airport at Huesca. The Teruel Airport is used for maintenance purposes, and the small airfields at Santa Cilia and Villanueva de G\u00e1llego are used for recreational flights. \nThe unemployment rate stood at 11.6% in 2017 and was lower than the national average.\nGovernment and politics.\nCurrent political organization.\nAs an autonomous community of Spain, Aragon has an elected regional parliament (, , ) with 67 seats. It meets in the Aljafer\u00eda, a Moorish palace in the capital city, Zaragoza. The Parliament chooses a President for the \"Diputaci\u00f3n General de Arag\u00f3n\" or Aragon Government, for a four-year term. Since 2023, the president is Jorge Azc\u00f3n of the Partido Popular. Nationally, Aragon elects 13 Deputies and 14 Senators to the Cortes Generales.\nIn addition to the Spanish political parties, there are a number of Aragonese parties, such as the Chunta Aragonesista, a left-wing Aragonese nationalist party, and the Aragonese Party, more conservative. Chunta Aragonesista had a seat in Spain's national Congress of Deputies from 2000 to 2008, while the centrist Aragonese Party has three national senators, who are in coalition with the ruling People's Party.\nIn a 2011 regional government survey, 47.6% of the population wanted greater autonomy for Aragon, while 35.2% were satisfied with its current level of autonomy. A total of 6% wanted an end to autonomy and 3.2% wanted full independence.\nTerritorial division.\nAragon is divided into three provinces from north to south, named after their capitals: Huesca, Zaragoza and Teruel. The provinces are further divided into 33 comarcas, three of which are in more than one province. There are a total of 732 municipalities in the region.\nHistoric.\nAragon in the Middle Ages was the hub of the wider Crown of Aragon. The Crown was represented in the region from 1517 by a viceroy.\nIn 1479, King Ferdinand II of Aragon married Isabella I of Castile, a kingdom covering much of the rest of modern Spain. However, until the Nueva Planta decrees of 1707, Aragon maintained its own separate laws and institutions.\nMedia.\nAragon has media set-ups in television, radio and numerous newspapers.\nTelevision.\nOn 21 April 2006, regional television broadcasts in Aragon officially began with the launch of Arag\u00f3n TV. The law which established the CARTV (Aragon Corporation Radio and Television) dated from 1987, but various political disputes delayed the project for several legislatures.\nDuring the years that Aragon had no public television, several media groups sought to supplement their absence. For one TVE-Aragon, taking the Territorial Centre in Zaragoza, produced several programs and educational activities with the Aragonese town. As for private groups, there were several projects. The most widely accepted for many years had been Antena Arag\u00f3n, which came to be regarded as regional television. This channel was created in 1998 and disappeared in 2005 shortly after having to leave the Media Production Centre (CPA), as this was built by the DGA for future public television host Aragon. With the push for the creation of public television, Antena Arag\u00f3n merged with RTVA (Radio Television Aragonesa) belonging to the Herald Group. Merging RTVA Antena Arag\u00f3n and led to channel ZTV (Zaragoza Television). Moreover, Antena 3 Televisi\u00f3n aired for several years, and off to Aragon, a news report fully Aragonese, having a central issue in the Pinares de Venecia in Zaragoza, within the premises of the Theme Park of Zaragoza.\nArag\u00f3n TV was launched in 2006 after spending a season broadcasting a letter and a loop with images of Aragonese villages and audio of regional radio programs.\nRadio.\nAragon Radio, began broadcasting on 18 August 2005 at 5 p.m. with the sound of drums and drums of Calanda and a group song Zaragoza \"The Fish\". Estimates of its audience range from 20 000 listeners, according to the latest EMG, to , according to private findings. The channel has regional news bulletins every hour from 7 a.m. to midnight and coverage of sports.\nSport.\nAragon's most successful football club is Real Zaragoza. The club was founded in 1932 and spent 58 seasons in First Division, having played at its current ground, La Romareda, since 1957. Real Zaragoza have won six Copa del Rey titles from 1964 to 2004, and the 1995 European Cup Winners' Cup.\nThe other most important football team in Aragon is SD Huesca, that in 2018 and 2020 was able to promote to first division. Now, SD Huesca is still playing in second division after being relegated two times. CD Teruel was able to promote in the 2022/2023 season from segunda federaci\u00f3n (Spanish 4th division) to primera federaci\u00f3n (Spanish 3rd division) There are plenty of smaller clubs in the region playing in semi-professional and amateur competitions.\nSkiing is popular in the Pyrenean north of Aragon, at resorts such as Formigal and Candanch\u00fa. The Aragonese city of Jaca in the Pyrenees bid to host the Winter Olympics from 2002 to 2014. Zaragoza was considering a bid for the 2022 Winter Olympics, but dropped it in 2011 to strengthen the chance of Barcelona winning the games.\nThe Ciudad del Motor de Arag\u00f3n, also known as Motorland Arag\u00f3n, is a motorsport race track located near Alca\u00f1iz in Aragon. It is home to the Aragon motorcycle Grand Prix.\nSymbols.\nThe current coat of arms of Aragon is composed of the four barracks and is attested for the first time in 1499, consolidating since the Early Modern Ages to take root decisively in the 19th century and be approved, according to precept, by the Real Academia de la Historia in 1921.\nThe first quartering appears at the end of the 15th century and commemorates, according to traditional interpretation, the legendary kingdom of Sobrarbe; in the second quarter there is the so-called \"Cross of \u00cd\u00f1igo Arista\", innovation of Peter IV of Aragon (from an anachronistic interpretation of the cross that symbolized the religion of the Asturian, Navarrese and Aragonese Christian kings), who took it as shields of the ancient kings of Aragon, although historically there were no heraldic emblems in the peninsula (or \"signal shields\", as it was said in the Middle Ages) before the union dynastic of 1137 of the House of Aragon with the House of Barcelona; in the third quartering appears the Saint George's Cross escutcheoned of four heads of Moors (the call \"Cross of Alcoraz\"), that is witnessed for the first time in a seal of 1281 of Peter III of Aragon and would remember, according to tradition arising from the 14th century, the battle in which Peter I of Aragon and Pamplona and the future Alfonso I of Aragon took Huesca and was considered in the Early modern Ages one of the proprietary emblems of the kingdom of Aragon; and in the fourth is the emblem of the so-called \"bars of Aragon\" or Royal Sign of Aragon, the oldest of the heraldic emblems that are part of the current coat of arms, dated in the second half of the 12th century.\nThis emblem of gules and gold was used in seals, banners, shields and standards indistinctly, not being but a familiar emblem that later denoted the authority as King of Aragon until, with the birth of Modern State, began to be a territorial symbol.\nThe current flag was approved in 1984, with the provisions of Article 3 of the Statute of Autonomy of Aragon, the flag is the traditional of the four horizontal red bars on a yellow background with the coat of arms of Aragon shifted towards the flagpole.\nThe bars of Aragon, common historic element of the current four autonomous communities that once were integrated into the Crown of Aragon, present in the third quartering of the coat of arms of Spain.\nThe anthem of Aragon (himno de Arag\u00f3n) was regulated in 1989 with music by the Aragonese composer Ant\u00f3n Garc\u00eda Abril that combines the old Aragonese musical tradition with popular musical elements within a modern conception. The lyrics were elaborated by the Aragonese poets Ildefonso Manuel Gil, \u00c1ngel Guinda, Rosendo Tello and Manuel Vilas and highlights within its poetic framework, values such as freedom, justice, reason, truth, open land ... that historically represent the expression of Aragon as a people. Another song, \"Canto a la libertad\", is often regarded as the de facto unofficial anthem of Aragon.\nThe Day of Aragon is celebrated on April 23 and commemorates Saint George, patron of the Kingdom of Aragon since the 15th century. It appears in Article 3 of the Statute of Autonomy of Aragon since 1984. Institutional acts such as the delivery of the Aragon Awards by the Government of Aragon or the composition of a flag of Aragon of flowers, with the collaboration of citizens, in the Plaza de Arag\u00f3n square of Zaragoza.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39444", "revid": "170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39444", "title": "Ajodhya", "text": ""}
{"id": "39445", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39445", "title": "Anti-psychiatry", "text": "Movement against psychiatric treatment\nAnti-psychiatry, sometimes spelled antipsychiatry, is a movement based on the view that psychiatric treatment can often be more damaging than helpful to patients. The term anti-psychiatry was coined in 1912, and the movement emerged in the 1960s, highlighting controversies about psychiatry. Objections include the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis, the questionable effectiveness and harm associated with psychiatric medications, the failure of psychiatry to demonstrate any disease treatment mechanism for psychiatric medication effects, and legal concerns about equal human rights and civil freedom being nullified by the presence of diagnosis. Historical critiques of psychiatry came to light after focus on the extreme harms associated with electroconvulsive therapy and insulin shock therapy. The term \"anti-psychiatry\" is in dispute and often used to dismiss all critics of psychiatry, many of whom agree that a specialized role of helper for people in emotional distress may at times be appropriate, and allow for individual choice around treatment decisions.\nBeyond concerns about effectiveness, anti-psychiatry might question the philosophical and ethical underpinnings of psychotherapy and psychoactive medication, seeing them as shaped by social and political concerns rather than the autonomy and integrity of the individual mind. They may believe that \"judgements on matters of sanity should be the prerogative of the philosophical mind\", and that the mind should not be a medical concern. Some activists reject the psychiatric notion of mental illness. Anti-psychiatry considers psychiatry a coercive instrument of oppression due to an unequal power relationship between doctor, therapist, and patient or client, and a highly subjective diagnostic process. Involuntary commitment, which can be enforced legally through sectioning, is an important issue in the movement. When sectioned, involuntary treatment may also be legally enforced by the medical profession against the patient's will. \nThe decentralized movement has been active in various forms for two centuries. In the 1960s, there were many challenges to psychoanalysis and mainstream psychiatry, in which the very basis of psychiatric practice was characterized as repressive and controlling. Psychiatrists identified with the anti-psychiatry movement included Timothy Leary, R. D. Laing, Franco Basaglia, Theodore Lidz, Silvano Arieti, and David Cooper. Others involved were Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, F\u00e9lix Guattari, and Erving Goffman. Cooper used the term \"anti-psychiatry\" in 1967, and wrote the book \"Psychiatry and Anti-psychiatry\" in 1971. The word \"Antipsychiatrie\" was already used in Germany in 1904. Thomas Szasz introduced the idea of mental illness being a myth in the book \"The Myth of Mental Illness\" (1961). However, his literature actually very clearly states that he was directly undermined by the movement led by David Cooper (1931\u20131986) and that Cooper sought to replace psychiatry with his own brand of it. Giorgio Antonucci, who advocated a non-psychiatric approach to psychological suffering, did not consider himself to be part of the antipsychiatric movement. His position is represented by \"the non-psychiatric thinking, which considers psychiatry an ideology devoid of scientific content, a non-knowledge, whose aim is to annihilate people instead of trying to understand the difficulties of life, both individual and social, and then to defend people, change society, and create a truly new culture\". Antonucci introduced the definition of psychiatry as a prejudice in the book \"I pregiudizi e la conoscenza critica alla psichiatria\" (1986).\nThe movement continues to influence thinking about psychiatry and psychology, both within and outside of those fields, particularly in terms of the relationship between providers of treatment and those receiving it. Contemporary issues include freedom versus coercion, nature versus nurture, and the right to be different.\nCritics of antipsychiatry from within psychiatry itself object to the underlying principle that psychiatry is harmful, although they usually accept that there are issues that need addressing. Medical professionals often consider anti-psychiatry movements to be promoting mental illness denial, and some consider their claims to be comparable to conspiracy theories.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nThe first widespread challenge to the prevailing medical approach in Western countries occurred in the late 18th century. Part of the progressive Age of Enlightenment, a \"moral treatment\" movement challenged the harsh, pessimistic, somatic (body-based) and restraint-based approaches that prevailed in the system of hospitals and \"madhouses\" for people considered mentally disturbed, who were generally seen as wild animals without reason. Alternatives were developed, led in different regions by ex-patient staff, physicians themselves in some cases, and religious and lay philanthropists. This \"moral treatment\" was seen as pioneering more humane psychological and social approaches, whether or not in medical settings; however, it also involved some use of physical restraints, threats of punishment, and personal and social methods of control. As it became the establishment approach in the 19th century, opposition to its negative aspects also grew.\nAccording to Michel Foucault, there was a shift in the perception of madness, whereby it came to be seen as less about delusion, i.e. disturbed judgment about the truth, than about a disorder of regular, normal behavior or will. Foucault argued that, prior to this, doctors could often prescribe travel, rest, walking, retirement and generally engaging with nature, seen as the visible form of truth, as a means to break with artificialities of the world (and therefore delusions). Another form of treatment involved nature's opposite, the theater, where the patient's madness was acted out for them in such a way that the delusion would reveal itself to the patient.\nThus the most prominent therapeutic technique became to confront patients with a healthy sound will and orthodox passions, ideally embodied by the physician. The \"cure\" involved a process of opposition, of struggle and domination, of the patient's troubled will by the healthy will of the physician. It was thought the confrontation would lead not only to bring the illness into broad daylight by its resistance, but also to the victory of the sound will and the renunciation of the disturbed will. \"We must apply a perturbing method, to break the spasm by means of the spasm... We must subjugate the whole character of some patients, subdue their transports, break their pride, while we must stimulate and encourage the others\" (Esquirol, J. E. D., 1816). Foucault also argued that the increasing internment of the \"mentally ill\" (the development of more and bigger asylums) had become necessary not just for diagnosis and classification but because an enclosed place became a requirement for a treatment that was now understood as primarily the contest of wills, a question of submission and victory.\nThe techniques and procedures of the asylums at this time included \"isolation, private or public interrogations, punishment techniques such as cold showers, moral talks (encouragements or reprimands), strict discipline, compulsory work, rewards, preferential relations between the physician and his patients, relations of vassalage, of possession, of domesticity, even of servitude between patient and physician at times\". Foucault summarized these as \"designed to make the medical personage the 'master of madness'\" through the power the physician's will exerts on the patient. The effect of this shift then served to inflate the power of the physician relative to the patient, correlated with the rapid rise of internment (asylums and forced detention).\nOther analyses suggest that the rise of asylums was primarily driven by industrialization and capitalism, including the breakdown of traditional family structures. By the end of the 19th century, psychiatrists often had little power in the overcrowded asylum system, acting mainly as administrators who rarely attended to patients in a system where therapeutic ideals had turned into institutional routines. In general, critics point to negative aspects of the shift toward so-called \"moral treatments\", and the concurrent widespread expansion of asylums, medical power and involuntary hospitalization laws, that played an important part in the development of the anti-psychiatry movement.\nVarious 19th-century critiques of the newly emerging field of psychiatry overlap thematically with 20th-century anti-psychiatry, for example in their questioning of the medicalization of \"madness\". Those critiques occurred at a time when physicians had not yet achieved hegemony through psychiatry, however, so there was no single, unified force to oppose. Nevertheless, there was increasing concern at the ease with which people could be confined, with frequent reports of abuse and illegal confinement. For example, Daniel Defoe, the author of \"Robinson Crusoe\", had previously argued for more government oversight of \"madhouses\" and for due process prior to involuntary internment. He later argued that husbands used asylum hospitals to incarcerate their disobedient wives, and in a subsequent pamphlet that wives even did the same to their husbands. It was also proposed that the role of asylum keeper be separated from doctor, to discourage exploitation of patients. There was general concern that physicians were undermining personhood by medicalizing problems, by claiming they alone had the expertise to judge, and by arguing that mental disorder was physical and hereditary. The Alleged Lunatics' Friend Society arose in England in the mid-19th century to challenge the system and campaign for rights and reforms. In the United States, Elizabeth Packard published a series of books and pamphlets describing her experiences in the Illinois insane asylum, to which she had been committed at the request of her husband.\nThroughout, the class nature of mental hospitals and their role as agencies of control were well recognized. The new psychiatry was partially challenged by two powerful social institutions\u2014the church and the legal system. These trends have been thematically linked to the later-20th-century anti-psychiatry movement.\nAs psychiatry became more professionally established during the 19th century (the term itself was coined in 1808 in Germany by Johann Christian Reil, as \"Psychiaterie\") and developed allegedly more invasive treatments, opposition increased. In the Southern US, black slaves and abolitionists encountered drapetomania, a pseudo-scientific diagnosis that presented the desire of slaves to run away from their masters as a symptom of pathology.\nThere was some organized challenge to psychiatry in the late 1870s from the new speciality of neurology, largely centered around control of state insane asylums in New York. Practitioners criticized mental hospitals for failure to conduct scientific research and adopt the modern therapeutic methods such as nonrestraint. Together with lay reformers and social workers, neurologists formed the National Association for the Protection of the Insane and the Prevention of Insanity. However, when the lay members questioned the competence of asylum physicians to even provide proper care at all, the neurologists withdrew their support and the association floundered.\nEarly 1900s.\nIt has been noted that \"the most persistent critics of psychiatry have always been former mental hospital patients\", but that very few were able to tell their stories publicly or to confront the psychiatric establishment openly, and those who did so were commonly considered so extreme in their charges that they could seldom gain credibility. In the early 20th century, ex-patient Clifford W. Beers campaigned to improve the plight of individuals receiving public psychiatric care, particularly those committed to state institutions, publicizing the issues in his book, \"A Mind that Found Itself\" (1908). While Beers initially condemned psychiatrists for tolerating mistreatment of patients, and envisioned more ex-patient involvement in the movement, he was influenced by Adolf Meyer and the psychiatric establishment, and toned down his hostility since he needed their support for reforms. In Germany during this time were similar efforts which used the term \"Antipsychiatrie\".\nBeers' reliance on rich donors and his need for approval from experts led him to hand over to psychiatrists the organization he helped found, the National Committee for Mental Hygiene, which eventually became the National Mental Health Association. In the UK, the National Society for Lunacy Law Reform was established in 1920 by angry ex-patients who sought justice for abuses committed in psychiatric custody, and were aggrieved that their complaints were patronizingly discounted by the authorities, who were seen to value the availability of medicalized internment as a 'whitewashed' extrajudicial custodial and punitive process. In 1922, ex-patient Rachel Grant-Smith added to calls for reform of the system of neglect and abuse she had suffered by publishing \"The Experiences of an Asylum Patient\". In the US, We Are Not Alone (WANA) was founded by a group of patients at Rockland State Hospital in New York, and continued to meet as an ex-patient group.\nFrench surrealist Antonin Artaud would also openly criticize that no patient should be labeled as \"mentally ill\" as an exterior identification, as he notes in his 1925 \"L'Ombilic des limbes\", as well as arguing against narcotic's restriction laws in France. Much influenced by the Dada and surrealist enthusiasms of the day, he considered dreams, thoughts and visions no less real than the \"outside\" world.\nIn this era before penicillin was discovered, eugenics was popular. People believed diseases of the mind could be passed on so compulsory sterilization of the mentally ill was enacted in many countries.\n1930s.\nIn the 1930s several controversial medical practices were introduced and framed as \"treatments\" for mental disorders, including inducing seizures (by electroshock, insulin or other drugs) or psychosurgery (lobotomy). In the US, beginning in 1939 through 1951, over 50,000 lobotomy operations were performed in mental hospitals, a procedure ultimately seen as inhumane.\nHolocaust historians argued that the medicalization of social programs and systematic euthanasia of people in German mental institutions in the 1930s provided the institutional, procedural, and doctrinal origins of the mass murder of the 1940s. The Nazi programs were called Action T4 and Action 14f13. The Nuremberg Trials convicted a number of psychiatrists who held key positions in Nazi regimes. As one Swiss psychiatrist stated: \"A not so easy question to be answered is whether it should be allowed to destroy lives objectively 'unworthy of living' without the expressed request of its bearers. (...) Even in incurable mentally ill ones suffering seriously from hallucinations and melancholic depressions and not being able to act, to a medical colleague I would ascript the right and in serious cases the duty to shorten\u2014often for many years\u2014the suffering\" (Bleuler, Eugen, 1936: \"Die naturwissenschaftliche Grundlage der Ethik\". Schweizer Archiv Neurologie und Psychiatrie, Band 38, Nr.2, S. 206).\n1940s and 1950s.\nThe post-World War II decades saw an enormous growth in psychiatry; many Americans were persuaded that psychiatry and psychology, particularly psychoanalysis, were a key to happiness. Meanwhile, most hospitalized mental patients received at best decent custodial care, and at worst, abuse and neglect.\nThe psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan has been identified as an influence on later anti-psychiatry theory in the UK, and as being the first, in the 1940s and 50s, to professionally challenge psychoanalysis to reexamine its concepts and to appreciate psychosis as understandable. Other influences on Lacan included poetry and the surrealist movement, including the poetic power of patients' experiences. Critics disputed this and questioned how his descriptions linked to his practical work. The names that came to be associated with the anti-psychiatry movement knew of Lacan and acknowledged his contribution even if they did not entirely agree. The psychoanalyst Erich Fromm is also said to have articulated, in the 1950s, the secular humanistic concern of the coming anti-psychiatry movement. In \"The Sane Society\" (1955), Fromm wrote \"An unhealthy society is one which creates mutual hostility [and] distrust, which transforms man into an instrument of use and exploitation for others, which deprives him of a sense of self, except inasmuch as he submits to others or becomes an automaton\"...\"Yet many psychiatrists and psychologists refuse to entertain the idea that society as a whole may be lacking in sanity. They hold that the problem of mental health in a society is only that of the number of 'unadjusted' individuals, and not of a possible unadjustment of the culture itself\".\nIn the 1950s new psychiatric drugs, notably the antipsychotic chlorpromazine, slowly came into use. Although often accepted as an advance in some ways, there was opposition, partly due to serious adverse effects such as tardive dyskinesia, and partly due their \"chemical straitjacket\" effect and their alleged use to control and intimidate patients. Patients often opposed psychiatry and refused or stopped taking the drugs when not subject to psychiatric control. There was also increasing opposition to the large-scale use of psychiatric hospitals and institutions, and attempts were made to develop services in the community.\nAccording to the Encyclopedia of Theory and Practice in Psychotherapy and Counseling, \"In the 1950s in the United States, a right-wing anti-mental health movement opposed psychiatry, seeing it as liberal, left-wing, subversive and anti-American or pro-Communist. There were widespread fears that it threatened individual rights and undermined moral responsibility. An early skirmish was over the Alaska Mental Health Bill, where the right wing protestors were joined by the emerging Scientology movement.\"\nThe field of psychology sometimes came into opposition with psychiatry. Behaviorists argued that mental disorder was a matter of learning not medicine; for example, Hans Eysenck argued that psychiatry \"really has no role to play\". The developing field of clinical psychology in particular came into close contact with psychiatry, often in opposition to its methods, theories and territories.\n1960s.\nComing to the fore in the 1960s, \"anti-psychiatry\" (a term first used by David Cooper in 1967) defined a movement that vocally challenged the fundamental claims and practices of mainstream psychiatry. While most of its elements had precedents in earlier decades and centuries, in the 1960s it took on a national and international character, with access to the mass media and incorporating a wide mixture of grassroots activist organizations and prestigious professional bodies.\nCooper was a South African psychiatrist working in Britain. A trained Marxist revolutionary, he argued that the political context of psychiatry and its patients had to be highlighted and radically challenged, and warned that the fog of individualized therapeutic language could take away people's ability to see and challenge the bigger social picture. He spoke of having a goal of \"non-psychiatry\" as well as anti-psychiatry.\nIn the 1960s fresh voices mounted a new challenge to the pretensions of psychiatry as a science and the mental health system as a successful humanitarian enterprise. These voices included: Ernest Becker, Erving Goffman, R.D. Laing; Laing and Aaron Esterson, Thomas Scheff, and Thomas Szasz. Their writings, along with others such as articles in the journal \"The Radical Therapist\", were given the umbrella label \"antipsychiatry\" despite wide divergences in philosophy. This critical literature, in concert with an activist movement, emphasized the hegemony of medical model psychiatry, its spurious sources of authority, its mystification of human problems, and the more oppressive practices of the mental health system, such as involuntary hospitalisation, drugging, and electroshock.\nThe psychiatrists R D Laing (from Scotland), Theodore Lidz (from America), Silvano Arieti (from Italy) and others, argued that \"schizophrenia\" and psychosis were understandable, and resulted from injuries to the inner-self-inflicted by psychologically invasive \"schizophrenogenic\" parents or others. It was sometimes seen as a transformative state involving an attempt to cope with a sick society. Laing, however, partially dissociated himself from his colleague Cooper's term \"anti-psychiatry\". Laing had already become a media icon through bestselling books (such as \"The Divided Self\" and \"The Politics of Experience\") discussing mental distress in an interpersonal existential context; Laing was somewhat less focused than his colleague Cooper on wider social structures and radical left wing politics, and went on to develop more romanticized or mystical views (as well as equivocating over the use of diagnosis, drugs and commitment). Although the movement originally described as anti-psychiatry became associated with the general counter-culture movement of the 1960s, Lidz and Arieti never became involved in the latter. Franco Basaglia promoted anti-psychiatry in Italy and secured reforms to mental health law there.\nLaing, through the Philadelphia Association founded with Cooper in 1965, set up over 20 therapeutic communities including Kingsley Hall, where staff and residents theoretically assumed equal status and any medication used was voluntary. Non-psychiatric Soteria houses, starting in the United States, were also developed as were various ex-patient-led services.\nPsychiatrist Thomas Szasz argued that \"mental illness\" is an inherently incoherent combination of a medical and a psychological concept. He opposed the use of psychiatry to forcibly detain, treat, or excuse what he saw as mere deviance from societal norms or moral conduct. As a libertarian, Szasz was concerned that such usage undermined personal rights and moral responsibility. Adherents of his views referred to \"the myth of mental illness\", after Szasz's controversial 1961 book of that name (based on a paper of the same name that Szasz had written in 1957 that, following repeated rejections from psychiatric journals, had been published in the American Psychologist in 1960). Although widely described as part of the main anti-psychiatry movement, Szasz actively rejected the term and its adherents; instead, in 1969, he collaborated with Scientology to form the Citizens Commission on Human Rights. It was later noted that the view that insanity was not in most or even in any instances a \"medical\" entity, but a moral issue, was also held by Christian Scientists and certain Protestant fundamentalists, as well as Szasz. Szasz was not a Scientologist himself and was non-religious; he commented frequently on the parallels between religion and psychiatry.\nErving Goffman, Gilles Deleuze, F\u00e9lix Guattari and others criticized the power and role of psychiatry in society, including the use of \"total institutions\" and the use of models and terms that were seen as stigmatizing. The French sociologist and philosopher Foucault, in his 1961 publication \"Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason\", analyzed how attitudes towards those deemed \"insane\" had changed as a result of changes in social values. He argued that psychiatry was primarily a tool of social control, based historically on a \"great confinement\" of the insane and physical punishment and chains, later exchanged in the moral treatment era for psychological oppression and internalized restraint. American sociologist Thomas Scheff applied labeling theory to psychiatry in 1966 in \"Being Mentally Ill\". Scheff argued that society views certain actions as deviant and, in order to come to terms with and understand these actions, often places the label of mental illness on those who exhibit them. Certain expectations are then placed on these individuals and, over time, they unconsciously change their behavior to fulfill them.\nObservation of the abuses of psychiatry in the Soviet Union in the so-called Psikhushka hospitals also led to questioning the validity of the practice of psychiatry in the West. In particular, the diagnosis of many political dissidents with schizophrenia led some to question the general diagnosis and punitive usage of the label schizophrenia. This raised questions as to whether the schizophrenia label and resulting involuntary psychiatric treatment could not have been similarly used in the West to subdue rebellious young people during family conflicts.\nSince 1970.\nNew professional approaches were developed as an alternative or reformist complement to psychiatry. \"The Radical Therapist\", a journal begun in 1971 in North Dakota by Michael Glenn, David Bryan, Linda Bryan, Michael Galan and Sara Glenn, challenged the psychotherapy establishment in a number of ways, raising the slogan \"Therapy means change, not adjustment.\" It contained articles that challenged the professional mediator approach, advocating instead revolutionary politics and authentic community making. Social work, humanistic or existentialist therapies, family therapy, counseling and self-help and clinical psychology developed and sometimes opposed psychiatry.\nThe psychoanalytically trained psychiatrist Szasz, although professing fundamental opposition to what he perceives as medicalization and oppressive or excuse-giving \"diagnosis\" and forced \"treatment\", was not opposed to other aspects of psychiatry (for example attempts to \"cure-heal souls\", although he also characterizes this as non-medical). Although generally considered anti-psychiatry by others, he sought to dissociate himself politically from a movement and term associated with the radical left wing. In a 1976 publication \"Anti-psychiatry: The paradigm of a plundered mind\", which has been described as an overtly political condemnation of a wide sweep of people, Szasz claimed Laing, Cooper and all of anti-psychiatry consisted of \"self-declared socialists, communists, anarchists or at least anti-capitalists and collectivists\". While saying he shared some of their critique of the psychiatric system, Szasz compared their views on the social causes of distress/deviance to those of anti-capitalist anti-colonialists who claimed that Chilean poverty was due to plundering by American companies, a comment Szasz made not long after a CIA-backed coup had deposed the democratically elected Chilean president and replaced him with Pinochet. Szasz argued instead that distress/deviance is due to the flaws or failures of individuals in their struggles in life.\nThe anti-psychiatry movement was also being driven by individuals with adverse experiences of psychiatric services. This included those who felt they had been harmed by psychiatry or who felt that they could have been helped more by other approaches, including those compulsorily (including via physical force) admitted to psychiatric institutions and subjected to compulsory medication or procedures. During the 1970s, the anti-psychiatry movement was involved in promoting restraint from many practices seen as psychiatric abuses.\nThe gay rights movement continued to challenge the classification of homosexuality as a mental illness and in 1974, in a climate of controversy and activism, the American Psychiatric Association membership (following a unanimous vote by the trustees in 1973) voted (by 58%) to remove it as an illness category from the DSM, replacing it with a category of \"sexual orientation disturbance\" and then \"ego-dystonic homosexuality,\" which was deleted in 1986, although a wide variety of \"paraphilias\" remain. \nThe diagnostic label gender identity disorder (GID) was used by the DSM until its reclassification as \"gender dysphoria\" in 2013, with the release of the DSM-5. The diagnosis was reclassified to better align it with medical understanding of the condition and to remove the stigma associated with the term \"disorder\". The American Psychiatric Association, publisher of the DSM-5, stated that gender nonconformity is not the same thing as gender dysphoria, and that \"gender nonconformity is not in itself a mental disorder. The critical element of gender dysphoria is the presence of clinically significant distress associated with the condition.\" Some transgender people and researchers support declassification of the condition because they say the diagnosis pathologizes gender variance and reinforces the binary model of gender. Szasz also publicly endorsed the transmisogynist work of Janice Raymond. In a 1979 \"New York Times\" book review of Raymond's \"The Transsexual Empire\", Szasz drew connections between his ongoing critique of psychiatric diagnosis and Raymond's feminist critique of trans women.\nIncreased legal and professional protections, and a merging with human rights and disability rights movements, added to anti-psychiatry theory and action.\nAnti-psychiatry came to challenge a \"biomedical\" focus of psychiatry (defined to mean genetics, neurochemicals and pharmaceutic drugs). There was also opposition to the increasing links between psychiatry and pharmaceutical companies, which were becoming more powerful and were increasingly claimed to have excessive, unjustified and underhand influence on psychiatric research and practice. There was also opposition to the codification of, and alleged misuse of, psychiatric diagnoses into manuals, in particular the American Psychiatric Association, which publishes the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\".\nAnti-psychiatry increasingly challenged alleged psychiatric pessimism and institutionalized alienation regarding those categorized as mentally ill. An emerging consumer/survivor movement often argues for full recovery, empowerment, self-management and even full liberation. Schemes were developed to challenge stigma and discrimination, often based on a social model of disability; to assist or encourage people with mental health issues to engage more fully in work and society (for example through social firms), and to involve service users in the delivery and evaluation of mental health services. However, those actively and openly challenging the fundamental ethics and efficacy of mainstream psychiatric practice remained marginalized within psychiatry, and to a lesser extent within the wider mental health community.\nThree authors came to personify the movement against psychiatry, and two of these were practicing psychiatrists. The initial and most influential of these was Thomas Szasz who rose to fame with his book \"The Myth of Mental Illness\", although Szasz himself did not identify as an anti-psychiatrist. The well-respected R D Laing wrote a series of best-selling books, including \"The Divided Self\". Intellectual philosopher Michel Foucault challenged the very basis of psychiatric practice and cast it as repressive and controlling. The term \"anti-psychiatry\" was coined by David Cooper in 1967. In parallel with the theoretical production of the mentioned authors, the Italian physician Giorgio Antonucci questioned the basis themselves of psychiatry through the dismantling of the psychiatric hospitals\" Osservanza\" and \"Luigi Lolli\" and the liberation\u2014and restitution to life\u2014of the people there secluded.\nChallenges to psychiatry.\nCivilization as a cause of distress.\nIn recent years, psychotherapists David Smail and Bruce E. Levine, considered part of the anti-psychiatry movement, have written widely on how society, culture, politics and psychology intersect. They have written extensively of the \"embodied nature\" of the individual in society, and the unwillingness of even therapists to acknowledge the obvious part played by power and financial interest in modern Western society. They argue that feelings and emotions are not, as is commonly supposed, features of the individual, but rather responses of the individual to their situation in society. Even psychotherapy, they suggest, can only change feelings in as much as it helps a person to change the \"proximal\" and \"distal\" influences on their life, which range from family and friends, to the workplace, socio-economics, politics and culture.\nR. D. Laing emphasized family nexus as a mechanism by which individuals become victimized by those around them, and spoke about a dysfunctional society.\nInadequacy of clinical interviews used to diagnose 'diseases'.\nPsychiatrists have been trying to differentiate mental disorders based on clinical interviews since the era of Kraepelin, but now realize that their diagnostic criteria are imperfect. Tadafumi Kato writes, \"We psychiatrists should be aware that we cannot identify 'diseases' only by interviews. What we are doing now is just like trying to diagnose diabetes mellitus without measuring blood sugar.\"\nNormality and illness judgments.\nIn 2013, psychiatrist Allen Frances said that \"psychiatric diagnosis still relies exclusively on fallible subjective judgments rather than objective biological tests\".\nReasons have been put forward to doubt the ontic status of mental disorders. Mental disorders engender ontological skepticism on three levels:\nIn the scientific and academic literature on the definition or classification of mental disorder, one extreme argues that it is entirely a matter of value judgements (including of what is normal) while another proposes that it is or could be entirely objective and scientific (including by reference to statistical norms). Common hybrid views argue that the concept of mental disorder is objective but a \"fuzzy prototype\" that can never be precisely defined, or alternatively that it inevitably involves a mix of scientific facts and subjective value judgments.\nOne remarkable example of psychiatric diagnosis being used to reinforce cultural bias and oppress dissidence is the diagnosis of drapetomania. In the US prior to the American Civil War, physicians such as Samuel A. Cartwright diagnosed some slaves with drapetomania, a mental illness in which the slave possessed an irrational desire for freedom and a tendency to try to escape. By classifying such a dissident mental trait as abnormal and a disease, psychiatry promoted cultural bias about normality, abnormality, health, and unhealth. This example indicates the probability for not only cultural bias but also confirmation bias and bias blind spot in psychiatric diagnosis and psychiatric beliefs.\nIt has been argued by philosophers like Foucault that characterizations of \"mental illness\" are indeterminate and reflect the hierarchical structures of the societies from which they emerge rather than any precisely defined qualities that distinguish a \"healthy\" mind from a \"sick\" one. Furthermore, if a tendency toward self-harm is taken as an elementary symptom of mental illness, then humans, \"as a species\", are arguably insane in that they have tended throughout recorded history to destroy their own environments, to make war with one another, etc.\nPsychiatric labeling.\nMental disorders were first included in the sixth revision of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-6) in 1949. Three years later, the American Psychiatric Association created its own classification system, DSM-I. The definitions of most psychiatric diagnoses consist of combinations of phenomenological criteria, such as symptoms and signs and their course over time. Expert committees combined them in variable ways into categories of mental disorders, defined and redefined them again and again over the last half century.\nThe majority of these diagnostic categories are called \"disorders\" and are not validated by biological criteria, as most medical diseases are; although they purport to represent medical diseases and take the form of medical diagnoses. These diagnostic categories are actually embedded in top-down classifications, similar to the early botanic classifications of plants in the 17th and 18th centuries, when experts decided a priori about which classification criterion to use, for instance, whether the shape of leaves or fruiting bodies were the main criterion for classifying plants. Since the era of Kraepelin, psychiatrists have been trying to differentiate mental disorders by using clinical interviews.\nExperiments admitting \"healthy\" individuals into psychiatric care.\nIn 1972, psychologist David Rosenhan published the Rosenhan experiment, a study questioning the validity of psychiatric diagnoses. The study arranged for eight individuals with no history of psychopathology to attempt admission into psychiatric hospitals. The individuals included a graduate student, psychologists, an artist, a housewife, and two physicians, including one psychiatrist. All eight individuals were admitted with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Psychiatrists then attempted to treat the individuals using psychiatric medication. All eight were discharged within 7 to 52 days. In a later part of the study, psychiatric staff were warned that pseudo-patients might be sent to their institutions, but none were actually sent. Nevertheless, a total of 83 patients out of 193 were believed by at least one staff member to be actors. The study concluded that individuals without mental disorders were indistinguishable from those with mental disorders.\nCritics such as Robert Spitzer cast doubt on the validity and credibility of the study, but did concede that the consistency of psychiatric diagnoses needed improvement. The challenge of the validity versus the reliability of diagnostic categories continues to plague diagnostic systems. Neuroscientist Tadafumi Kato advocates for a new classification of diseases based on the neurobiological features of each mental disorder. while Austrian psychiatrist Heinz Katsching advises psychiatrists to replace the term \"mental illness\" by \"brain illness.\"\nThere are recognized problems regarding the diagnostic reliability and validity of mainstream psychiatric diagnoses, both in ideal and controlled circumstances and even more so in routine clinical practice (McGorry \"et al.\". 1995). Criteria in the principal diagnostic manuals, the DSM and ICD, are not consistent between the two manuals. Some psychiatrists in critiquing diagnostic criteria point out that comorbidity, when an individual meets criteria for two or more disorders, is the rule rather than the exception, casting doubt on the distinctness of the categories, with overlap and vaguely defined or changeable boundaries between what are asserted to be distinct disorders.\nOther concerns raised include using standard diagnostic criteria in different countries, cultures, genders or ethnic groups. Critics contend that Westernized, white, male-dominated psychiatric practices and diagnoses disadvantage and misunderstand those from other groups. For example, several studies have shown that African Americans are more often diagnosed with schizophrenia than white people, and men more than women. Some within the anti-psychiatry movement are critical of the use of diagnosis at all as it conforms with the biomedical model, seen as illegitimate.\nTool of social control.\nAccording to Franco Basaglia, Giorgio Antonucci, and Bruce E. Levine, whose approach pointed out the role of psychiatric institutions in the control and medicalization of deviant behaviors and social problems, psychiatry is used as the provider of scientific support for social control to the existing establishment, and the ensuing standards of deviance and normality brought about repressive views of discrete social groups. According to Mike Fitzpatrick, resistance to medicalization was a common theme of the gay liberation, anti-psychiatry, and feminist movements of the 1970s, but now there is actually no resistance to the advance of government intrusion in lifestyle if it is thought to be justified in terms of public health.\nIn the opinion of Mike Fitzpatrick, the pressure for medicalization also comes from society itself. As one example, Fitzpatrick claims that feminists who once opposed state intervention as oppressive and patriarchal, now demand more coercive and intrusive measures to deal with child abuse and domestic violence. According to Richard Gosden, the use of psychiatry as a tool of social control is becoming obvious in preventive medicine programs for various mental diseases. These programs are intended to identify children and young people with divergent behavioral patterns and thinking and send them to treatment before their supposed mental diseases develop. Clinical guidelines for best practice in Australia include the risk factors and signs which can be used to detect young people who are in need of prophylactic drug treatment to prevent the development of schizophrenia and other psychotic conditions.\nPsychiatry and the pharmaceutical industry.\nCritics of psychiatry commonly express a concern that the path of diagnosis and treatment in contemporary society is primarily or overwhelmingly shaped by profit prerogatives, echoing a common criticism of general medical practice in the United States, where many of the largest psychopharmaceutical producers are based.\nPsychiatric research has demonstrated varying degrees of efficacy for improving or managing a number of mental health disorders through either medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. Typical psychiatric medications include stimulants, antidepressants, anxiolytics, and antipsychotics (neuroleptics).\nOn the other hand, organizations such as MindFreedom International and World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry maintain that psychiatrists exaggerate the evidence of medication and minimize the evidence of adverse drug reaction. They and other activists believe individuals are not given balanced information, and that current psychiatric medications do not appear to be specific to particular disorders in the way mainstream psychiatry asserts; and psychiatric drugs not only fail to correct measurable chemical imbalances in the brain, but rather induce undesirable side effects. For example, though children on Ritalin and other psycho-stimulants become more obedient to parents and teachers, critics have noted that they can also develop abnormal movements such as tics, spasms and other involuntary movements. This has not been shown to be directly related to the therapeutic use of stimulants, but to neuroleptics. The diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder on the basis of inattention to compulsory schooling also raises critics' concerns regarding the use of psychoactive drugs as a means of unjust social control of children.\nThe influence of pharmaceutical companies is another major issue for the anti-psychiatry movement. As many critics from within and outside of psychiatry have argued, there are many financial and professional links between psychiatry, regulators, and pharmaceutical companies. Drug companies routinely fund much of the research conducted by psychiatrists, advertise medication in psychiatric journals and conferences, fund psychiatric and healthcare organizations and health promotion campaigns, and send representatives to lobby general physicians and politicians. Peter Breggin, Sharkey, and other investigators of the psycho-pharmaceutical industry maintain that many psychiatrists are members, shareholders or special advisors to pharmaceutical or associated regulatory organizations.\nThere is evidence that research findings and the prescribing of drugs are influenced as a result. A United Kingdom cross-party parliamentary inquiry into the influence of the pharmaceutical industry in 2005 concludes: \"The influence of the pharmaceutical industry is such that it dominates clinical practice\" and that there are serious regulatory failings resulting in \"the unsafe use of drugs; and the increasing medicalization of society\". The campaign organization \"No Free Lunch\" details the prevalent acceptance by medical professionals of free gifts from pharmaceutical companies and the effect on psychiatric practice. The ghostwriting of articles by pharmaceutical company officials, which are then presented by esteemed psychiatrists, has also been highlighted. Systematic reviews have found that trials of psychiatric drugs that are conducted with pharmaceutical funding are several times more likely to report positive findings than studies without such funding.\nThe number of psychiatric drug prescriptions have been increasing at an extremely high rate since the 1950s and show no sign of abating. In the United States antidepressants and tranquilizers are now the top selling class of prescription drugs, and neuroleptics and other psychiatric drugs also rank near the top, all with expanding sales. As a solution to the apparent conflict of interests, critics propose legislation to separate the pharmaceutical industry from the psychiatric profession.\nJohn Read and Bruce E. Levine have advanced the idea of socioeconomic status as a significant factor in the development and prevention of mental disorders such as schizophrenia and have noted the reach of pharmaceutical companies through industry sponsored websites as promoting a more biological approach to mental disorders, rather than a comprehensive biological, psychological and social model.\nElectroconvulsive therapy.\nPsychiatrists may advocate psychiatric drugs, psychotherapy or more controversial interventions such as electroshock or psychosurgery to treat mental illness. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is administered worldwide typically for severe mental disorders. Across the globe it has been estimated that approximately 1\u00a0million patients receive ECT per year. Exact numbers of how many persons per year have ECT in the United States are unknown due to the variability of settings and treatment. Researchers' estimates generally range from 100,000 to 200,000 persons per year.\nSome persons receiving ECT die during the procedure (ECT is performed under a general anesthetic, which always carries a risk). Leonard Roy Frank writes that estimates of ECT-related death rates vary widely. The lower estimates include: \nHigher estimates include:\nPolitical abuse of psychiatry.\nPsychiatrists around the world have been involved in the suppression of individual rights by states in which the definitions of mental disease have been expanded to include political disobedience. Nowadays, in many countries, political prisoners are sometimes confined and abused in mental institutions. Psychiatry possesses a built-in capacity for abuse which is greater than in other areas of medicine. The diagnosis of mental disease can serve as proxy for the designation of social dissidents, allowing the state to hold persons against their will and to insist upon therapies that work in favor of ideological conformity and in the broader interests of society. In a monolithic state, psychiatry can be used to bypass standard legal procedures for establishing guilt or innocence and allow political incarceration without the ordinary odium attaching to such political trials.\nUnder the Nazi regime in the 1940s, the \"duty to care\" was violated on an enormous scale. In Germany alone 300,000 individuals that had been deemed mentally ill, work-shy or feeble-minded were sterilized. An additional 200,000 were euthanized. These practices continued in territories occupied by the Nazis further afield (mainly in eastern Europe), affecting thousands more. From the 1960s up to 1986, political abuse of psychiatry was reported to be systematic in the Soviet Union, and to surface on occasion in other Eastern European countries such as Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia, as well as in Western European countries, such as Italy. An example of the use of psychiatry in the political field is the \"case Sabattini\", described by Giorgio Antonucci in his book \"Il pregiudizio psichiatrico\". A \"mental health genocide\" reminiscent of the Nazi aberrations has been located in the history of South African oppression during the apartheid era. A continued misappropriation of the discipline was later attributed to the People's Republic of China.\nK. Fulford, A. Smirnov, and E. Snow state: \"An important vulnerability factor, therefore, for the abuse of psychiatry, is the subjective nature of the observations on which psychiatric diagnosis currently depends.\" In an article published in 1994 by the \"Journal of Medical Ethics\", American psychiatrist Thomas Szasz stated that \"the classification by slave owners and slave traders of certain individuals as Negroes was scientific, in the sense that whites were rarely classified as blacks. But that did not prevent the 'abuse' of such racial classification, because (what we call) its abuse was, in fact, its use.\" Szasz argued that the spectacle of the Western psychiatrists loudly condemning Soviet colleagues for their abuse of professional standards was largely an exercise in hypocrisy. Szasz states that K. Fulford, A. Smirnov, and E. Snow, who correctly emphasize the value-laden nature of psychiatric diagnoses and the subjective character of psychiatric classifications, fail to accept the role of psychiatric power. He stated that psychiatric abuse, such as people usually associated with practices in the former USSR, was connected not with the misuse of psychiatric diagnoses, but with the political power built into the social role of the psychiatrist in democratic and totalitarian societies alike. Musicologists, drama critics, art historians, and many other scholars also create their own subjective classifications; however, lacking state-legitimated power over persons, their classifications do not lead to anyone's being deprived of property, liberty, or life. For instance, a plastic surgeon's classification of beauty is subjective, but the plastic surgeon cannot treat his or her patient without the patient's consent, so there cannot be any political abuse of plastic surgery.\nThe bedrock of political medicine is coercion masquerading as medical treatment. In this process, physicians diagnose a disapproved condition as an \"illness\" and declare the intervention they impose on the victim a \"treatment,\" and legislators and judges legitimate these categorizations. In the same way, physician-eugenicists advocated killing certain disabled or ill persons as a form of treatment for both society and patient long before the Nazis came to power.\nFrom the commencement of his political career, Hitler put his struggle against \"enemies of the state\" in medical rhetoric. In 1934, addressing the Reichstag, he declared, \"I gave the order\u2026 to burn out down to the raw flesh the ulcers of our internal well-poisoning.\" The entire German nation and its National Socialist politicians learned to think and speak in such terms. Werner Best, Reinhard Heydrich's deputy, stated that the task of the police was \"to root out all symptoms of disease and germs of destruction that threatened the political health of the nation\u2026 [In addition to Jews,] most [of the germs] were weak, unpopular and marginalized groups, such as gypsies, homosexuals, beggars, 'antisocials', 'work-shy', and 'habitual criminals'.\"\nIn spite of all the evidence, people ignore or underappreciate the political implications of the pseudotherapeutic character of Nazism and of the use of medical metaphors in modern democracies. Dismissed as an \"abuse of psychiatry\", this practice is a controversial subject not because the story makes psychiatrists in Nazi Germany look bad, but because it highlights the dramatic similarities between pharmacratic controls in Germany under Nazism and those that have emerged in the US under the free market economy.\nTherapeutic state.\nThe \"therapeutic state\" is a phrase coined by Szasz in 1963. The collaboration between psychiatry and government leads to what Szasz calls the \"therapeutic state\", a system in which disapproved actions, thoughts, and emotions are repressed (\"cured\") through pseudomedical interventions. Thus suicide, unconventional religious beliefs, racial bigotry, unhappiness, anxiety, shyness, sexual promiscuity, shoplifting, gambling, overeating, smoking, and illegal drug use are all considered symptoms or illnesses that need to be cured. When faced with demands for measures to curtail smoking in public, binge-drinking, gambling or obesity, ministers say that \"we must guard against charges of nanny statism\". The \"nanny state\" has turned into the \"therapeutic state\" where nanny has given way to counselor. Nanny just told people what to do; counselors also tell them what to think and what to feel. The \"nanny state\" was punitive, austere, and authoritarian, the therapeutic state is touchy-feely, supportive\u2014and even more authoritarian. According to Szasz, \"the therapeutic state swallows up everything human on the seemingly rational ground that nothing falls outside the province of health and medicine, just as the theological state had swallowed up everything human on the perfectly rational ground that nothing falls outside the province of God and religion\".\nFaced with the problem of \"madness\", Western individualism proved to be ill-prepared to defend the rights of the individual: modern man has no more right to be a madman than medieval man had a right to be a heretic because if once people agree that they have identified the one true God, or Good, it brings about that they have to guard members and nonmembers of the group from the temptation to worship false gods or goods. A secularization of God and the medicalization of good resulted in the post-Enlightenment version of this view: once people agree that they have identified the one true reason, it brings about that they have to guard against the temptation to worship unreason\u2014that is, madness.\nCivil libertarians warn that the marriage of the State with psychiatry could have catastrophic consequences for civilization. In the same vein as the separation of church and state, Szasz believes that a solid wall must exist between psychiatry and the State.\n\"Total institution\".\nIn his book \"Asylums\", Erving Goffman coined the term 'total institution' for mental hospitals and similar places which took over and confined a person's whole life. Goffman placed psychiatric hospitals in the same category as concentration camps, prisons, military organizations, orphanages, and monasteries. In \"Asylums\" Goffman describes how the institutionalization process socializes people into the role of a good patient, someone 'dull, harmless and inconspicuous'; it in turn reinforces notions of chronicity in severe mental illness.\nLaw.\nIn the US, critics of psychiatry contend that the intersection of the law and psychiatry create extra-legal entities. For example, the insanity defense, leading to detainment in a psychiatric institution versus a prison, can be worse than criminal imprisonment according to some critics, as it involves the risk of compulsory medication with neuroleptics or the use of electroshock treatment. While a criminal imprisonment has a predetermined and known time of duration, patients are typically committed to psychiatric hospitals for indefinite durations, an arguably outrageous imposition of fundamental uncertainty. It has been argued that such uncertainty risks aggravating mental instability, and that it substantially encourages a lapse into hopelessness and acceptance that precludes recovery.\nInvoluntary hospitalization.\nCritics see the use of legally sanctioned force in involuntary commitment as a violation of the fundamental principles of free or open societies. The political philosopher John Stuart Mill and others have argued that society has no right to use coercion to subdue an individual as long as they do not harm others. Research evidence regarding violent behavior by people with mental illness does not support a direct connection in most studies. The growing practice, in the United Kingdom and elsewhere, of Care in the Community was instituted partly in response to such concerns. Alternatives to involuntary hospitalization include the development of non-medical crisis care in the community.\nThe American Soteria project was developed by psychiatrist Loren Mosher as an alternative model of care in a residential setting to support those experiencing psychiatric symptoms or extreme states. The Soteria houses closed in 1983 in the United States due to lack of financial support. Similar programs were established in Europe, including in Sweden and other North European countries. In 2015, a Soteria House opened in Vermont, US.\nThe physician Giorgio Antonucci, during his activity as a director of the \"Ospedale Psichiatrico Osservanza\" of Imola in Italy from 1979 to 1996, refused any form of coercion and any violation of the fundamental principles of freedom, questioning the basis of psychiatry itself.\nPsychiatry as pseudoscience and failed enterprise.\nMany of the above issues lead to the claim that psychiatry is a pseudoscience. According to some philosophers of science, for a theory to qualify as science it needs to exhibit the following characteristics:\nPsychiatrists Colin A. Ross and Alvin Pam maintain that biopsychiatry does not qualify as a science on many counts.\nPsychiatric researchers have been criticized on the basis of the replication crisis and textbook errors. Questionable research practices are known to bias key sources of evidence.\nStuart A. Kirk has argued that psychiatry is a failed enterprise, as mental illness has grown, not shrunk, with about 20% of American adults diagnosable as mentally ill in 2013.\nAccording to a 2014 meta-analysis, psychiatric treatment is no less effective for psychiatric illnesses in terms of treatment effects than treatments by practitioners of other medical specialties for physical health conditions. The analysis found that the effect sizes for psychiatric interventions are, on average, on par with other fields of medicine.\nDiverse paths.\nSzasz has since (2008) re-emphasized his disdain for the term anti-psychiatry, arguing that its legacy has simply been a \"catchall term used to delegitimize and dismiss critics of psychiatric fraud and force by labeling them \"antipsychiatrists\"\". He points out that the term originated in a meeting of four psychiatrists (Cooper, Laing, Berke and Redler) who never defined it yet \"counter-label[ed] their discipline as anti-psychiatry\", and that he considers Laing most responsible for popularizing it despite also personally distancing himself. Szasz describes the deceased (1989) Laing in vitriolic terms, accusing him of being irresponsible and equivocal on psychiatric diagnosis and use of force, and detailing his past \"public behavior\" as \"a fit subject for moral judgment\" which he gives as \"a bad person and a fraud as a professional\".\nDaniel Burston, however, has argued that overall the published works of Szasz and Laing demonstrate far more points of convergence and intellectual kinship than Szasz admits, despite the divergence on a number of issues related to Szasz being a libertarian and Laing an existentialist; that Szasz employs a good deal of exaggeration and distortion in his criticism of Laing's personal character, and unfairly uses Laing's personal failings and family woes to discredit his work and ideas; and that Szasz's \"clear-cut, crystalline ethical principles are designed to spare us the agonizing and often inconclusive reflections that many clinicians face frequently in the course of their work\". Szasz has indicated that his own views came from libertarian politics held since his teens, rather than through experience in psychiatry; that in his \"rare\" contacts with involuntary mental patients in the past he either sought to discharge them (if they were not charged with a crime) or \"assisted the prosecution in securing [their] conviction\" (if they were charged with a crime and appeared to be prima facie guilty); that he is not opposed to consensual psychiatry and \"does not interfere with the practice of the conventional psychiatrist\", and that he provided \"listening-and-talking (\"psychotherapy\")\" for voluntary fee-paying clients from 1948 until 1996, a practice he characterizes as non-medical and not associated with his being a psychoanalytically trained psychiatrist.\nThe gay rights or gay liberation movement is often thought to have been part of anti-psychiatry in its efforts to challenge oppression and stigma and, specifically, to get homosexuality removed from the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. However, a psychiatric member of APA's Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Issues Committee has recently sought to distance the two, arguing that they were separate in the early '70s protests at APA conventions and that APA's decision to remove homosexuality was scientific and happened to coincide with the political pressure. Reviewers have responded, however, that the founders and movements were closely aligned; that they shared core texts, proponents and slogans; and that others have stated that, for example, the gay liberation critique was \"made possible by (and indeed often explicitly grounded in) traditions of antipsychiatry\".\nIn the clinical setting, the two strands of anti-psychiatry\u2014criticism of psychiatric knowledge and reform of its practices\u2014were never entirely distinct. In addition, in a sense, anti-psychiatry was not so much a demand for the end of psychiatry, as it was an often self-directed demand for psychiatrists and allied professionals to question their own judgments, assumptions and practices. In some cases, the suspicion of non-psychiatric medical professionals towards the validity of psychiatry was described as anti-psychiatry, as well the criticism of \"hard-headed\" psychiatrists towards \"soft-headed\" psychiatrists. Most leading figures of anti-psychiatry were themselves psychiatrists, and equivocated over whether they were really \"against psychiatry\", or parts thereof. Outside the field of psychiatry, however\u2014e.g. for activists and non-medical mental health professionals such as social workers and psychologists\u2014'anti-psychiatry' tended to mean something more radical. The ambiguous term \"anti-psychiatry\" came to be associated with these more radical trends, but there was debate over whether it was a new phenomenon, whom it best described, and whether it constituted a genuinely singular movement. In order to avoid any ambiguity intrinsic to the term anti-psychiatry, a current of thought that can be defined as critique of the basis of psychiatry, radical and unambiguous, aims for the complete elimination of psychiatry. The main representative of the critique of the basis of psychiatry is an Italian physician, Giorgio Antonucci, the founder of the non-psychiatric approach to psychological suffering, who posited that the \"essence of psychiatry lies in an ideology of discrimination\".\nIn the 1990s, a tendency was noted among psychiatrists to characterize and to regard the anti-psychiatric movement as part of the past, and to view its ideological history as flirtation with the polemics of radical politics at the expense of scientific thought and enquiry. It was also argued, however, that the movement contributed towards generating demand for grassroots involvement in guidelines and advocacy groups, and to the shift from large mental institutions to community services. Additionally, community centers have tended in practice to distance themselves from the psychiatric/medical model and have continued to see themselves as representing a culture of resistance or opposition to psychiatry's authority. Overall, while antipsychiatry as a movement may have become an anachronism by this period and was no longer led by eminent psychiatrists, it has been argued that it became incorporated into the mainstream practice of mental health disciplines. On the other hand, mainstream psychiatry became more biomedical, increasing the gap between professionals.\nHenry Nasrallah claims that while he believes anti-psychiatry consists of many historical exaggerations based on events and primitive conditions from a century ago, \"antipsychiatry helps keep us honest and rigorous about what we do, motivating us to relentlessly seek better diagnostic models and treatment paradigms. Psychiatry is far more scientific today than it was a century ago, but misperceptions about psychiatry continue to be driven by abuses of the past. The best antidote for antipsychiatry allegations is a combination of personal integrity, scientific progress, and sound evidence-based clinical care\".\nA criticism was made in the 1990s that three decades of anti-psychiatry had produced a large literature critical of psychiatry, but little discussion of the deteriorating situation of the mentally troubled in American society. Anti-psychiatry crusades have thus been charged with failing to put suffering individuals first, and therefore being similarly guilty of what they blame psychiatrists for. The rise of anti-psychiatry in Italy was described by one observer as simply \"a transfer of psychiatric control from those with medical knowledge to those who possessed socio-political power\".\nCritics of this view, however, from an anti-psychiatry perspective, are quick to point to the industrial aspects of psychiatric treatment itself as a primary causal factor in this situation that is described as \"deteriorating\". The numbers of people labeled \"mentally ill\", and in treatment, together with the severity of their conditions, have been going up primarily due to the direct efforts of the mental health movement, and mental health professionals, including psychiatrists, and not their detractors. Envisioning \"mental health treatment\" as violence prevention has been a big part of the problem, especially as you are dealing with a population that is not significantly more violent than any other group.\nOn October 7, 2016, the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE) at the University of Toronto announced that they had established a scholarship for students doing theses in the area of antipsychiatry. Called \"The Bonnie Burstow Scholarship in Antipsychiatry\", it is to be awarded annually to an OISE thesis student. An unprecedented step, the scholarship should further the cause of freedom of thought and the exchange of ideas in academia. The scholarship is named in honor of Bonnie Burstow, a faculty member at the University of Toronto, a radical feminist, and an antipsychiatry activist. She is also the author of \"Psychiatry and the Business of Madness\" (2015).\nSome components of antipsychiatric theory have in recent decades been reformulated into a critique of \"corporate psychiatry\", heavily influenced by the pharmaceutical industry. A recent editorial about this was published in the \"British Journal of Psychiatry\" by Moncrieff, arguing that modern psychiatry has become a handmaiden to conservative political commitments. David Healy is a psychiatrist and professor in psychological medicine at Cardiff University School of Medicine, Wales. He has a special interest in the influence of the pharmaceutical industry on medicine and academia.\nIn the meantime, members of the psychiatric consumer/survivor movement continued to campaign for reform, empowerment and alternatives, with an increasingly diverse representation of views. Groups often have been opposed and undermined, especially when they proclaim to be, or when they are labeled as being, \"anti-psychiatry\". However, as of the 1990s, more than 60 percent of ex-patient groups reportedly support anti-psychiatry beliefs and consider themselves to be \"psychiatric survivors\". Although anti-psychiatry is often attributed to a few famous figures in psychiatry or academia, it has been pointed out that consumer/survivor/ex-patient individuals and groups preceded it, drove it and carried on through it.\nCriticism.\nA schism exists among those critical of conventional psychiatry between radical abolitionists and more moderate reformists. Laing, Cooper and others associated with the initial anti-psychiatry movement stopped short of actually advocating for the abolition of coercive psychiatry. Thomas Szasz, from near the beginning of his career, crusaded for the abolition of forced psychiatry. Today, believing that coercive psychiatry marginalizes and oppresses people with its harmful, controlling, and abusive practices, many who identify as anti-psychiatry activists are proponents of the complete abolition of non-consensual and coercive psychiatry.\nCritics of antipsychiatry from within psychiatry itself object to the underlying principle that psychiatry is by definition harmful. Most psychiatrists accept that issues exist that need addressing, but that the abolition of psychiatry is harmful. Nimesh Desai concludes: \"To be a believer and a practitioner of multidisciplinary mental health, it is not necessary to reject the medical model as one of the basics of psychiatry.\" and admits \"Some of the challenges and dangers to psychiatry are not so much from the avowed antipsychiatrists, but from the misplaced and misguided individuals and groups in related fields.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39446", "revid": "43777222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39446", "title": "Agnus Dei", "text": "Christian prayer\n is the Latin name under which the \"Lamb of God\" is honoured within Christian liturgies descending from the historic Latin liturgical tradition, including those of Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism and Anglicanism. It is the name given to a specific prayer that occurs in these liturgies, and is the name given to the music pieces that accompany the text of this prayer.\nThe use of the title \"Lamb of God\" in liturgy is based on , in which St. John the Baptist, upon seeing Jesus, proclaims \"Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!\"\nLiturgical usage.\nLatin Catholic.\nThe Syrian custom of a chant addressed to the Lamb of God was introduced into the Roman Rite Mass by Pope Sergius I (687\u2013701) in the context of his rejection of the Council of Trullo of 692 (which was well received in the Byzantine East), whose canons had forbidden the iconographic depiction of Christ as a lamb instead of a man. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Latin\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014English translation\nThe verse used in the first and second invocations may be repeated as many times as necessary whilst the celebrant prepares the host and wine for communion.\nIn a Tridentine Requiem Mass, the words \" are replaced by \" (grant them rest), while \" is replaced by \" (grant them eternal rest). Virtually every Mass setting includes an .\nThe priest uses the phrase \"Lamb of God\" again, later in the Mass. While displaying the Eucharistic species to the people before giving them Holy Communion, he says: \"\" (\"Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him who takes away the sins of the world. Blessed are those called to the supper of the Lamb.\")\nLutheran.\nThe version found in the Lutheran Service Book of the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn celebrations of the Mass done in English, the following translation is employed by the Church of Sweden:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnglican.\nThe following instances are found in the Church of England's Book of Common Prayer:\nFrom \"The Litany\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom \"Holy Communion\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe following versions are found in \"Common Worship,\" the alternative Anglican liturgical resources, and also in the Episcopal Church's liturgical resources:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvangelical Protestants.\nA popular worship song among Evangelical Protestants is a reaction to the Lamb of God being seated on the throne in Revelation 5 by Michael W. Smith. This version is response of praise to scene, while the other liturgical versions are prayers.\nThe words are\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA Ukrainian translation was sung in 2015 in Lviv, Ukraine, during the War in Donbas at an event organized by Franklin Graham. The song was notably sung again on Easter 2022 in Lviv by a choir of Ukrainian refugees fleeing the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39447", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39447", "title": "Myth of Mental Illness", "text": ""}
{"id": "39448", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39448", "title": "Magnavox", "text": "American electronics company\nMagnavox (Latin for \"great voice\", often stylized as MAGNAVOX) is an American electronics brand. It was purchased by North American Philips in 1974, which was absorbed into Dutch electronics company Philips in 1987. The predecessor to Magnavox was founded in 1911 by Edwin Pridham and Peter L. Jensen, co-inventors of the moving-coil loudspeaker at their lab in Napa, California, under United States Patent number 1,105,924 for telephone receivers. Six decades later, Magnavox produced the Odyssey, the world's first home video game console.\nOn January 29, 2013, it was announced that Philips had agreed to sell its audio and video operations to the Japan-based Funai Electric for \u20ac150 million, with the audio business planned to transfer to Funai in the latter half of 2013, and the video business in 2017. As part of the transaction, Funai was to pay a regular licensing fee to Philips for the use of the Philips brand. The purchase agreement was terminated by Philips in October because of breach of contract and the consumer electronics operations remain under Philips. Philips said it would seek damages for breach of contract in the US$200-million sale. In April 2016, the International Court of Arbitration ruled in favour of Philips, awarding compensation of \u20ac135 million in the process. Magnavox brand name products were formerly made by Funai and Craig Electronics under license from trademark owner Philips.\nIn January 2025, Curtis International acquired all global rights to the Magnavox brand.\nHistory.\nJensen and Pridham founded the Commercial Wireless and Development Company in Napa, CA in 1911, moving to San Francisco, and then Oakland in 1916. In July 1917, a merger with The Sonora Phonograph Distributor Company was finalized and the Magnavox Company was born. Frank Morgan Steers was chosen as the company's first President. Jensen moved on to found the Jensen Radio Manufacturing Company in Chicago, in the late 1920s. Pridham stayed on with Magnavox, which moved manufacturing to Fort Wayne, Indiana by the 1930s. The term \"Commercial Wireless\" had a different meaning in the early days of radio and telephone. Magnavox manufactured radios, TVs, and phonographs. In the 1960s, Magnavox manufactured the first plasma displays for the military and for computer applications.\nIn 1972 Magnavox introduced the Odyssey, the first video game console. In 1974, North American Philips acquired a majority stake in the Magnavox Company, which became a wholly owned subsidiary the following year. Philips acquired the similar-sounding company Philco in 1981, and Philips was able to freely use the Philips name, alternating with the Magnavox name for some electronics, with the personal care business continuing to use the Norelco name.\nIn the late 1970s, Philips developed LaserDisc technology, producing an optically read, 12\u00a0inch disc that would contain recorded video material. In the early 1980s, Philips worked with Sony to create a standard for optical audio discs (CDs), using the technology developed for the LaserDisc.\nTeamed with Sony, Philips used the Magnavox brand name to introduce the CD-DA standard and equipment for consumer audio with the Magnavox player sold in department stores while the Sony CDP-101 went to high-end audio stores.\nDuring the late 1970s the company released the Odyssey\u00b2, in Europe also known as Philips Videopac G7000.\nIn the early 1980s, Philips merged Sylvania, Philco and Magnavox into one division headquartered in Knoxville, Tennessee, with a manufacturing plant in Greeneville, Tennessee. The Sylvania plant in Batavia, New York, was closed and all operations moved to Greeneville. Philips also abandoned the Sylvania trademark which is owned by Osram.\nIn the late 1980s, Magnavox sold the Magnavox/Philips VideoWriter with some success. Released in 1985, the VideoWriter was a standalone fixed-application word processing machine (electronic typewriter).\nPhilips Computers, primarily based in Canada, sold its products in North America under the Magnavox brand with minor rebadging in logo and color scheme of computers, monitors, peripherals and manuals. Philips exited the proprietary personal computer business in 1992. Philips sold the Greenville plant in 1997.\nIn the 1990s, several Magnavox branded CD-i players were marketed by Philips.\nStarting in the early 1990s, some Philips electronics were marketed under the brand name \"Philips Magnavox\", in an attempt to increase brand awareness of the Philips name in the United States. While it did work to a degree, it also caused confusion to the consumer as to the difference between \"Philips Magnavox\" products and \"Philips\" products, resulting in Philips marketing the two brands separately again.\nLicensing.\nThe brand also has worked with Funai with their televisions after the Philips Magnavox name was popular. Magnavox also has a brand licensing deal where several of their consumer electronics are manufactured by Craig Electronics and sold under the Magnavox brand.\nIn Australia, the rights to the Magnavox brand are not owned by Philips but by Mistral Ltd, a Hong Kong trading company that uses it to sell audio/video equipment of a different make.\nIn Europe, the brand Magnavox was briefly used in the 1990s by Philips on budget consumer electronics to replace traditional local brand names (such as Aristona, Erres, Hornyphon, Radiola, Siera). Since no one recognised the brand name, it was soon discontinued.\nDefense Electronics.\nThe defense electronics group, centered in Fort Wayne, Indiana, remained independent under the Magnavox Electronic Systems name, first under Philips and later in the Carlyle Group, until it was acquired by Hughes Electronics in 1995. The three areas of business of the MESC operation during the late 1980s and early 1990s were C-Cubed (Command, Control, and Communication), Electronic Warfare, and sonobuoys. When Hughes Electronics sold its aerospace and defense operations to Raytheon, the former Magnavox defense operations were transferred as well. Shortly thereafter, Raytheon spun off the sonobuoy operation to form Under Sea Systems Inc (USSI), in Columbia City, Indiana. In 1998, Raytheon sold USSI to a British defense consortium named Ultra Electronics. The company is now a wholly owned subsidiary of Ultra, manufacturing water and acoustic sensing and communications devices for military and civil defense.\nAmong the defense products Magnavox manufactured were the AN/ARC-164 UHF radio, AN/SSQ-53 series sonobuoys, AN/ALQ-128 EW equipment, AN/SSQ-62 series sonobuoys, and the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39449", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39449", "title": "Mikhail Bulgakov", "text": "Russian and Soviet author (1891\u20131940)\nMikhail Afanasyevich Bulgakov ( ; Russian: , 15 May\u00a0[O.S. 3 May]\u00a01891 \u2013 10 March 1940) was a Russian and Soviet novelist and playwright. His novel \"The Master and Margarita\", published posthumously, has been called one of the masterpieces of the 20th century. He also wrote the novel \"The White Guard\" and the plays \"Ivan Vasilievich\", \"Flight\" (also called \"The Run\"), and \"The Days of the Turbins\".\nSome of his works (\"Flight\", all his works between 1922 and 1926, and others) were banned by the Soviet government, and personally by Joseph Stalin, after it was decided by them that they \"glorified emigration and White generals\". On the other hand, Stalin loved Bulgakov's dramatization of \"The White Guard\", anodynely renamed \"The Days of the Turbins\". The Soviet leader reportedly attended the play at least 15 times, even calling a theater to personally demand its production after the playwright's fall from favor. Despite Stalin's intercession in this and other matters Bulgakov was only briefly successful during his lifetime. After his death, especially once the publication of \"The Master and Margarita\" had been accomplished in 1966-67, his work was reassessed. He is now widely regarded as one of the great Russian authors of the 20th century.\nLife and work.\nEarly life.\nMikhail Bulgakov was born on 15 May\u00a0[O.S. 3 May]\u00a01891 in Kiev, Kiev Governorate of the Russian Empire, at 28 Vozdvishenskaya Street, into a Russian family, and baptized on 18 May\u00a0[O.S. 6 May]\u00a01891. He was the oldest of the seven children of Afanasiy Bulgakov\u00a0\u2013 a state councilor, a professor at the Kiev Theological Academy, as well as a prominent Russian Orthodox essayist, thinker and translator of religious texts. His mother was Varvara Mikhailovna Bulgakova (\"nee\" Pokrovskaya), a former teacher at a women's gymnasium. The academician Nikolai Petrov was his godfather, while his godmother was his paternal grandmother, Olympiada.\nAfanasiy Bulgakov (1859 - 1907) was born in Oryol, Oryol Governorate, the oldest son of Ivan Avraamovich Bulgakov, a priest, and his wife Olympiada Ferapontovna. He first studied in a seminary in Oryol, and then studied in Kiev Theological Academy from 1881 to 1885, and was named a docent of the Academy in 1886. Varvara Bulgakova (1869 - 1922) was born in Karachev; her father, Mikhail Pokrovsky, was a protoiereus. Afanasiy and Varvara married in 1890. Their other children were Vera (b. 1892), Nadezhda (b. 1893), Varvara (b. 1895), Nikolai (b. 1898), Ivan (b. 1900), and Yelena (b. 1902). \nAll the children received a good education; they read the classics of Russian and European literature, studied music, and went to concerts. Mikhail played piano, sang baritone, and enjoyed opera. In particular, he enjoyed \"Faust\" by Gounod; according to his sister Nadezhda, he attended showings of \"Faust\" at least 40 times. At home, Mikhail and his siblings acted out plays that they enjoyed; the family also had a dacha in Bucha.\nIn 1900, Bulgakov was enrolled in the Second Kiev Gymasium; in 1901, Bulgakov was enrolled in the First Kiev Gymnasium, where he developed an interest in Russian and European literature (his favourite authors at the time being Gogol, Pushkin, Dostoyevsky, Saltykov-Shchedrin, and Dickens), theatre and opera. The teachers of the Gymnasium exerted a great influence on the formation of his literary taste. \nIn 1906, Afanasy Bulgakov fell ill with malignant nephrosclerosis; he died of the illness in 1907. The loss of his father caused Mikhail to turn away from the Orthodox faith. His sister Nadezhda observed that he showed a great interest in the theories of Darwin, and had turned to \"non-belief\". After Afanasy's death, Mikhail's mother, a well-educated and extraordinarily diligent person, assumed responsibility for his education.\nIn the summer of 1908, Bulgakov met Tatyana Lappa. Lappa, who lived in Saratov, had arrived in Kiev to visit her relatives; her aunt was a friend of Varvara Bulgakova and thus introduced her to the young Bulgakov. In 1909, Bulgakov began to study medicine at the Kiev University. In 1912, Lappa arrived in Kiev to study. The two married in April 1913.\nBulgakov was staying with Lappa's parents in Saratov at the outbreak of the First World War. Her mother opened a field hospital for wounded soldiers, where Bulgakov worked as a doctor. The couple returned to Kiev in the autumn. In 1916, Bulgakov graduated from the university, after which he volunteered for the Red Cross. His wife volunteered as a nurse. He first worked in Kamianets-Podilskyi, then he was transferred to Chernivtsi in the same year. In September of that year he was transferred to Moscow; and then to the village of Nikolskoye in the Smolensk Oblast. The time he spent working as a doctor would be the inspiration for his short story cycle, \"A Young Doctor's Notebook\" and his short story, \"Morphine\". \"Morphine\" is based on the author's actual addiction to morphine, which he started taking to alleviate the allergic effects of an anti-diphtheria drug, after accidentally infecting himself with the disease while treating a child with the same condition. While visiting Kiev with his wife, they received advice from Bulgakov's stepfather on countering his addiction in the form of injecting distilled water instead of morphine, which gradually helped Bulgakov to end his addiction.\nIn the autumn of 1917 he was transferred to the town of Vyazma, but left for Moscow in either November or December of that year in an unsuccessful attempt to gain a military discharge. After briefly visiting Lappa's parents in Saratov, they returned to Kiev in February 1918. Upon returning Bulgakov opened a private practice at his home at Andreyevsky Descent, 13. Here he lived through the Civil War and witnessed ten coups. Successive governments drafted the young doctor into their service while two of his brothers were serving in the White Army against the Bolsheviks.\nIn 1919, he was mobilised as an army physician by the White Army. In September 1919, Bulgakov was in Grozny with his wife. While there, he observed the fighting between the forces of Anton Denikin and Uzun-Hajji in the city of Chechen-Aul; this became part of one of his earliest works, \"Unusual Adventures\" (). There, he became seriously ill with typhus, and was bedridden for several weeks. Around this time, both his brothers Nikolai and Ivan emigrated. The family lost contact with them, and Bulgakov never saw his brothers again.\nCareer.\nBulgakov had expressed his desire to be a writer as early as 1912 or 1913, when he showed his sister Nadezhda his first attempt at a story, called \"The Fiery Serpent\" (), about an alcoholic who dies in a fit of delirium tremens, and stated to her that he planned to be a writer. According to his first wife, he first began to consistently write in Vyazma, where at night he would work on a story called \"The Green Serpent\" ().\nAfter his illness, Bulgakov abandoned his medical practice to pursue writing. Bulgakov in his autobiography wrote that he abandoned medicine for writing in early 1920; according to his friend Pavel Popov, Bulgakov abandoned medicine for good on 15 February 1920. At this time, he was in Vladikavkaz. His first book was an almanac of feuilletons called \"Future Perspectives\", written and published the same year.\nBulgakov considered emigration; he made his way to the city of Batum in 1921 to attempt to emigrate. His attempts failed; he then decided to move to Moscow and attempt a career as a writer. He arrived in Moscow in September 1921; his wife had arrived three weeks prior. He was appointed secretary to the literary section of Glavpolitprosvet, where he worked until November, when the literary section closed. He began work on a novel there, which ultimately turned into his story \"Morphine\". The story was published only once in his lifetime - in 1927. To make a living, he started working as a feuilleton writer for the newspapers \"Gudok\" and \"Nakanune\". His work \"Diaboliad\" was written in 1923.\nThe death of Bulgakov's mother from typhus on 1 February 1922 influenced the writing of \"The White Guard.\" He completed the novel in 1924. Early in 1924, Bulgakov attended a party hosted by Aleksey Tolstoy, where he met Lyubov Belozerskaya. The same year, Bulgakov divorced Tatyana Lappa. In April of the next year, he married Belozerskaya. \"The White Guard\" began serialization in 1925; he dedicated the work to Belozerskaya.\n\"The White Guard\" caught the attention of the Moscow Art Theatre. Bulgakov was invited in April 1925 to turn his work into a play, to be staged at the theater. The play was staged under the name \"The Days of the Turbins\" in October 1926, and met with success. Also in 1925 Bulgakov was approached by the Vakhtangov Theatre to write a play for them based on \"The White Guard\". Bulgakov offered to write them another play. The resulting play, \"Zoyka's Apartment\", was also staged in October 1926, and a third play, \"The Crimson Island\", was staged at the Kamerny Theatre in December 1928. His plays were popular with viewers, but attracted negative reviews from critics. \nBulgakov began work on the play \"Flight\" in 1926, and completed it in 1928. He had planned to stage it at the Moscow Art Theatre. Glavrepertkom, the government organ responsible for censoring and approving theatrical works, published a resolution on 9 May, stating that the play had been written to glorify emigration and White Army generals, and therefore, it was banned. Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko, wanting to save the play, invited Maxim Gorky, several theater critics and several members of Glaviskusstvo (Central Arts Administration) and Glavrepertkom to a reading of \"Flight\" on 9 October. Gorky, as well as most of those attending, was impressed by the play. Nemirovich-Danchenko began rehearsals the next day, with Nikolai Khmelyov, Viktor Stanitsyn, Alla Tarasova and Mark Prudkin in the main roles. However, Glavrepertkom showed \"Flight\" to Joseph Stalin, who agreed with the committee that it should be banned. \"Flight\" would only be staged again in 1957, 17 years after Bulgakov's death.\nOn 6 December 1929, Bulgakov completed his play \"The Cabal of Hypocrites\". However, the play was banned by Glavrepertkom on 18 March 1930. In despair, Bulgakov wrote personally to Joseph Stalin, requesting aid. He received a phone call directly from Stalin on 18 April, who asked him whether he really desired to leave the Soviet Union. Bulgakov replied that he did not want to leave his homeland. Stalin told him to apply for work as a director at the Moscow Art Theatre. In May 1930, he became a director at the MAT, and \"The Cabal of Hypocrites\" was permitted in October 1931 by Glavrepertkom to be staged, under the title of \"Moli\u00e8re\". Bulgakov began work on an adaptation of Gogol's \"Dead Souls\" for the stage that month. The play was complete by 1932. As with his earlier plays, it received a positive reaction among general viewers, and a negative reaction with critics.\nIn 1929, Bulgakov met Elena Shilovskaya. The two married in October 1932. Elena's younger son from her previous marriage, Sergey, came to live with them. During the last decade of his life, Bulgakov continued to work on \"The Master and Margarita\", wrote plays, critical works, and stories and made several translations and dramatisations of novels. Many of them were not published, others were \"torn to pieces\" by critics. Much of his work (ridiculing the Soviet system) stayed in his desk drawer for several decades.\nLast years.\nBulgakov began work on \"The Master and Margarita\" in either 1928 or 1929. He burnt the first draft in 1930. The first version of the novel was very different from the final version: there was no Master or Margarita, and the novel was called \"The Engineer's Hoof\" ().\nIn the late 1930s, he joined the Bolshoi Theatre as a librettist and consultant. He left after perceiving that none of his works would be produced there. Stalin's favor protected Bulgakov from arrests and execution, but he could not get his writing published. When his last play \"Batum\" (1939), a complimentary portrayal of Stalin's early revolutionary days, was banned before rehearsals, Bulgakov requested permission to leave the country but was refused.\nIn poor health, Bulgakov devoted his last years to what he called his \"sunset\" novel. The years 1937 to 1939 were stressful for Bulgakov, veering from glimpses of optimism, believing the publication of his masterpiece could still be possible, to bouts of depression, when he felt as if there were no hope. On 15 June 1938, when the manuscript was nearly finished, Bulgakov wrote in a letter to his wife:\n\"In front of me 327 pages of the manuscript (about 22 chapters). The most important remains \u2013 editing, and it's going to be hard, I will have to pay close attention to details. Maybe even re-write some things... 'What's its future?' you ask? I don't know. Possibly, you will store the manuscript in one of the drawers, next to my 'killed' plays, and occasionally it will be in your thoughts. Then again, you don't know the future. My own judgement of the book is already made and I think it truly deserves being hidden away in the darkness of some chest...\"\nIn 1939, Bulgakov organized a private reading of \"The Master and Margarita\" to his close circle of friends. Elena Bulgakova remembered 30 years later, \"When he finally finished reading that night, he said: 'Well, tomorrow I am taking the novel to the publisher!' and everyone was silent\", \"...Everyone sat paralyzed. Everything scared them. P. (P. A. Markov, in charge of the literature division of MAT) later at the door fearfully tried to explain to me that trying to publish the novel would cause terrible things\", she wrote in her diary (14 May 1939).\nIn the last month of his life, friends and relatives were constantly on duty at his bedside. On 10 March 1940, Bulgakov died from nephrotic syndrome (an inherited kidney disorder). His father had died of the same disease, and from his youth Bulgakov had guessed his future mortal diagnosis. On 11 March, a civil funeral was held in the building of the Union of Soviet Writers. Before the funeral, the Moscow sculptor Sergey Merkurov cast a death mask of his face. He was buried in the Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow.\nWorks.\nDuring his life, Bulgakov was best known for the plays he contributed to Konstantin Stanislavski's and Nemirovich-Danchenko's Moscow Art Theatre. Stalin was known to be fond of the play \"Days of the Turbins\" (\u0414\u043d\u0438 \u0422\u0443\u0440\u0431\u0438\u043d\u044b\u0445, 1926), which was based on Bulgakov's novel \"The White Guard\". Even after his plays were banned from the theatres, Bulgakov wrote a comedy about Ivan the Terrible's visit into 1930s Moscow. His play \"Batum\" (\u0411\u0430\u0442\u0443\u043c, 1939) about the early years of Stalin was prohibited by the premier himself. Bulgakov later reflected his experience of being a Soviet playwright in \"Theatrical Novel\" (\u0422\u0435\u0430\u0442\u0440\u0430\u043b\u044c\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0440\u043e\u043c\u0430\u043d, 1936, unfinished). \nHis prose remained unprinted from the late 1920s to 1961; his plays likewise remained mostly unstaged - only in 1954 would his play \"Day of the Turbins\" be staged again at the Stanislavski and Nemirovich-Danchenko Theatre. In 1962, his \"Life of Monsieur de Moli\u00e8re\" was published; in 1963, \"Notes of a Young Doctor\"; in 1965, \"Theatrical Novel\" and a collection of his plays, including \"Flight\", \"Ivan Vasilievich\", and \"The Cabal of Hypocrites\" were published; in 1966, a collection of his prose including \"The White Guard\"; and in 1967 \"The Master and Margarita\" was published.\nBulgakov began writing novels with \"The White Guard\" (\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u044f \u0433\u0432\u0430\u0440\u0434\u0438\u044f) (1923, partly published in 1925, first full edition 1927\u20131929, Paris) \u2013 a novel about a life of a White Army officer's family in civil war Kiev. In the mid-1920s, he came to admire the works of Alexander Belyaev and H. G. Wells and wrote several stories and novellas with elements of science fiction, notably \"The Fatal Eggs\" (\u0420\u043e\u043a\u043e\u0432\u044b\u0435 \u044f\u0439\u0446\u0430) (1924) and \"Heart of a Dog\" (\u0421\u043e\u0431\u0430\u0447\u044c\u0435 \u0441\u0435\u0440\u0434\u0446\u0435) (1925). He intended to compile his stories of the mid-twenties (published mostly in medical journals) that were based on his work as a country doctor in 1916\u20131918 into a collection titled \"Notes of a Young Doctor\" (\u0417\u0430\u043f\u0438\u0441\u043a\u0438 \u044e\u043d\u043e\u0433\u043e \u0432\u0440\u0430\u0447\u0430), but the book came out only in 1963.\n\"The Fatal Eggs\" tells of the events of a Professor Persikov, who, in experimentation with eggs, discovers a red ray that accelerates growth in living organisms. At the time, an illness passes through the chickens of Moscow, killing most of them, and to remedy the situation, the Soviet government puts the ray into use at a farm. Due to a mix-up in egg shipments, the Professor ends up with chicken eggs, while the government-run farm receives the shipment of ostrich, snake and crocodile eggs ordered by the Professor. The mistake is not discovered until the eggs produce giant monstrosities that wreak havoc in the suburbs of Moscow and kill most of the workers on the farm. The propaganda machine turns on Persikov, distorting his nature in the same way his \"innocent\" tampering created the monsters. This tale of a bungling government earned Bulgakov his label of counter-revolutionary.\n\"Heart of a Dog\" features a professor who implants human testicles and a pituitary gland into a dog named Sharik (means \"Little Balloon\" or \"Little Ball\" \u2013 a popular Russian nickname for a male dog). The dog becomes more and more human as time passes, resulting in all manner of chaos. The tale can be read as a critical satire of liberal nihilism and the communist mentality. It contains a few bold hints to the communist leadership; e.g. the name of the drunkard donor of the human organ implants is Chugunkin which can be seen as a parody on the name of Stalin (\"stal'\" is steel). It was adapted as a comic opera called \"The Murder of Comrade Sharik\" by William Bergsma in 1973. In 1988, an award-winning film version \"Sobachye Serdtse\" was produced by Lenfilm, starring Yevgeniy Yevstigneyev, Roman Kartsev and Vladimir Tolokonnikov.\n\"The Master and Margarita\".\nThe novel \"The Master and Margarita\" is a critique of Soviet society and its literary establishment. The work is appreciated for its philosophical undertones and for its high artistic level, thanks to its picturesque descriptions (especially of old Jerusalem), lyrical fragments and style. It is a frame narrative involving two characteristically related time periods, or plot lines: a retelling in Bulgakov's interpretation of the New Testament and a description of contemporary Moscow.\nThe novel begins with Satan visiting Moscow in the 1930s, joining a conversation between a critic and a poet debating the most effective method of denying the existence of Jesus Christ. It develops into an all-embracing indictment of the corruption of communism and Soviet Russia. A story within the story portrays the interrogation of Jesus Christ by Pontius Pilate and the Crucifixion.\nIt became the best known novel by Bulgakov. He began writing it in 1928, but the novel was finally published by his widow only in 1966, twenty-six years after his death. The book contributed a number of sayings to the Russian language, for example, \"Manuscripts don't burn\" and \"second-grade freshness\". A destroyed manuscript of the Master is an important element of the plot. Bulgakov had to rewrite the novel from memory after he burned the draft manuscript in 1930, as he could not see a future as a writer in the Soviet Union at a time of widespread political repression.\nLegacy.\nExhibitions and museums.\nMikhail Bulgakov Museum, Kyiv.\nThe Mikhail Bulgakov Museum (Bulgakov House) in Kyiv has been converted to a literary museum with some rooms devoted to the writer, as well as some to his works. This was his family home, the model for the house of the Turbin family in his play \"The Days of the Turbins\".\nThe Bulgakov Museums in Moscow.\nIn Moscow, two museums honour the memory of Mikhail Bulgakov and \"The Master and Margarita\". Both are situated in Bulgakov's old apartment building on Bolshaya Sadovaya street nr. 10, in which parts of \"The Master and Margarita\" are set. Since the 1980s, the building has become a gathering spot for Bulgakov's fans, as well as Moscow-based Satanist groups, and had various kinds of graffiti scrawled on the walls. The numerous paintings, quips, and drawings were completely whitewashed in 2003. Previously the best drawings were kept as the walls were repainted, so that several layers of different colored paints could be seen around the best drawings.\nThe Bulgakov House.\nThe Bulgakov House (Russian: \u041c\u0443\u0437\u0435\u0439 \u2013 \u0442\u0435\u0430\u0442\u0440 \"\u0411\u0443\u043b\u0433\u0430\u043a\u043e\u0432\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0414\u043e\u043c\") is situated at the ground floor. This museum has been established as a private initiative on 15 May 2004.\nThe \"Bulgakov House\" contains personal belongings, photos, and several exhibitions related to Bulgakov's life and his different works. Various poetic and literary events are often held, and excursions to \"Bulgakov's Moscow\" are organised, some of which are animated with living characters of \"The Master and Margarita\". The \"Bulgakov House\" also runs the \"Theatre M.A. Bulgakov\" with 126 seats, and the \"Caf\u00e9 302-bis\".\nThe Museum M.A. Bulgakov.\nIn the same building, in apartment number 50 on the fourth floor, is a second museum that keeps alive the memory of Bulgakov, the Museum M.A. Bulgakov (Russian: \u041c\u0443\u0437\u0435\u0439 \u041c. \u0410. \u0411\u0443\u043b\u0433\u0430\u043a\u043e\u0432). This second museum is a government initiative, and was founded on 26 March 2007.\nThe Museum M.A. Bulgakov contains personal belongings, photos, and several exhibitions related to Bulgakov's life and his different works. Various poetic and literary events are often held.\nMedical eponym.\nAfter graduating from the Medical School in 1909, he spent the early days of his career as a venereologist, rather than pursuing his goal of being a pediatrician, as syphilis was highly prevalent during those times. It was during those early years that he described the symptoms and characteristics of syphilis affecting the bones. He described the abnormal and concomitant change of the outline of the crests of the shin-bones with a pathological worm-eaten like appearance and creation of abnormal osteophytes in the bones of those suffering from later stages of syphilis. This became known as \"Bulgakov's Sign\" and is commonly used in the former Soviet states, but is known as the \"Bandy Legs Sign\" in the west.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39451", "revid": "48027336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39451", "title": "Microware", "text": "American software company\nMicroware Systems Corporation was an American software company based in Clive, Iowa, that produced the OS-9 real-time operating system.\nMicroware Systems Corporation existed as a separate entity from 1977 until September 2001, when it was bought by RadiSys Corp., and became a division of that company. The rights to Microware OS-9 and related software were purchased by a group of distributors on 1 March 2013. The new owner was Microware LP. Microware initially produced a version of BASIC and a real-time kernel for the Motorola 6800 processor, and was asked by Motorola to develop what turned into BASIC09 for the then-new Motorola 6809 processor. Having written BASIC09, they decided it needed an operating system underlying it, and they created the first version of OS-9.\nOS-9 was ported to the 68000 family of processors and, after being rewritten mostly in C, to the Intel 80x86, PowerPC, ARM, MIPS, and some of the Hitachi SuperH (SH) series processors. Initially, in the days of the SS-50 bus and SS-50C bus systems such as SWTPC, Gimix, and Smoke Signal Broadcasting, OS-9 was used more as a general purpose microcomputer operating system and had a large, active hobbyist-user population. OS-9 was also popular with industrial and embedded-system users. This was especially true when OS-9 was available for popular 6809-based computers such as the FM-7, FM-77, and the Tandy TRS-80 Color Computer and its near-clone, the Dragon. Over time, Microware concentrated on industrial customers and neglected the hobbyist base that was porting a great many Unix packages and utilities to OS-9."}
{"id": "39452", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39452", "title": "Easter Egg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39464", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39464", "title": "Jefferies tube", "text": ""}
{"id": "39467", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39467", "title": "Adam Oehlenschl\u00e4ger", "text": "Danish poet and playwright\nAdam Gottlob Oehlenschl\u00e4ger (; 14 November 1779\u00a0\u2013 20 January 1850) was a Danish poet and playwright. He introduced romanticism into Danish literature. He wrote the lyrics to the song \"Der er et yndigt land\", which is one of the national anthems of Denmark.\nBiography.\nHe was born in Vesterbro, then a suburb of Copenhagen. His father, Joachim Conrad Oehlenschl\u00e4ger (1748\u20131827) was at that time organist of Frederiksberg Church and later, keeper of the royal palace of Frederiksberg. The poet's mother Martha Marie Hansen (1745\u20131800) suffered from depression, which afterwards deepened into melancholy madness.\nOehlenschl\u00e4ger and his sister Sophie \u00d8rsted (1782\u20131818) were taught only to read and write, until their twelfth year. At the age of nine, Oehlenschl\u00e4ger began to write fluent verses. Three years later, he attracted the notice of the poet Edvard Storm (1749\u20131794) and as a result \u00d6hlenschl\u00e4ger received an introduction into Scandinavian mythology.\nOehlenschl\u00e4ger was confirmed in 1795, and was to have been apprenticed to a tradesman in Copenhagen. He also entered the stage where he was offered a small position. In 1797 he made his appearance on the boards in several successive parts, but soon discovered that he possessed no real histrionic talent. Jurist Anders Sand\u00f8e \u00d8rsted (1778\u20131860) who would later marry his sister Sophie, persuaded him to quit the theatre, and in 1800 he entered the University of Copenhagen. He was disturbed in his studies by the death of his mother, by his inveterate occupation with poetry, and finally by the First Battle of Copenhagen in April 1801, which, however, inspired a dramatic sketch (\"April the Second 1801\"), the first work of the kind by his pen that we possess.\nIn the summer of 1802, when Oehlenschl\u00e4ger had an old Scandinavian romance, as well as a volume of lyrics in the press, the young Norse philosopher, Henrik Steffens (1773\u20131845), returned to Copenhagen after a long visit to Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775\u20131854) in Germany. He was full of new romantic ideas. His lectures at the university, in which Goethe and Schiller were revealed to the Danish public for the first time, created a great sensation. Steffens and Oehlenschl\u00e4ger met one day resulting in a conversation of sixteen hours. After Oehlenschl\u00e4ger returned home, he wrote at a sitting his poem \"Guldhornene\", in a manner totally new to Danish literature. The result of his new enthusiasm speedily showed itself in a somewhat hasty volume of poems, published in 1803, now chiefly remembered as containing the piece called \"Sanct Hansaften-Spil\".\nThe next two years saw the production of several exquisite works, in particular the epic of \"Thors Reise til Jotunheim\", the poem in hexameters called \"Langelandsreisen\", and the bewitching fantasy \"Aladdin\" (1805). At the age of twenty-six, Oehlenschl\u00e4ger was universally recognised, even by the opponents of the romantic revival, as the leading poet of Denmark. He now collected his \"Poetical Writings\" in two volumes. He found no difficulty in obtaining a grant for foreign travel from the government, and he left Denmark for the first time, joining Steffens at the University of Halle in August 1805. Here he wrote the first of his great historical tragedies, \"Hakon Jarl\", which he sent off to Copenhagen, and then proceeded for the winter months to Berlin, where he associated with Wilhelm von Humboldt, Johann Gottlieb Fichte and met Goethe for the first time.\nIn the spring of 1806 he went on to Weimar, where he spent several months in daily intercourse with Goethe. Autumn of that year was passed with Tieck in Dresden, and he proceeded in December to Paris. Here he resided eighteen months and wrote his three famous masterpieces, \"Baldur hin Gode\" (1808), \"Palnatoke\" (1809), and \"Axel og Valborg\" (1810). Oehlenschl\u00e4ger had also made his own translation of \"Aladdin\" into German, adding some new material which does not appear in the 1805 edition; this revised version was published in Amsterdam in 1808. Ferruccio Busoni later used the text of this translation for the last (choral) movement of his Piano Concerto Op. 39. Later editions of Oehlenschl\u00e4ger's play do not contain this text.\nIn July 1808 he left Paris and spent the autumn and winter in Switzerland as the guest of Madame de Sta\u00ebl at Coppet, in the midst of her salon. In the spring of 1809, Oehlenschl\u00e4ger went to Rome to visit Bertel Thorvaldsen, and in his house wrote the tragedy of \"Correggio.\" He hurriedly returned to Denmark in the spring of 1810, partly to take the chair of aesthetics at the University of Copenhagen, partly to marry the sister-in-law of Knud Lyne Rahbek, to whom he had been long betrothed. His first course of lectures dealt with his Danish predecessor Johannes Ewald, the second with Schiller. From this time forward his literary activity became very great; in 1811 he published the Oriental tale of \"Ali og Gulhyndi\", and in 1812 the last of his great tragedies, \"St\u00e6rkodder\".\nFrom 1814 to 1819 his admirers were engaged in a long and angry controversy with Baggesen, who represented the old didactic school. This contest seems to have disturbed the peace of Oehlenschl\u00e4ger's mind and to have undermined his genius. His talent may be said to have culminated in the cycle of verse-romances called \"Helge\", published in 1814. The tragedy of \"Hagbarth og Signe\", (1815), showed a distinct diminution of his powers. In 1817 he returned to Paris, and published \"Hroars Saga\" and the tragedy of \"Fostbr\u00f8drene\". In 1818 he was again in Copenhagen, and wrote the idyll of \"Den lille Hyrdedreng\" and the Eddaic cycle called \"Nordens Guder\". His next productions were the tragedies of \"Erik og Abel\" (1820) and \"V\u00e6ringerne i Miklagaard\" (1826), and the epic of \"Hrolf Krake\" (1829). His last volumes were \"Tordenskjold\" (1833), \"Dronning Margrethe\" (1833), \"Sokrates\" (1835), \"Olaf den Hellige\" (1836), \"Knud den Store\" (1838), \"Dina\" (1842), \"Erik Glipping\" (1843), and \"Kiartan og Gudrun\" (1847). After his death his \"Recollections\" (1850) were published in two volumes.\nPersonal life.\nAdam Oehlenschl\u00e4ger married Christiane Georgine Elisabeth Heger (1782\u20131841) in 1810. She was the sister of Kamma Rahbek (1775\u20131829), the wife of Knud Lyne Rahbek (1760\u20131830).\nOehlenschl\u00e4ger died 20 January 1850 and was buried in the cemetery of Frederiksberg Church. \nLegacy.\nAdam Oehlenschl\u00e4ger was one of the principal pioneers of the romantic movement in Europe.\nWith the exception of Ludvig Holberg (1684\u20131754), no Danish writer before 1870 has exercised so wide an influence. \nHis work awoke among his countrymen an enthusiasm for the poetry and religion of their ancestors. \nHe supplied his countrymen with romantic tragedies at a time when all eyes were turned to the stage. \nHis plays fulfilled the stage requirements of the day, and were popular beyond all expectation. \nHe performed to an extent that his name remains to this day synonymous with Scandinavian romance.\nThe earliest are the best: Oehlenschlager's dramatic masterpiece being his first tragedy, \"Hakon Jarl\". Although his inspiration came from Germany, he is not much like a German poet, except when he is consciously following Goethe; his analogy is rather to be found among English poets than his contemporaries.\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39469", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39469", "title": "Homology group", "text": ""}
{"id": "39470", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39470", "title": "Nottingham", "text": "City and council area in Nottinghamshire, England\nNottingham ( ) is a city and unitary authority area in Nottinghamshire, East Midlands, England. It is located south-east of Sheffield and north-east of Birmingham. Nottingham is the legendary home of Robin Hood's belligerant the Sheriff of Nottingham, and to the lace-making, bicycle and tobacco industries. The city is also the county town of Nottinghamshire and the settlement was granted its city charter in 1897, as part of Queen Victoria\u2019s Diamond Jubilee celebrations.\nIn the 2021 Census, Nottingham had a reported population of 323,632. The wider conurbation, which includes many of the city's suburbs, has a population of 768,638. It is the largest urban area in the East Midlands and the second-largest in the Midlands. Its Functional Urban Area, the largest in the East Midlands, has a population of 919,484. The population of the Nottingham/Derby metropolitan area is estimated to be 1,610,000. The metropolitan economy of Nottingham is the seventh-largest in the United Kingdom with a GDP of $50.9\u00a0billion (2014). Aside from Birmingham, it is the only city in the Midlands to be ranked as a sufficiency-level world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\nNottingham is a major sporting centre and, in October 2015, was named \"Home of English Sport\". The National Ice Centre, Holme Pierrepont National Water Sports Centre and Trent Bridge international cricket ground are all based in or around the city, which is also the home of two professional football teams: Notts County, recognised as the world's oldest professional league club, and Nottingham Forest, two-time winners of the UEFA European Cup under Brian Clough in 1979 and 1980. The city has professional rugby, ice hockey and cricket teams; it also hosts the Aegon Nottingham Open, an international tennis tournament on the ATP and WTA tours. This accolade came just over a year after Nottingham was named as the UK's first \"City of Football\".\nThe city is served by Nottingham railway station and the Nottingham Express Transit tram system; its bus company, Nottingham City Transport, is the largest publicly owned bus network in England. In December 2015, Nottingham was named a 'City of Literature' by UNESCO, joining a list of 20 Cities of Literature. The title reflects Nottingham's literary heritage, with Lord Byron, D. H. Lawrence and Alan Sillitoe having links to the city, as well as a contemporary literary community, a publishing industry and a poetry scene. The city is served by three universities: the University of Nottingham, Nottingham Trent University and the Nottingham campus of the University of Law; it hosts the highest concentration of higher education providers in the East Midlands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Nottingham\" comes from the Old English \"Snotingaham\", meaning \"homestead of the Snotingas\" (that is, \"the family or followers of a man called Snot\"). The loss of the initial S is due to Norman influence. In his \"Life of King Alfred\", the Welsh cleric Asser refers to Nottingham as \"Tigguocobauc\" (modern Welsh \"T\u0177 Gogofawg\"), meaning \"cave house\". It is unclear, however, whether this is a genuine Welsh name for Nottingham or an invention of Asser's.\nHistory.\nThe history of Nottingham dates back to 919 AD, when Edward the Elder captured the settlement, subsequently building a fortress on the south bank of the Trent. Following the Norman Conquest, William the Conqueror built a castle in Nottingham, which he entrusted to William Peverel.\nThe Anglo-Saxon settlement was originally confined to the area today known as the Lace Market and was surrounded by a substantial defensive ditch and rampart. The ditch had fallen out of use and been filled in by the time of the Domesday Book (1086). Following the Norman Conquest, the Saxon settlement developed into the \"English Borough\" of Nottingham. A \"French Borough\" also developed around the castle on the hill opposite. Eventually, the space between was built on as the town grew and the Old Market Square became the focus of Nottingham. Defences consisted initially of a ditch and bank in the early 12th century. The ditch was later widened, in the mid-13th century, and a stone wall built around much of the perimeter of the town. A short length of the wall survives, and is visible at the northern end of Maid Marian Way, and is protected as a Scheduled Monument.\nOn the return of Richard the Lionheart from the Crusades in 1194, the castle was occupied by supporters of Prince John, including the Sheriff of Nottingham. It was besieged by Richard and, after a sharp conflict, was captured. In the legends of Robin Hood, Nottingham Castle is the scene of the final showdown between the sheriff and the hero outlaw.\nDuring the Black Death of 1349, it is believed that approximately 60% of Nottingham's population died, but that migration from other parts of England helped begin the process of population recovery.\nBy the 15th century, Nottingham had established itself as the centre of a thriving export trade in religious sculpture made from Nottingham alabaster. During the late medieval period Nottingham alabasters were exported as far afield as Iceland, and may be one reason why a small number of Icelandic immigrants lived in Nottingham during the 15th century. The town became a county corporate in 1449 giving it effective self-government, in the words of the charter, \"for eternity\". The Castle and Shire Hall were expressly excluded and remained as detached parishes of Nottinghamshire.\nOne of those highly impressed by Nottingham in the late 18th century was the German traveller C. P. Moritz, who wrote in 1782, \"Of all the towns I have seen outside London, Nottingham is the loveliest and neatest. Everything had a modern look, and a large space in the centre was hardly less handsome than a London square. A charming footpath leads over the fields to the highway, where a bridge spans the Trent. \u2026 Nottingham \u2026 with its high houses, red roofs and church steeples, looks excellent from a distance.\"\nDuring the Industrial Revolution, much of Nottingham's prosperity was founded on the textile industry; in particular, the city became an internationally important centre of lace manufacture. In 1831 citizens rioted in protest against the Duke of Newcastle's opposition to the Reform Act 1832, setting fire to his residence on the site of Nottingham Castle.\nIn common with the British textile industry, Nottingham's textile sector fell into decline in the decades following the Second World War. Little textile manufacture now takes place in Nottingham; however, many of the former industrial buildings in the Lace Market district have been restored and put to new uses.\nNottingham was one of the boroughs reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, and at that time consisted of the parishes of St Mary, St Nicholas and St Peter. It was expanded in 1877 by the addition of the parishes of Basford, Brewhouse Yard, Bulwell, Radford, Sneinton, Standard Hill, and parts of the parishes of West Bridgford, Carlton, Wilford (North Wilford). In 1889 Nottingham became a county borough under the Local Government Act 1888. City status was awarded as part of Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee celebrations, being conveyed in a letter from the prime minister, the Marquess of Salisbury to the mayor, dated 18 June 1897. The city was enlarged in 1933 by the addition of Bilborough and Wollaton, parts of the parishes of Bestwood Park and Colwick, and a recently developed part of the Beeston Urban District. A further boundary extension occurred in 1951, when Clifton and Wilford (south of the River Trent) were incorporated into the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nElectric trams were introduced to the city in 1901; they served the city for 35 years until 1936. Trams were reintroduced after 68 years when a new network opened in 2004.\nIn the sporting world, Nottingham is home to the world's oldest professional football club, Notts County, which was formed in 1862. The town's other football club, Nottingham Forest, had a period of success between 1977 and 1993 under manager Brian Clough, winning the First Division, four League Cups, a UEFA Super Cup and two European Cups. During this time Forest signed Trevor Francis, Britain's first \u00a31\u00a0million footballer, who joined the club in February 1979 from Birmingham City.\nThe city was the site of race riots in 1958, centred on the St Ann's neighbourhood.\nDuring the second half of the 20th century Nottingham saw urban growth with the development of new public and private housing estates and new urban centres, which have engulfed former rural villages such as Bilborough, Wollaton, Gedling and Bramcote. South of the river there has also been expansion with new areas such as Edwalton and West Bridgford, adding to Nottingham's urban sprawl. Although this growth slowed towards the end of the century, the modern pressures for more affordable and council housing is back on the political agenda and there is now pressure on the green belt which surrounds the city.\nGovernment.\nLocal government.\nNottingham City Council is a unitary authority, and is based at Loxley House on Station Street. It consists of 55 councillors, representing 20 wards, who are elected every four years; the last elections being held on 4 May 2023. The council is independent of Nottinghamshire County Council but work with them for local developments and other matters. Nottingham, though, remains the county town of Nottinghamshire even though the county hall is in the neighbouring town of West Bridgford where the county council is based.\nThe city also has a Lord Mayor who is selected by city councillors from among themselves. The position is largely ceremonial but the Lord Mayor also acts as Chair of Full Council meetings.\nThe City of Nottingham's boundaries are tightly drawn and exclude several suburbs and towns that are usually considered part of Greater Nottingham. Unlike the city, these areas are governed by a two tier system of local government. Nottinghamshire County Council is based at the county hall. It provides the upper tier of local government whilst the lower tier is split into several district or borough councils. The County Council are responsible for Health, Social Care, Education, Highways, Transport, Libraries and Trading Standards, whilst the lower tier councils are responsible for local planning, neighbourhood services, housing, licensing, environmental health and leisure facilities. The towns of Beeston, Stapleford and Eastwood are administered by Broxtowe Borough Council. Further west still, the Nottingham urban district extends into Derbyshire where Ilkeston and Long Eaton are administered by Erewash Borough Council, and Ripley by Amber Valley. To the north, Hucknall is governed by Ashfield District Council, while in the east Arnold and Carlton form part of the Borough of Gedling. South of the river, the town of West Bridgford lies in Rushcliffe, as do the outlying villages of Ruddington and Tollerton and the town of Bingham.\nUK Parliament.\nNottingham has three UK parliamentary constituency seats within its boundaries. Nottingham North has been represented since 2017 by Labour Member of Parliament (MP) Alex Norris, Nottingham East since 2019 by Labour MP Nadia Whittome and Nottingham South since 2010 by Labour MP Lilian Greenwood. Each of the outer districts (Broxtowe, Ashfield, Gedling and Rushcliffe) are also parliamentary constituencies in their own right although the parliamentary constituency boundaries do not align with the boundaries of the council districts of which they share their name.\nGeography.\nNottingham is situated on an area of low hills along the lower valley of the River Trent, and is surrounded by the Sherwood Forest in the north, the Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Yorkshire Coalfield in the west, and the Trent and Belvoir Vales in the east and south.\nWithin the city, native wildlife includes red fox, peregrine falcon and common kingfisher. Notable nature reserves around the city include Attenborough Nature Reserve SSSI, Sherwood Forest National Nature Reserve, Holme Pit SSSI, Fairham Brook Local Wildlife Site and Wollaton Park. Due to its position as a central city with strong transport links, Nottingham has become home to invasive animal and plant species including rose-ringed parakeet, Japanese knotweed and Himalayan balsam.\nIn 2017 it was reported that Nottingham was one of a number of UK cities that broke WHO air pollution guidelines for the maximum concentration of small particulate matter; the pollution in part being caused by harmful wood-burning stoves.\nNottingham is bounded by a green belt area, provisionally drawn up from the 1950s. Completely encircling the city, it extends for several miles into the surrounding districts, as well as towards Derby.\nWithin the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAround the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nLike most of the United Kingdom, Nottingham has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfb) and experiences warm mild summers and mild to cool winters with abundant precipitation throughout the year. There are two weather-reporting stations close to Nottingham: the former \"Nottingham Weather Centre\", at Watnall, about northwest of the city centre; and the University of Nottingham's agricultural campus at Sutton Bonington, about southwest of the city centre. The highest temperature recorded in Nottingham (Watnall) stands at , whilst Sutton Bonington recorded a temperature of , both recorded on 19 July 2022, and the record-high minimum temperature is recorded on 20 July 2022. On average, a temperature of or above is recorded on 11 days per year, whilst a temperature of is recorded at least 1 day per year at Watnall for the period of 1991\u20132020, and the warmest day of the year reaches an average of .\nFor the period 1991\u20132020 Nottingham (Watnall) recorded on average 36.9 days of air frost per year, and Sutton Bonington 42.2. The lowest recorded temperature in Nottingham (Watnall) is recorded on 23 January 1963 and 13 January 1987, whilst a temperature of was recorded in Sutton Bonington on 24 February 1947. The record-low maximum temperature is recorded in January 1963. For the period of 1991\u20132020, the coldest temperature of the year reaches an average of in Nottingham (Watnall).\nCity centre.\nThe city centre of Nottingham is usually defined as the Old Market Square. The square is dominated by the Council House, which was built in the 1920s to replace the Nottingham Exchange. The Council House has baroque columns and two stone lion statues in the front to stand watch over the square. The Exchange Arcade, on the ground floor, is a shopping centre.\nTall office buildings line Maid Marian Way. The Georgian area around Oxford and Regent Streets is dominated by small professional firms. The Albert Hall faces the Gothic revival St Barnabas' Roman Catholic Cathedral by Pugin. Nottingham Castle and its grounds are located further south in the western third of the city. The central third descends from the university district in the north, past Nottingham Trent University's Gothic revival Arkwright Building. The university also owns many other buildings in this area. The Theatre Royal on Theatre Square, with its pillared fa\u00e7ade, was built in 1865. King and Queen Streets are home to striking Victorian buildings designed by such architects as Alfred Waterhouse and Watson Fothergill.\nThe canal-side to the south of the city is adjacent to Nottingham railway station and home to multiple repurposed (as bars and restaurants) 19th-century industrial buildings.\nThe eastern third of the city contains Hockley Village, with specialist and independent shops. The Victoria Centre is also in the area; it was built in the 1970s on the demolished Victoria railway station site. All that remains of the old station is the station hotel and clock tower. The 250-foot-high Victoria Centre flats stand above the shopping centre and are the tallest buildings in the city.\nLace Market.\nThe Lace Market area just south of Hockley has streets with four- to seven-storey red brick warehouses, iron railings and red phone boxes.\nMany of the buildings have been converted into apartments, bars and restaurants. The largest building in the Lace Market is the Adams Building, built by Thomas Chambers Hine for Thomas Adams (1807\u20131873), and currently used by Nottingham College. The Georgian-built Shire Hall, which was once Nottingham's main court and prison building, is now home to the National Justice Museum (formerly the \"Galleries of Justice\").\nPublic houses.\nYe Olde Trip To Jerusalem (the Trip), partially built into the cave system beneath Nottingham Castle, is a contender for the title of England's Oldest Pub, as it is supposed to have been established in 1189.\nThe Bell Inn in the Old Market Square, and Ye Olde Salutation Inn (the Salutation) in Maid Marian Way have both disputed this claim. The Trip's current timber building probably dates back to the 17th or 18th century, but the caves are certainly older and may have been used to store beer and water for the castle during medieval times. There are also caves beneath the Salutation that date back to the medieval period, although they are no longer used as beer cellars. The Bell Inn is probably the oldest of the three pub buildings still standing, according to dendrochronology, and has medieval cellars that are still used to store beer.\nEducation.\nAlmost 62,000 students attend the city's three universities, Nottingham Trent University, the University of Law and the University of Nottingham; in the 2016/17 academic year, Trent University was attended by 29,370 students and Nottingham University by 32,515. The University of Nottingham Medical School is part of the Queen's Medical Centre.\nThere are three colleges of further education located in Nottingham: Bilborough College is solely a sixth form college; Nottingham College was formed in 2017, by the amalgamation of Central College Nottingham and New College Nottingham (which had both previously formed from the merger of smaller FE colleges); and the Confetti Institute of Creative Technologies, owned by Nottingham Trent University, is a further education college that specialises in media. The city has dozens of sixth form colleges and academies, providing education and training for adults aged over sixteen.\nNottingham also has a number of independent schools. The city's oldest educational establishment is Nottingham High School, a day school which was founded in 1513. The school was previously boys-only, however became co-educational in 2015. Nottingham Girls' High School is another independent school, however girls-only. Founded in 1875, it is now part of the Girls' Day School Trust (GDST).\nMuseums.\nThe city contains several notable museums including:\nIn 2015, the National Videogame Arcade was opened in the Hockley area of the city; being \"the UK's first cultural centre for videogames\". It was announced in June 2018 that the arcade was soon to close and relocate to Sheffield city centre, where it reopened in November 2018 as the National Videogame Museum.\nEconomy.\nNottingham is the East Midlands' largest economy. The headquarters of several large companies are based in the city: these include Alliance Boots (formerly Boots the Chemists); Chinook Sciences; GM (cricket bats); Pedigree Petfoods; VF Corporation (American clothing); Changan Automobile (Chinese-made automobiles); the credit reference agency Experian; energy company E.ON Energy UK; betting company Gala Bingo; amusement and gambling machine manufacturer Bell-Fruit-Games; engineering company Siemens; sportswear manufacturers Speedo; high-street opticians Vision Express and Specsavers; games and publishing company Games Workshop; PC software developer Serif Europe (publisher of PagePlus and other titles); web hosting provider Heart Internet; the American credit card company Capital One; the national law firm Browne Jacobson; and Earache Records, an independent music company founded by local resident Digby Pearson, based on Handel Street in Sneinton. Nottingham also has offices of Nottingham Building Society (established 1849); HM Revenue &amp; Customs; the Driving Standards Agency; Ofsted; the Care Quality Commission and BBC East Midlands. The schools and aerial photographers, H Tempest Ltd, were Nottingham-based for many years, until relocating to St Ives, Cornwall January 1959.\nNottingham was named one of the UK's six science cities in 2005 by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown. Among the science-based industries within the city is BioCity. Founded as a joint venture between Nottingham Trent University and the University of Nottingham, it is the UK's biggest bioscience innovation and incubation centre, housing around 80 science-based companies. In 2010, Nottingham City Council announced that the target sectors of their economic development strategy would include low-carbon technologies; digital media; life sciences; financial and business services; and retail and leisure.\nThe city formerly had a major bicycle manufacturing industry sector. Raleigh Bicycle Company was established in 1886 and Sturmey-Archer, the developer of three-speed hub gears, was also founded in the city. Raleigh's factory on Triumph Road, famous as the filming location of \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\", was demolished in 2003 to make way for the University of Nottingham Jubilee Campus's expansion.\nIn 2015, Nottingham was ranked in the top 10 UK cities for job growth (from 2004 to 2013), in the public and private sectors. and in the same year, it was revealed that more new companies were started in Nottingham in 2014\u201315 than in any other UK city, with a 68% year-on-year increase. In 2017, Nottingham came seventh in Harper Dennis Hobbes's Top 50 British Centres, behind the West End of London, Glasgow, Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds and Liverpool.\nRetail.\nThe Bridlesmith Gate area has numerous designer shops, one being the original Paul Smith boutique. There are various specialist shops and small businesses in side streets and alleys: notable streets include Poultry Walk, West End Arcade and Hurts Yard and Derby Road (the latter once known for antiques). Smaller shopping areas in the city are the older Flying Horse Walk, The Exchange Arcade, Hockley and newer Trinity Square and The Pod.\nNottingham's Victoria Centre is the city's main retail shopping centre: it was the first to be built in the city and was developed on the site of the former Nottingham Victoria railway station.\nEnterprise zone.\nIn March 2011, the government announced the creation of Nottingham Enterprise Zone, an enterprise zone sited on part of the Boots Estate. In March 2012, Nottingham Science Park, Beeston Business Park and Nottingham Medipark were added to the zone. In December 2014, the government announced that the zone would be expanded again, to include Infinity Park Derby, a planned business park for aerospace, rail and automotive technology adjacent to the Rolls-Royce site in Sinfin, Derby.\nCreative Quarter.\nThe Creative Quarter is a project started by Nottingham City Council as part of the Nottingham City Deal. Centred on the east of the city (including the Lace Market, Hockley, Broadmarsh East, the Island site and BioCity), the project aims at creating growth and jobs. In July 2012, the government contributed \u00a325million towards a \u00a345million venture capital fund, mainly targeted at the Creative Quarter.\nCulture.\nLibrary.\nNottingham Central Library opened in November 2023 at a cost of more than \u00a310 million and provides books, computer access and other public services.\nArt Galleries.\nGalleries include Nottingham Contemporary art centre in the Lace Market, opened in 2009, and New Art Exchange contemporary art gallery, the largest in the UK dedicated to showing diverse artists, opened in 2008.\nPublic art.\nNottingham has a range of public artworks across the city, largely from the twentieth century. These include traditional statues such as \"Robin Hood\" by James Woodford, and Lee Johnson's statue of Brian Clough. Contemporary artwork includes Anish Kapoor's \"Sky Mirror\" at Nottingham Playhouse, and \"Aspire\" by Ken Shuttleworth at the University of Nottingham. In 2018 the site of Lenton Priory was declared a sculpture park and three new artworks commissioned on the site. These include 'Lenton Priory Stone' by James Winnet based the carvings on the 12th century Norman baptismal font from the Priory, and the 'Lenton Priory Pillars' by Adrian Riley.\nVenues.\nNottingham has two large-capacity theatres, the Nottingham Playhouse and the Theatre Royal, which together with the neighbouring Royal Concert Hall forms the Royal Centre. The city also contains smaller theatre venues such as the Nottingham Arts Theatre, the Lace Market Theatre, New Theatre and Nonsuch Studios.\nThere is a Vue International and a Showcase in the city. Independent cinemas include the Arthouse Broadway Cinema in Hockley, and the four-screen Art Deco Savoy Cinema.\nNottingham has several large music and entertainment venues including the Royal Concert Hall, Rock City, Nottingham Royal Concert Hall (2,500-capacity) and the Nottingham Arena (Social centre). Nottingham's City Ground played host to rock band R.E.M with Idlewild and The Zutons supporting in 2005, the first time a concert had been staged at the football stadium.\nNottingham also has a selection of smaller venues, including the Albert Hall (800-capacity), Ye Olde Salutation Inn, Malt Cross, Rescue Rooms, the Bodega, the Old Angel, the Central, the Chameleon and the Corner.\nMusic.\n1960s blues-rock band Ten Years After formed in Nottingham, as did the 1970s pop act Paper Lace, the Tindersticks, electronic music groups Stereo MC's, Bent, and Crazy P, as well as folk singer Anne Briggs. Since the beginning of the 2010s, the city has produced a number of artists to gain media attention, including; Sleaford Mods, Jake Bugg, London Grammar, Indiana, Bru-C, Saint Raymond, Childhood, Kagoule, Rue Royale, Spotlight Kid, Divorce, and Amber Run.\nNottingham is home to Earache Records, a large independent record label setup in Nottingham in 1986 and home to artists such as Napalm Death, Carcass, Entombed and Rival Sons.\nThe city has an active classical music scene, with long-established ensembles such as the city's Symphony Orchestra, Philharmonic Orchestra, Nottingham Harmonic Society, Bach Choir, Early Music Group Musica Donum Dei and the Symphonic Wind Orchestra giving regular performances in the city. The Sumac Centre is a social centre in Forest Fields.\nNottingham is known for its hip-hop scene. Audio Recording Studios opened in 2013, on the site of a former square known as \"Milk Square\" which was known to have hosted musicians, bands and orchestras in the 1800s. Since opening, the studios have hosted musicians and actors from various places including involvement in Hollywood films, and British rock band Spiritualized's album And Nothing Hurt. The studios are a base for rapper and producer Sway Dasafo's New Reign Productions and Jake Bugg's manager, Jason Hart. The rock band Church of the Cosmic Skull are from Nottingham.\nAnnual events.\nWollaton Park in Nottingham hosts an annual family-friendly music event called Splendour. In 2009 it was headlined by Madness and the Pogues. The following year it was headlined by the Pet Shop Boys and featured, among others, Calvin Harris, Noisettes, Athlete and OK Go. In 2011, it featured headline acts Scissor Sisters, Blondie, Eliza Doolittle and Feeder. In 2012, performers included Dizzee Rascal, Razorlight, Katy B and Hard-Fi. In 2014, Wollaton Park hosted the first-ever No Tomorrow Festival, featuring artists including Sam Smith, London Grammar and Clean Bandit.\nNottingham holds several multicultural events throughout the year. The city has hosted an annual Asian Mela every summer since about 1989, there is a parade on St Patrick's Day, fireworks for the Chinese New Year, Holi in the Park to celebrate the Hindu spring festival, a West Indian-style carnival which takes place in summer, and several Sikh events.\nThe city is particularly famous for its annual Goose Fair, a large travelling funfair held at the Forest Recreation Ground at the beginning of October every year. Established over 700 years ago, the fair was originally a livestock market where thousands of geese were sold in the Old Market Square, but the modern-day Goose Fair is known for its fairground rides and attractions.\nSince the late 1990s, Nottinghamshire Pride has organised an annual pride parade, a day-long celebration that usually takes place in the city in July.\nFood and drink.\nThere are more than three hundred restaurants in Nottingham, with several AA Rosette winners (as of 2018[ [update]]). City-centre restaurant, Ib\u00e9rico World Tapas, was awarded a Bib Gourmand in the 2013 Michelin Guide. There are also two Michelin-starred restaurants: Alchemilla in the city centre has one star; and Restaurant Sat Bains with Rooms, on the edge of the city near Clifton Bridge, has two Michelin stars. There were five other Nottingham restaurants recommended in the Michelin Guide in 2020. Nottingham is recognised as one of the UK's most vegan-friendly cities, and it is where Veggies of Nottingham was founded in 1984. The Nottingham City Council in 2024 announced it had switched to all plant-based catering, following similar changes by other councils including Oxfordshire County Council and Cambridge City Council.\nTourism.\nIn 2010, Nottingham was named as one of the \"Top 10 Cities to Visit in 2010\" by DK Travel. Nottingham was ranked number one for the 'Best Value City Break' in August 2017 by TripAdvisor. According to the Scarborough Tourism Economic Activity Monitor (STEAM) report, tourism in Nottingham city was valued at \u00a3628\u00a0million in 2017, an increase of 4.1% over the 2016 figure of \u00a3604\u00a0million.\nMany local businesses and organisations use the worldwide fame of Robin Hood to represent or promote their brands. The Robin Hood Pageant takes place in Nottingham each year and has been rebranded Robin Hood Live for 2020. The city is home to the Nottingham Robin Hood Society, founded in 1972 by Jim Lees and Steve and Ewa Theresa West. Sherwood Forest County Park is a Natural Nature Reserve spanning in the county of Nottinghamshire only north of Nottingham. This grand forest has been a part of great history for centuries, showing evidence of use by prehistoric hunters and gatherers. It is even said that the legendary Robin Hood of the 1200s has set foot here and hid near the Major Oak, referred to as the 1,000-year-old giant tree. Today, Sherwood Forest Visitor Centre &amp; Nature Reserve is internationally recognised, with annual visitors reaching around 350,000.\nEach February Nottingham celebrates Light Night, with dozens of free creative events illuminating the city. The city has also hosted the Nottingham Cave Festival, Nottingham Puppet Festival, The Nottingham Festival of Science and Curiosity, plus a series of outdoor film and theatre performances at historical locations throughout the summer.\nIn February 2008, a Ferris wheel was put up in the Old Market Square. The wheel returned to Nottingham in February 2009 to mark another night of lights, activities, illuminations and entertainment. Initially marketed as the Nottingham Eye, it was later redubbed as the Nottingham Wheel, to avoid any association with the London Eye.\nSport.\nFootball.\nNottingham is home to professional football club EFL League Two club Notts County, and Premier League club Nottingham Forest is named after the city but is located in nearby town West Bridgford. Their two football grounds, facing each other on opposite sides of the River Trent, are noted for geographically being the closest in English league football. Notts County, formed in 1862, is the oldest professional football club in the world. It was also among the Football League's founder members in 1888. For most of its history the team have played their home games at Meadow Lane, which currently holds some 20,000 spectators, all seated. They currently play in League Two of the English Football League (most recently played at Level 1 in May 1992).\nNottingham Forest, who currently play in the Premier League, were Division One English League champions in 1978 and won the European Cup twice over the next two seasons under the management of Brian Clough, who was the club's manager from January 1975 to May 1993, leading them to four Football League Cup triumphs in that time. They have played at the City Ground, on the south bank of the River Trent, since 1898. Nottingham Forest joined the Football League in 1892, four years after its inception when it merged with the rival Football Alliance, and 100 years later, they were among the FA Premier League's founder members in 1992\u2014though they had not played top division football from May 1999 until their promotion from the Level 2 EFL Championship in the 2021/2022 season, 23 years later. The City Ground played host to group stage games in the 1996 European Football Championships.\nNottingham won the title of 2015 City of Football after five months of campaigning, which resulted in \u00a31.6m in funding for local football ventures and to encourage more people to play the sport. Nottingham was selected to be a host city for the England 2018 FIFA World Cup bid. It was proposed that if the bid were successful, the city would have received a new Nottingham Forest Stadium.\nOther sports.\nNottinghamshire County Cricket Club is based at Trent Bridge, a test cricket ground that was one of the venues for the 2009 ICC World Twenty20 tournament. Nottinghamshire won the 2010 County Championship.\nThe rugby union team, Nottingham R.F.C., competes in the RFU Championship, playing their home games at the Nottinghamshire Sports Club in the Lady Bay area of the city. The Nottingham Outlaws are an amateur rugby league team that plays in the Yorkshire Men's League. The Nottingham Caesars are the city's American football club, playing their games at the Harvey Hadden Stadium in the Bilborough area of Nottingham.\nThe city was the birthplace and training location for Torvill and Dean, who won gold medals in ice dance at the 1984 Sarajevo Olympics. The National Ice Centre, which first opened in 2000, is the home base of the Nottingham Panthers ice hockey team, and hosts an array of winter sporting events including the UK Speed Skating Championships. The plaza at the front of the ice centre is named \"Bolero Square\" after Torvill and Dean's gold medal-winning performance.\nOther sporting events in the city include the annual Nottingham Trophy tennis tournament (staged at the Nottingham Tennis Centre), the \"Robin Hood\" Marathon and the Outlaw Triathlon.\nThere are a number of field hockey clubs based in and around Nottingham that are part of the men's and women's national league, the Midlands Hockey League and the BUCS league structures. Current hockey clubs in and around the area are Beeston, Boots, Mansfield, Nottingham, Nottingham Players, Sikh Union (Nottingham), South Nottingham, West Bridgford, Nottingham Trent University and University of Nottingham. Some clubs are based at the Nottingham Hockey Centre.\nNottingham has two roller derby leagues: Nottingham Roller Derby (formerly Nottingham Roller Girls, formed 2010, and home to the Super Smash Brollers from 2013 to 2020) and East Midlands Open Roller Derby (formed 2020, after the Super Smash Brollers team left the Nottingham Roller Derby banner to become a new, standalone league). The Nottingham Hellfire Harlots were a WTFDA-ranked league from 2010 to 2023. They announced their disbanding on 3 August 2023, citing the difficulties with continuing to run a grassroots sports team.\nIn October 2015, Nottingham was named as the official Home of Sport by VisitEngland, for its sporting contributions and in recognition of its development of football, cricket, field hockey, ice hockey, boxing, tennis, athletics, gymnastics, and water sports.\nTransport.\nAir.\nNottingham is served by East Midlands Airport (formerly known as \"Nottingham East Midlands Airport\", until it reverted to its original name), near Castle Donington in north-west Leicestershire, just less than south-west of the city centre. Another airport also serving Nottingham being Nottingham City Airport, located in Tollerton, Nottinghamshire, England. It is situated southeast of Nottingham City Centre.\nTrams.\nThe reintroduction of trams in 2004 made Nottingham one of only nine English cities to have a light rail system. As of May 2025, trams ran either from the city centre to Hucknall in the north to Totton Lane in the south, or between Phoenix Park park and ride and Clifton.\nRailways.\nNottingham railway station, formerly \"Nottingham Midland\", provides access to rail services for the city; trains are operated by CrossCountry, East Midlands Railway and Northern. It is the only remaining station in the city centre and is the second-busiest railway station in the Midlands for passenger entries and exits.\nNottingham was an important interchange for many railways and mineral lines which served the city, its suburbs and the collieries around the city. The city once had five other railway stations:\nBuses.\nNottingham is served by a municipal bus company, Nottingham City Transport (NCT), which is the biggest transport operator in the city with 330 buses. NCT has won five \"UK Bus Operator of the Year\" awards, most recently in 2019. The former Broadmarsh shopping centre and multi-storey car park was demolished in the early 2020s; the car park was rebuilt to include a bus station and library, while the centre was demolished and plans to be landscaped into an urban park.\nRoads.\nIn April 2012, Nottingham became the first city in the UK to introduce a workplace parking levy. The levy charges businesses \u00a3350 on each parking space made available to their employees, provided that the business has more than ten such parking spaces. The council have used the revenue of around \u00a310 million a year to develop the city's tram system. There has been a 9% reduction in traffic and 15% increase in public transport use since the introduction of the levy.\nIn September 2010, Nottingham was named \"England's least car-dependent city\" by the Campaign for Better Transport with London, Brighton and Manchester in second, third and fourth place, respectively.\nScooter hire.\nNottingham was one of several trial locations arranged by the Department for Transport to facilitate local journeys by electric scooters. Started in October 2020 together with Derby City Council, in December 2023 the trial was extended until 2026. Riders must be 18 years of age minimum, hold a full provisional driving licence, must ride on roads and bus lanes only, not pedestrian footways, and pay by mobile-phone app.\nIn late December 2023, the partner-business, US-based Superpedestrian, planned to cease trading by 31 December, and the scooters were withdrawn from their city centre locations. Nottingham City Council are to seek a new provider to continue the scheme.\nWaterways.\nNottingham's waterways, now primarily used for leisure, were used extensively for transportation in the past.\nPublic services.\nEmergency.\nFire and rescue services are provided by Nottinghamshire Fire and Rescue Service, and emergency medical care by East Midlands Ambulance Service, both of which have their headquarters in Nottingham. There are two major National Health Service hospitals in Nottingham, the Queen's Medical Centre (QMC) and Nottingham City Hospital, both managed by the Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust. The QMC is a teaching hospital with close connections to the Medical School at Nottingham University; until 2012, it was the largest hospital in the UK. Nottingham City Hospital includes maternity and neonatal facilities but has no A&amp;E department. Students from the Medical School are attached to most of the departments at City Hospital as part of their clinical training.\nLaw enforcement is carried out by Nottinghamshire Police, whose headquarters are at Sherwood Lodge in Arnold. The city has a Crown Court and a Magistrates' Court. Laurie Macdonald of \"Inside One\" magazine observes that Nottingham's former high crime rate earned it the nickname \"Shottingham\", but that by 2013 this image was outdated. The article was written in response to a uSwitch survey that had found south Nottinghamshire to be the fourth-best place to live in the UK in terms of living standards. Crime in the city of Nottingham had also fallen by three-quarters since 2007.\nUtilities.\nSevern Trent Water is the company responsible for supplying fresh water to households and businesses in Nottingham, as well as the treatment of sewage. Severn Trent took over these services from the City of Nottingham Water Department in 1974.\nNottingham was host to the UK's first and only local authority\u2013owned and not-for-profit energy company, Robin Hood Energy. Veolia operates a cogeneration (CHP) plant in Nottingham for generating energy from biomass.\nThe city has one of the largest district heating schemes in the UK, operated by EnviroEnergy Limited, which is wholly owned by Nottingham City Council. The plant in the city centre supplies heat to 4,600 homes and a wide variety of business premises, including the Concert Hall, the Nottingham Arena, the Victoria Baths, the Broadmarsh Shopping Centre, the Victoria Centre, and others.\nReligion.\nHistorically, the requirement for city status was the presence of an Anglican (Church of England) cathedral; however, Nottingham does not have one of these, having only been designated a city in 1897 in celebration of Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee. From around AD 1100, Nottingham was part of the Diocese of Lichfield, controlled as an archdeaconry from Lichfield Cathedral in Staffordshire. In 1837, Nottingham's archdeaconry was placed under the control of the Diocese of Lincoln and, in 1884, it was incorporated into the newly created Diocese of Southwell which it is still part of today. The bishop is based at Southwell Minster, northeast of the city.\nAlthough lacking an Anglican cathedral, Nottingham has three notable historic Anglican parish churches, all of which date back to the Middle Ages. The oldest and largest of these is St. Mary the Virgin, situated in the Lace Market. The church dates from the eighth or ninth centuries, but the present structure is at least the third building on the site, dating primarily from 1377 to 1485. A member of the Major Churches Network, St. Mary's is considered the mother church of the city and is used for holding civic services, including the annual welcome to the new Lord Mayor. In the heart of the city is St. Peter's, the oldest building in continuous use in Nottingham, with traces of building dating back to 1180. The third notable Anglican parish church is St. Nicholas', known locally as \"St. Nic's\", situated on the edge of the city centre in the direction of the castle.\nThere are various chapels and meeting rooms in Nottingham. Many of the grand buildings have been demolished, including Halifax Place Wesleyan Chapel, but some have been re-used, notably High Pavement Chapel which is now a public house. The city has three Christadelphian meeting halls and is home to the national headquarters of the Congregational Federation.\nNottingham is one of 18 British cities that do not have an Anglican cathedral. It is, however, home to the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St. Barnabas, which was designed by Augustus Pugin and consecrated in 1844. It is the cathedral church for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Nottingham.\nToday, there are places of worship for all major religions, including Christianity and Islam (with 32 mosques in Nottingham).\nDemographics.\nThe population of Nottingham is 331,077 (2024). The population of Greater Nottingham is 729,977 (2011) and the Metro population is 1,543,000 (2011). The city of Nottingham has a density of . At the 2021 census, 65.9% were White, 14.9% Asian, 10.0% Black, 5.9% mixed or multiple ethnic groups and other groups were 3.3%.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nThe BBC has its East Midlands headquarters in Nottingham on London Road. \"BBC East Midlands Today\" is broadcast from the city every weeknight at 6:30\u00a0pm.\nFrom 1983 to 2005 Central Television (the ITV region for the east Midlands) had a studio complex on Lenton Lane, producing programmes for various networks and broadcasting regional news. The studios are now a satellite campus of the University of Nottingham, since 2005.\nThe city was granted permission by Ofcom to establish its own local television station. After a tender process, Confetti College was awarded the licence. The station was declared open by Prince Harry in April 2013 and Notts TV broadcast from spring 2014 to 2025.\nRadio.\nIn addition to the national commercial and BBC radio stations, the Nottingham area is served by licensed commercial radio stations (though all broadcast to a wider area than the city).\nRadio stations include:\nThe city's two universities both broadcast their own student radio station. Fly FM is based at Nottingham Trent University's city campus and is broadcast online. The station originated in 1996 with its original name of Kick FM. University Radio Nottingham (URN) is broadcast around Nottingham University's main and Sutton Bonington campuses on medium wave (AM), as well as over the internet. URN was founded in 1979 after starting out with a slot on BBC Radio Nottingham in the late 1970s.\nNewspapers and magazines.\nNottingham's main local newspaper, the \"Nottingham Post\", is owned by Local World and is published daily from Monday to Saturday each week.\n\"LeftLion\" magazine (established 2003) is distributed free of charge across the city, covering Nottingham culture including music, art, theatre, comedy, food and drink.\nStudent tabloid \"The Tab\" also publishes online content and has teams at both universities.\nFilm.\nNottingham has been used as a location in many locally, nationally, and internationally produced films. Movies that have been filmed (partly or entirely) in Nottingham include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nNottingham is twinned with the following cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNote: Ljubljana, Minsk, and Harare are capital cities. Nottingham ended its relations with Minsk and Krasnodar in March 2022.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39473", "revid": "38664462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39473", "title": "History of Alabama", "text": "The history of what is now Alabama stems back thousands of years ago when it was inhabited by indigenous peoples. The Woodland period spanned from around 1000 BC to 1000 AD and was marked by the development of the Eastern Agricultural Complex. This was followed by the Mississippian culture of Native Americans, which lasted to around the 1600 AD. The first Europeans to make contact with Alabama were the Spanish, with the first permanent European settlement being Mobile, established by the French in 1702.\nAfter being a part of the Mississippi Territory (1798\u20131817) and then the Alabama Territory (1817\u20131819), Congress admitted Alabama as a state on December 14, 1819. After Indian Removal forcibly displaced most Southeast tribes to west of the Mississippi River to what was then called Indian Territory (now Oklahoma), European Americans arrived in large numbers, with some of them bringing or buying African Americans in the domestic slave trade.\nFrom the early to mid-19th century, the state's wealthy planter class considered slavery essential to their economy. As one of the largest slaveholding states, Alabama was among the first six states to secede from the Union. It declared its secession in January 1861, joining the Confederate States of America in February 1861. During the ensuing American Civil War (1861\u20131865) Alabama saw moderate levels of warfare and battles. Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation freed all the enslaved people as soonas the U.S. arrived. Alabama transitioned into the Reconstruction era (1863\u20131877). During that time, its biracial government established the first public schools and welfare institutions in the state.\nFor a half century following the Civil War, Alabama was mostly economically poor and heavily rural, with few industries within the state. Agriculture production, based primarily on cotton exports, was the main economic driver. Most farmers were tenants, sharecroppers or laborers who did not own land. Reconstruction ended when Democrats, calling themselves \"Redeemers\" regained control of the state legislature by both legal and extralegal means (including violence and harassment). In 1901, Southern Democrats in Alabama passed a state Constitution that effectively disfranchised most African Americans (who in 1900 comprised more than 45 percent of the state's population), as well as tens of thousands of Poor Whites in the state. By 1941, a total 600,000 poor whites and 520,000 African Americans had been disfranchised.\nAfrican Americans living in Alabama in the early-to-mid 20th century experienced the inequities of disfranchisement, legalized segregation, violence and underfunded schools. Tens of thousands of African Americans from Alabama joined the Great Migration out of the South from 1915 to 1930 and moved for better opportunities in industrial cities, mostly in the North and Midwest. The black exodus escalated steadily in the first three decades of the 20th century; 22,100 emigrated from 1900 to 1910; 70,800 between 1910 and 1920; and 80,700 between 1920 and 1930. As a result of African American disenfranchisement and rural white control of the legislature, state politics were dominated by Democrats, as part of the \"Solid South.\"\nThe Great Depression in the United States of 1929-1939 hit Alabama's state economy hard. However, New Deal farm programs raised the price of cotton, bringing some economic relief. During and after World War II, Alabama started to see some economic prosperity, as the state developed a manufacturing and service base. In the mid-20th century cotton faded in economic importance. Many poor people left the cotton districts for towns or Northern cities. Following years of civil rights movement activities, the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 abolished legalized segregation, along with African Americans being able to again exercise their constitutional right to vote.\nIn the mid-to-late 20th century, the formation of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, boosted economic growth by developing an aerospace industry. In 1986, the election of Guy Hunt as governor marked a shift in Alabama toward becoming a Republican stronghold in Presidential elections as its voters also leaned Republican in statewide elections. The Democratic Party still dominated many local and legislative offices, but total Democrat dominance had ended. In the early 21st century, Alabama's economy was fueled in part by aerospace, agriculture, auto production, and the service sector.\nIndigenous peoples, early history.\nPrecontact.\nAt least 12,000 years ago, Native Americans or Paleo-Indians appeared in what is today referred to as \"The South\". Paleo-Indians in the Southeast were hunter-gatherers who pursued a wide range of animals, including the megafauna, which became extinct following the end of the Pleistocene age. Their diets were based primarily on plants, gathered and processed by women who learned about nuts, berries and other fruits, and the roots of many plants. The Woodland period from 1000 BCE to 1000 CE was marked by the development of pottery and the low intensity agriculture of the Eastern Agricultural Complex.\nThe Mississippian culture arose as the intensified cultivation of Mesoamerican crops of corn and beans led to crop surpluses and population growth. Increased population density gave rise to urban centers and regional chiefdoms, of which the greatest was the city known as Cahokia, in present-day Illinois near the confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers. The culture spread along the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and their tributaries. Its population of 20,000 to 30,000 at its peak exceeded that of any of the later European cities in North America until 1800. Stratified societies developed, with hereditary religious and political elites, and flourished in what is now the Midwestern, Eastern, and Southeastern United States from 800 to 1500 C.E.\nTrade with the Northeast indigenous peoples via the Ohio River began during the Burial Mound Period (1000\u00a0BC\u2013AD\u00a0700) and continued until European contact. Various Mississippian polities such as Bottle Creek Province covered most of the state from 1000 to 1600 AD, with Alabama's largest being Moundville Province, the second-largest complex of this period in the United States. Some 29 earthwork mounds survive at the capital, with many more mounds and settlements formerly encircling the capital.\nAnalysis of artifacts recovered from archaeological excavations at Moundville were the basis of scholars' formulating the characteristics of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex (SECC). Contrary to popular belief, the SECC appears to have no direct links to Mesoamerican culture, but developed independently. The Ceremonial Complex represents a major component of the religion of the Mississippian peoples; it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood.\nThe early historic Muscogee are considered likely descendants of the Mississippian culture along the Tennessee River in modern Tennessee, Georgia and Alabama. They may have been related to the \"Utinahica\" of southern Georgia. At the time the Spanish made their first forays inland from the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, many political centers of the Mississippians were already in decline, or abandoned.\nAmong the historical tribes of Native American people living in the area of present-day Alabama at the time of European contact were the Muskogean-speaking Alabama (\"Alibamu\"), Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Koasati, and Mobile peoples. Also in the region were the Iroquoian-speaking Cherokee, from a different family and cultural group. They are believed to have migrated south at an earlier time from the Great Lakes area, based on their language's similarity to those of the Iroquois Confederacy and other Iroquoian-speaking tribes around the Great Lakes. The history of Alabama's Native American peoples is reflected in many of its place names.\nEuropean colonization.\nThe Spanish were the first Europeans to enter Alabama, claiming land for their Crown. They named the region as La Florida, which extended to the southeast peninsular state now bearing the name.\nAlthough a member of P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez's expedition of 1528 may have entered southern Alabama, the first fully documented visit was by explorer Hernando de Soto. In 1539 he made an arduous expedition along the Coosa, Alabama and Tombigbee rivers.\nThe Alabama region at the period of European contact is best described as a collection of moderately sized native chiefdoms (such as the Coosa chiefdom on the upper Coosa River and the Tuskaloosa chiefdom on the lower Coosa, Tallapoosa, and Alabama Rivers), interspersed with completely autonomous villages and tribal groups. Many of the settlements de Soto encountered had platform mounds and villages fortified with defensive palisades with bastions for archers. The South Appalachian Mississippian culture \"Big Eddy phase\" has been tentatively identified as the protohistoric \"Province of Tuskaloosa\" encountered by the de Soto expedition in 1540. The Big Eddy phase Taskigi Mound is a platform mound and fortified village site located at the confluence of the Coosa, Tallapoosa, and Alabama Rivers near Wetumpka, Alabama. It is preserved as part of the Fort Toulouse-Fort Jackson State Historic Site and is one of the locations included on the University of Alabama Museums \"Alabama Indigenous Mound Trail\".\nThe English also laid claims to the region north of the Gulf of Mexico. Charles II of England included most of the territory of modern Alabama in the Province of Carolina, with land granted to certain of his favorites by the charters of 1663 and 1665. English traders from Carolina frequented the valley of the Alabama River as early as 1687 to trade for deerskins with the Native American peoples.\nThe French also colonized the region. In 1702 they founded a settlement on the Mobile River near its mouth, constructing \"Fort Louis.\" For the next nine years this was the French seat of government of New France, or \"La Louisiane\" (Louisiana). In 1711, they abandoned Fort Louis because of repeated flooding. Settlers rebuilt a fort on higher ground known as \"Fort Conde\". This was the start of what developed as present-day Mobile, the first permanent European settlement in Alabama. Biloxi was another early French settlement on the Gulf Coast, to the west in what is now Mississippi.\nThe French and the English contested the region, each attempting to forge strong alliances with Indian tribes. To strengthen their position, defend their Indian allies, and draw other tribes to them, the French established the military posts of \"Fort Toulouse\", near the junction of the Coosa and Tallapoosa rivers, and \"Fort Tombecbe\" on the Tombigbee River.\nThe French and the English engaged in competition for Indian trade in what is now the state of Alabama between roughly the 1690s and the 1750s, at which point the French and Indian War broke out. It was the North American front of the Seven Years' War between these two nations in Europe. Though the French claimed the territory as their own and attempted to rule it from Fort Toulouse, so as to engage in trade with the Indians, English traders based out of the Carolinas infiltrated the region, also engaging in trade. The Chickasaw frequently favored the English in this contest. \nOverall, during this time the English proved to be the better traders and colonizers. They operated independently, while the French government was more directly involved in its colonies. On this note Edmund Burke would later note that English colonists in America would owe their freedom more \"to [the Crown's] carelessness than to its design\". This was a policy referred to as \"salutary neglect\". The distance between the colonies and the home countries meant they could always operate with some freedom. \nThe English Crown's grant of Georgia to Oglethorpe and his associates in 1732 included a portion of what is now northern Alabama. In 1739, Oglethorpe visited the Creek Indians west of the Chattahoochee River and made a treaty with them.\nThe 1763 Treaty of Paris, which ended the Seven Years' War after France's defeat by Britain, resulted in France ceding its territories east of the Mississippi to Britain. Great Britain came into undisputed control of the region between the Chattahoochee and the Mississippi rivers, in terms of other European powers. Of course it had not consulted with any of the numerous indigenous peoples whom it nominally \"ruled.\" The portion of Alabama below the 31st parallel was considered a part of British West Florida. The British Crown defined the portion north of this line as part of the \"Illinois Country\"; the area west of the Appalachian Mountains was to be reserved for use by Native American tribes. European-American settlers were not supposed to encroach in that territory, but they soon did. In 1767, Britain expanded the province of West Florida northward to 32\u00b028'N latitude.\nMore than a decade later, during the American Revolutionary War, the British informally ceded this West Florida region to Spain. By the Treaty of Versailles, September 3, 1783, Great Britain formally ceded West Florida to Spain. By the Treaty of Paris (1783), signed the same day, Britain ceded to the newly established United States all of this province north of 31\u00b0N, thus laying the foundation for a long controversy.\nBy the Treaty of Madrid in 1795, Spain ceded to the United States the lands east of the Mississippi between 31\u00b0N and 32\u00b028'N. Three years later, in 1798, Congress organized this district as the Mississippi Territory. A strip of land 12 or 14 miles wide near the present northern boundary of Alabama and Mississippi was claimed by South Carolina, as part of the eastern colonies' previous hopeful extensions to the west. In 1787, during constitutional negotiations, South Carolina ceded this claim to the federal government. Georgia likewise claimed all the lands between the 31st and 35th parallels from its present western boundary to the Mississippi River, and did not surrender its claim until 1802. Two years later, the boundaries of Mississippi Territory were extended so as to include all of the Georgia cession.\nAs annexation by the United States appeared imminent, John Hood and Samuel Miller transported the first printing press into modern-day Alabama overland and then down the Mobile River to Fort Stoddert. On May 23, 1811, they began printing Alabama's first newspaper, \"The Mobile Centinel\". The \"Madison Gazette\" began printing in Huntsville, Alabama, one year later. The first standalone work of literature written and published in Alabama was Lewis Sewall's poem, \"The Last Campaign of Sir John Falstaff the II; or, The Hero of the Burnt-Corn Battle: a Heroi-Comic Poem\", a satirical account of the Battle of Burnt Corn. Early literary works composed in modern-day Alabama were printed elsewhere. For example, members of Hernando de Soto's expedition wrote accounts from Alabama chronicling battles against local chief Tuskaloosa. Written accounts from an unnamed Portuguese author, de Soto's secretary Rodrigo Rangel, and the King's agent Luis Hernandez de Biedma were published in \u00c9vora (1557), Madrid (1851), and London (1857) respectively. Because of the detailed journals kept by French colonial carpenter Andr\u00e9 P\u00e9nigaut, that were posthumously published by French historian Pierre Margry in 1883, scholars have called P\u00e9nigaut \"Alabama's first literary figure\".\nIn 1812, Congress added the Mobile District of West Florida to the Mississippi Territory, claiming that it was included in the Louisiana Purchase. The following year, General James Wilkinson occupied the Mobile District with a military force. The Spanish did not resist. Thus the whole area of the present state of Alabama was taken under the jurisdiction of the United States. Several powerful Native American tribes still occupied most of the land, with some formal ownership recognized by treaty with the United States. Five of the major tribes became known as the Five Civilized Tribes, as they had highly complex cultures and adopted some elements of European-American culture.\nIn 1817, the Mississippi Territory was divided. The western portion, which had attracted population more quickly, became the state of Mississippi. The eastern portion became the Alabama Territory, with St. Stephens on the Tombigbee River as its temporary seat of government.\nConflict between the various tribes in Alabama and American settlers increased rapidly in the early 19th century because the Americans kept encroaching on Native American territories. The great Shawnee chief Tecumseh visited the region in 1811, seeking to forge an Indian alliance among these tribes to join his resistance in the Great Lakes area. With the outbreak of the War of 1812, Britain encouraged Tecumseh's resistance movement, in the hope of expelling American settlers from west of the Appalachians. Several tribes were divided in opinion.\nThe Creek tribe fell to civil war (1813\u20131814). Violence between Creeks and Americans escalated, culminating in the Fort Mims massacre. Full-scale war between the United States and the \"Red Stick\" Creeks began; they were the more traditional members of their society who resisted US encroachment. The Chickasaw, Choctaw, Cherokee Nation and other Creek factions remained neutral to or allied with the United States during the war; they were highly decentralized in bands' alliances. Some warriors from among the bands served with American troops. Volunteer militias from Georgia, South Carolina and Tennessee marched into Alabama, fighting the Red Sticks.\nLater, federal troops became the main fighting force for the United States. General Andrew Jackson was the commander of the American forces during the Creek War and in the continuing effort against the British in the War of 1812. His leadership and military success during the wars made him a national hero. The Treaty of Fort Jackson (August 9, 1814) ended the Creek War. By the terms of the treaty, the Creek, Red Sticks and neutrals alike, ceded about one-half of the present state of Alabama to the United States. Due to later cessions by the Cherokee, Chickasaw and Choctaw in 1816, they retained only about one-quarter of their former territories in Alabama.\nEarly statehood.\nIn 1819, Alabama was admitted as the 22nd state to the Union. Its constitution provided for equal suffrage for white men, a standard it abandoned in its constitution of 1901, which reduced suffrage of poor whites and most blacks, disenfranchising tens of thousands of voters.\nOne of the first problems of the new state was finance. Since the amount of money in circulation was not sufficient to meet the demands of the increasing population, a system of state banks was instituted. State bonds were issued and public lands were sold to secure capital, and the notes of the banks, loaned on security, became a medium of exchange. Prospects of an income from the banks led the legislature of 1836 to abolish all taxation for state purposes. The Panic of 1837 wiped out a large portion of the banks' assets, leaving the state poor. Next came revelations of grossly careless and corrupt management. In 1843 the banks were placed in liquidation. After disposing of all their available assets, the state assumed the remaining liabilities, for which it had pledged its faith and credit.\nIn 1830 Congress passed the Indian Removal Act under the leadership of President Andrew Jackson, authorizing federal removal of southeastern tribes to west of the Mississippi River, including the Five Civilized Tribes of Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Seminole (in Florida). In 1832, the national government provided for the removal of the Creek via the Treaty of Cusseta. Before the removal occurred between 1834 and 1837, the state legislature organized counties in the lands to be ceded, and European-American settlers flocked in before the Native Americans had left.\nUntil 1832, the Democratic-Republican Party was the only one in the state, descended from the time of Jefferson. Disagreements over whether a state could nullify a federal law caused a division within the Democratic party. About the same time the Whig party emerged as an opposition party. It drew support from planters and townsmen, while the Democrats were strongest among poor farmers and Catholic communities (descendants of French and Spanish colonists) in the Mobile area. For some time, the Whigs were almost as numerous as the Democrats, but they never secured control of the state government. The States' Rights faction were in a minority; nevertheless, under their persistent leader, William L. Yancey (1814\u20131863), they prevailed upon the Democrats in 1848 to adopt their most radical views.\nDuring the agitation over the Wilmot Proviso, which would bar slavery from territory acquired from Mexico as a result of the Mexican War (1848), Yancey induced the Democratic State Convention of 1848 to adopt what was known as the \"Alabama Platform\". It declared that neither Congress nor the government of a territory had the right to interfere with slavery in a territory, that those who held opposite views were not Democrats, and that the Democrats of Alabama would not support a candidate for the presidency if he did not agree with them. This platform was endorsed by conventions in Florida and Virginia and by the legislatures of Georgia and Alabama.\nIn antebellum Alabama, wealthy planters created large cotton plantations based in the fertile central Black Belt of the upland region, which depended on the labor of enslaved Africans. Tens of thousands of slaves were transported to and sold in the state by slave traders who purchased them in the Upper South. In the mountains and foothills, poorer whites practiced subsistence farming. By 1860 blacks (nearly all slaves) comprised 45 percent of the state's 964,201 people.\nTensions related to slavery divided many state delegations in Congress, as this body tried to determine the futures of territories beyond the Mississippi River. Following the Congressional passage of the Compromise of 1850, which assigned certain territories as slave or free, in Alabama people began to realign politically. The States' Rights faction, joined by many Democrats, founded the Southern Rights Party, which demanded the repeal of the Compromise, advocated resistance to future encroachments, and prepared for secession. The Whigs were joined by the remaining Democrats and called themselves the \"Unionists\". The party unwillingly accepted the Compromise and denied that the Constitution provided for secession.\nSince the turn of the 19th century, development of large cotton plantations had taken place across the upland Black Belt after the invention of the cotton gin made short-staple cotton profitable. Cotton had added dramatically to the state's wealth. The owners' wealth depended on the labor of hundreds of thousands of enslaved African Americans, many initially transported in the domestic trade from the Upper South, which resulted in one million workers being relocated to the South. In other parts of the state, the soil supported only subsistence farming. Most of the yeoman farmers owned few or no slaves. By 1860 the investment and profits in cotton production resulted in planters holding 435,000 enslaved African Americans, who made up 45% of the state's population.\nAt the time of statehood, the early Alabama settlers adopted universal white suffrage. They were noted for a spirit of frontier democracy and egalitarianism, but this declined after the slave society developed. J. Mills Thornton argues that Whigs worked for positive state action to benefit society as a whole, while the Democrats feared any increase of power in government or in state-sponsored institutions as central banks. Fierce political battles raged in Alabama on issues ranging from banking to the removal of the Creek Indians. Thornton suggested the overarching issue in the state was how to protect liberty and equality for white people. Fears that Northern agitators threatened their value system and slavery as the basis of their wealthy economy made voters ready to secede when Abraham Lincoln was elected in 1860.\nSecession and Civil War (1861\u20131865).\nThe \"Unionists\" were successful in the elections of 1851 and 1852. Passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Bill and uncertainty about agitation against slavery led the State Democratic convention of 1856 to revive the \"Alabama Platform\". When the Democratic National Convention at Charleston, South Carolina, failed to approve the \"Alabama Platform\" in 1860, the Alabama delegates, followed by those of the other \"cotton states\", withdrew. Upon the election of Abraham Lincoln, Governor Andrew B. Moore, as previously instructed by the legislature, called a state convention. Many prominent men had opposed Alabama secession. In North Alabama, there was an attempt to organize a neutral state to be called Nickajack. With President Lincoln's call to arms in April 1861, most opposition to secession ended.\nOn January 11, 1861, the State of Alabama adopted the ordinances of secession from the Union (by a vote of 61\u201339). Alabama joined the Confederate States of America, whose government was first organized at Montgomery on February 4, 1861. The CSA set up its temporary capital in Montgomery and selected Jefferson Davis as president. In May 1861, the Confederate government abandoned Montgomery before the sickly season began and relocated to Richmond, Virginia, the capital of that state. During the ensuing American Civil War Alabama had moderate levels of warfare.\nGovernor Moore energetically supported the Confederate war effort. Even before hostilities began, he seized Federal facilities, sent agents to buy rifles in the Northeast and scoured the state for weapons. Despite some resistance in the northern part of the state, Alabama joined the Confederate States of America (CSA). Congressman Williamson R. W. Cobb was a Unionist and pleaded for compromise. When he ran for the Confederate congress in 1861, he was defeated. (In 1863, with war-weariness growing in Alabama, he was elected on a wave of antiwar sentiment.)\nSome idea of the current transportation patterns and severe internal logistic problems faced by the Confederacy can be seen by tracing Jefferson Davis' journey from his plantation in Mississippi to Montgomery. With few roads and railroads, he traveled by steamboat from his plantation on the Mississippi River down to Vicksburg, where he boarded a train to Jackson, Mississippi. He took another train north to Grand Junction, then a third train east to Chattanooga, Tennessee and a fourth train south to the main hub at Atlanta, Georgia. He took another train to the Alabama border and a last one to Montgomery in the center of the state.\nAs the war proceeded, the Federals seized ports along the Mississippi River, burned trestles and railroad bridges and tore up track. The frail Confederate railroad system faltered and virtually collapsed for want of repairs and replacement parts.\nIn the early part of the Civil War, Alabama was not the scene of military operations. The state contributed about 120,000 soldiers to Confederate service. Most soldiers were recruited locally and served with others they knew, which built esprit and strengthened ties to home. Medical conditions were severe for all soldiers. About 15% of deaths were from disease, more than the 10% from battle. Alabama had few well-equipped hospitals, but it had many on the home front who volunteered to nurse the sick and wounded. Soldiers were poorly equipped, especially after 1863. Often they pillaged the dead for boots, belts, canteens, blankets, hats, shirts and pants.\nUncounted thousands of slaves were impressed to work for Confederate troops; they took care of horses and equipment, cooked and did laundry, hauled supplies, and helped in field hospitals. Other slaves built defensive installations, especially those around Mobile. They graded roads, repaired railroads, drove supply wagons, and labored in iron mines, iron foundries and even in the munitions factories. The service of slaves was involuntary: their unpaid labor was impressed from their unpaid masters. About 10,000 slaves within the state escaped and joined the Union army.\nAround 2,700 white men from Alabama who were adherent Southern Unionists served in the Union Army, many of whom served in the 1st Alabama Cavalry Regiment.\nThirty-nine Alabamians attained flag rank, most notably Lieutenant General James Longstreet and Admiral Raphael Semmes. Josiah Gorgas, who came to Alabama from Pennsylvania, was the chief of ordnance for the Confederacy. He located new munitions plants in Selma, which employed 10,000 workers until the Union soldiers burned the factories down in 1865. Selma Arsenal made most of the Confederacy's ammunition. The Selma Naval Ordnance Works made artillery, turning out a cannon every five days. The Confederate Naval Yard built ships and was noted for launching the CSS \"Tennessee\" in 1863 to defend Mobile Bay. Selma's Confederate Nitre Works procured niter for the Nitre and Mining Bureau for gunpowder, from limestone caves. When supplies were low, it advertised for housewives to save the contents of their chamber pots\u2014as urine was a rich source of nitrogen.\nIn 1863, Union forces secured a foothold in northern Alabama in spite of the opposition of General Nathan B. Forrest. From 1861, the Union blockade shut Mobile, and, in 1864, the outer defenses of Mobile were taken by a Union fleet; the city itself held out until April 1865.\nAlabama soldiers fought in hundreds of battles; the state's losses at the Battle of Gettysburg were the highest loss of any battle with 1,750 dead plus more captured or wounded; the \"Alabama Brigade\" took 781 casualties. Governor Lewis E. Parsons in July 1865 made a preliminary estimate of losses, which totaled that around the 122,000 Alabamian soldiers who served, around 35,000 died during the war. The next year Governor Robert M. Patton estimated that 20,000 veterans had returned home with permanent disabilities. With cotton prices low, the value of farms shrank, from $176\u00a0million in 1860 to only $64\u00a0million in 1870. The livestock supply shrank too, as the number of horses fell from 127,000 to 80,000, and mules from 111,000 to 76,000. The overall population growth remained the same, the growth that might have been expected was neutralized by death and emigration out of the state.\nReconstruction (1865\u20131875).\nAccording to the Presidential plan of reorganization, a provisional governor for Alabama was appointed in June 1865. A state convention met in September of the same year, and declared the ordinance of secession null and void and slavery abolished. A legislature and a governor were elected in November, and the legislature was at once recognized by President Andrew Johnson, but not by Congress, which refused to seat the delegation. Johnson ordered the army to allow the inauguration of the governor after the legislature ratified the Thirteenth Amendment in December 1865. But the legislature's passage of Black Codes to control the freedmen who were flocking from the plantations to the towns, and its rejection of the Fourteenth Amendment to grant suffrage, intensified Congressional hostility to the Presidential plan.\nIn 1867, the congressional plan of Reconstruction was completed and Alabama was placed under military government. The freedmen were enrolled as voters. Only whites who could swear the Ironclad oath could be voters; that is they had to swear they had never voluntarily supported the Confederacy. This provision was insisted upon by the whites in the northern hill counties so they could control local government. As a result, Republicans controlled 96 of the 100 seats in the state constitutional convention. The new Republican party, made up of freedmen, southern white Union sympathizers (scalawags), and northerners who had settled in the South (carpetbaggers), took control two years after the war ended. The constitutional convention in November 1867 framed a constitution which conferred universal manhood suffrage and imposed the iron-clad oath, so that whites who had supported the Confederacy were temporarily prohibited from holding office. The Reconstruction Acts of Congress required every new constitution to be ratified by a majority of the legal voters of the state. Most whites boycotted the polls and the new constitution fell short. Congress enacted that a majority of the votes cast should be sufficient. Thus the constitution went into effect, the state was readmitted to the Union in June 1868, and a new governor and legislature were elected.\nMany whites resisted postwar changes, complaining that the Republican governments were notable for legislative extravagance and corruption. But the Republican biracial coalition created the first system of public education in the state, which would benefit poor white children as well as freedmen. They also created charitable public institutions, such as hospitals and orphanages, to benefit all citizens. The planters had not made public investment but kept their wealth for themselves. As the state tried to improve institutions and infrastructure for the future, the state debt and state taxes rose. The state endorsed railway bonds at the rate of $12,000 and $16,000 a mile until the state debt had increased from eight million to seventeen million dollars. The native whites united, peeling many Alabama Scalawags away from the Republican coalition, and elected a governor and a majority of the lower house of the legislature in 1870, in an election characterized by widespread violence and fraud. As the new administration was overall a failure, in 1872, voters re-elected Republicans.\nBy 1874, however, the power of the Republicans was broken, and Democrats regained power in all state offices. A commission appointed to examine the state debt found it to be $25,503,000; by compromise, it was reduced to $15,000,000. A new constitution was adopted in 1875, which omitted the guarantee of the previous constitution that no one should be denied suffrage on account of race, color or previous condition of servitude. Its provisions forbade the state to engage in internal improvements or to give its credit to any private enterprise, an anti-industrial stance that persisted and limited the state's progress for decades into the 20th century.\nIn the South, the interpretation of the tumultuous 1860s has differed sharply by race. Americans often interpreted great events in religious terms. Historian Wilson Fallin contrasts the interpretation of Civil War and Reconstruction in white versus black using Baptist sermons in Alabama. White preachers expressed the view that:\n God had chastised them and given them a special mission \u2013 to maintain orthodoxy, strict biblicism, personal piety and traditional race relations. Slavery, they insisted, had not been sinful. Rather, emancipation was a historical tragedy, and the end of Reconstruction was a clear sign of God's favor.\nIn sharp contrast, black preachers interpreted the Civil War, emancipation and Reconstruction as:\n God's gift of freedom. They appreciated opportunities to exercise their independence, to worship in their own way, to affirm their worth and dignity and to proclaim the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. Most of all, they could form their own churches, associations and conventions. These institutions offered self-help, racial uplift and provided places where the gospel of liberation could be proclaimed. As a result, black preachers continued to insist that God would protect and help them: God would be their rock in a stormy land.\nDemocratic politics and disfranchisement.\nAfter 1874, the Democratic party had constant control of the state administration. The Republican Party by then was chiefly supported by African Americans. Republicans held no local or state offices, but the party did have some federal patronage. It failed to make nominations for office in 1878 and 1880 and endorsed the ticket of the Greenback party in 1882.\nThe development of mining and manufacturing was accompanied by economic distress among the farming classes, which found expression in the Jeffersonian Democratic party, organized in 1892. The regular Democratic ticket was elected and the new party was merged into the Populist party. In 1894, the Republicans united with the Populists, elected three congressional representatives, and secured control of many of the counties. They did not succeed in carrying the state. The Populist coalition had less success in the next campaigns. Partisanship became intense, and Democratic charges of corruption of the black electorate were matched by Republican and Populist accusations of fraud and violence by Democrats.\nDespite opposition by Republicans and Populists, Democrats completed their dominance with passage of a new constitution in 1901 that restricted suffrage and effectively disenfranchised most African Americans and many poor whites, through requirements for voter registration, such as poll taxes, literacy tests and restrictive residency requirements. From 1900 to 1903, the number of white registered voters fell by more than 40,000, from 232,821 to 191,492, despite a growth in population. By 1941 a total of more whites than blacks had been disenfranchised: 600,000 whites to 520,000 blacks. This was due mostly to effects of the cumulative poll tax.\nThe damage to the African-American community was severe and pervasive, as nearly all its eligible citizens lost the ability to vote. In 1900 45% of Alabama's population were African American: 827,545 citizens. In 1900 fourteen Black Belt counties (which were primarily African American) had more than 79,000 voters on the rolls. By June 1, 1903, the number of registered voters had dropped to 1,081. While Dallas and Lowndes counties were each 75% black, between them only 103 African-American voters managed to register. In 1900 Alabama had more than 181,000 African Americans eligible to vote. By 1903 only 2,980 had managed to \"qualify\" to register, although at least 74,000 black voters were literate. The shut out was long-lasting. The effects of segregation suffered by African Americans were severe. At the end of WWII, for instance, in the black Collegeville community of Birmingham, only eleven voters in a population of 8,000 African Americans were deemed \"eligible\" to register to vote. Disfranchisement also meant that blacks and poor whites could not serve on juries, so were subject to a justice system in which they had no part.\nProgressive era (1900\u20131930).\nThe Progressive Movement in Alabama, while not as colorful or successful as in some other states, drew upon the energies of a rapidly growing middle class, and flourished from 1900 to the late 1920s. Reforms that were enacted included the corrupt practices act of 1915; the registration law of 1915; the direct election of U.S. senators; encouraging the establishment of commission government in the towns and cities; and the ratification of the 19th amendment to allow women the right to vote. They replaced nomination by party convention with primary elections for nominating candidates. While the Progressives denied Blacks and many poor white people the right to vote, they did facilitate much more opportunity for participation in the government to middle class whites.\nB. B. Comer (1848\u20131927) was the state's most prominent progressive leader, especially during his term as governor (1907\u20131911). Middle-class reformers placed high on their agenda the regulation of railroads, and a better school system, with compulsory education and the prohibition of child labor. Comer sought 20 different railroad laws, to strengthen the railroad commission, reduce free passes handed out to grasping politicians, lobbying, and secret rebates to favored shippers. The Legislature approved his package, except for a provision that tried to forbid freight trains operating on Sundays. The result was a reduction in both freight and passenger rates. Railroads fought back vigorously in court, and in the arena of public opinion. The issue was fiercely debated for years, making Alabama laggard among the southern states in terms of controlling railroad rates. Finally in 1914 a compromise was reached, in which the railroads accepted the reduced passenger rates, but were free to seek higher freight rates through the court system.\nProgressive reforms cost money, especially for the improved school system. Eliminating the inefficiencies of the tax collection system helped a bit. Reformers wanted to end the convict lease system, but it was producing a profit to the government of several hundred thousand dollars a year. That was too lucrative to abolish; however the progressives did move control over convict lease from the counties to a statewide system. Finally the legislature increased statewide funding for the schools, and established the policy of at least one high school in every county; by 1911 half the counties operated public high schools for whites. Compulsory education was opposed by working-class families who wanted their children to earn money, and who distrusted the schooling the middle class was so insistent upon. But it finally passed in 1915; it was enforced for whites only and did not apply to farms. By 1910 Alabama still lagged with 62 percent of its children in school, compared to a national average of 71 percent.\nThe progressives worked hard to upgrade the hospital and public health system, with provisions to require the registration of births and deaths to provide the information needed. When the Rockefeller Foundation identified the hookworm as a critical element in draining energy out of Southern workers, Alabama discovered hookworm cases in every county, with rates as high as 60 percent. The progressive genius for organization and devotion to the public good was least controversial in the public health area and probably most successful there. Prohibition was a favorite reform for Protestant churches across this entire country, and from the 1870s to the 1920s, Alabama passed a series of more restrictive laws that were demanded by the Women's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) and other reform elements.\nMiddle-class business and professional activists in the cities were frustrated with the old-fashioned politicized city governments and demanded a commission formed in which municipal affairs would be very largely run by experts rather than politicians. Emmet O'Neal, elected governor in 1910, made the commission system his favored reform, and secured its passage by the legislature in 1911. The cities of Birmingham, Montgomery and Mobile quickly adopted the commission form\nWomen energized by the prohibition wars turned their crusading energies to woman suffrage. They were unable to overcome male supremacy until the national movement passed the 19th amendment, granting women the right to vote in 1920.\nRailroads and industry.\nThe economy of Alabama in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was largely based on agriculture and industry. Cotton was the primary crop grown in the state, and it was supplemented by corn and livestock. Timber was also an important part of the economy, as large tracts of pine forests were harvested for lumber and naval stores such as turpentine and rosin. Iron ore was mined from the Appalachian Mountains and shipped to the state's steel mills. By the 1880s, Alabama was a major producer of coal, and the state's railroads helped to transport the coal to other markets. Manufacturing also began to take hold in the state, with the establishment of cotton mills, sawmills, and other industries.\nBy the 1920s, the urban economy was largely based on manufacturing, with the production of cotton textiles, timber products, and iron and steel being the major industries. The Great Depression of the 1930s, however, caused a significant decline in the state's economy\nBirmingham was founded on June 1, 1871, by real estate promoters who sold lots near the planned crossing of the Alabama &amp; Chattanooga and South &amp; North railroads. The site was notable for the nearby deposits of iron ore, coal and limestone\u2014the three principal raw materials used in making steel. Its founders adopted the name of England's principal industrial city to advertise the new city as a center of iron and steel production. Despite outbreaks of cholera, the population of this 'Pittsburgh of the South' grew from 38,000 to 132,000 from 1900 to 1910, attracting rural white and black migrants from all over the region. Birmingham experienced such rapid growth that it was nicknamed \"The Magic City.\" By the 1920s, Birmingham was the 19th largest city in the U.S. and held more than 30% of the population of the state. Heavy industry and mining were the basis of the economy. Chemical and structural constraints limited the quality of steel produced from Alabama's iron and coal. These materials did, however, combine to make ideal foundry iron. Because of low transportation and labor costs, Birmingham quickly became the largest and cheapest foundry iron-producing area. By 1915, twenty-five percent of the nation's foundry pig iron was produced in Birmingham.\nNew South era beginnings (1914\u20131945).\nDespite Birmingham's powerful industrial growth and its contributions to the state economy, its citizens, and those of other newly developing areas, were underrepresented in the state legislature for years. The rural-dominated legislature refused to redistrict state House and Senate seats from 1901 to the 1960s. In addition, the state legislature had a senate based on one for each county. The state legislative delegations controlled counties. This led to a stranglehold on the state by a white rural minority. The contemporary interests of urbanizing, industrial cities and tens of thousands of citizens were not adequately represented in the government. One result was that Jefferson County, home of Birmingham's industrial and economic powerhouse, contributed more than one-third of all tax revenue to the state. It received back only 1/67th of the tax money, as the state legislature ensured taxes were distributed equally to each county regardless of population.\nFrom 1910 to 1940, tens of thousands of African Americans migrated out of Alabama in the Great Migration to seek jobs, education for their children, and freedom from lynching in northern and midwestern cities, such as St. Louis, Chicago, Detroit, and Cleveland. These cities had many industrial jobs, but the migrants also had to compete with new waves of European immigrants. The rate of population growth in Alabama dropped from 20.8% in 1900 and 16.9% in 1910, to 9.8% in 1920, reflecting the impact of the outmigration. Formal disenfranchisement was ended only after the mid-1960s after African Americans led the Civil Rights Movement and gaining Federal legislation to protect their voting and civil rights. But the state devised new ways to reduce their political power. By that time, African Americans comprised a smaller minority than at the turn of the century, and a majority in certain rural counties.\nA rapid pace of change across the country, especially in growing cities, combined with new waves of immigration and migration of rural whites and blacks to cities, all contributed to a volatile social environment and the rise of a second Ku Klux Klan (KKK) in the South and Midwest after 1915. In many areas it represented itself as a fraternal group to give aid to a community. Feldman (1999) has shown that the second KKK was not a mere hate group; it showed a genuine desire for political and social reform on behalf of poor whites. For example, Alabama Klansmen such as Hugo Black were among the foremost advocates of better public schools, effective Prohibition enforcement, expanded road construction, and other \"progressive\" measures to benefit poor whites. By 1925, the Klan was a powerful political force in the state, as urban politicians such as J. Thomas Heflin, David Bibb Graves, and Hugo Black manipulated the KKK membership against the power of the \"Big Mule\" industrialists and especially the Black Belt planters who had long dominated the state.\nIn 1926, Democrat Bibb Graves, a former chapter head, won the governor's office with KKK members' support. He led one of the most progressive administrations in the state's history, pushing for increased education funding, better public health, new highway construction, and pro-labor legislation. At the same time, KKK vigilantes\u2014thinking they enjoyed governmental protection\u2014launched a wave of physical terror across Alabama in 1927, targeting both blacks and whites. The Republicans responded: The major newspapers kept up a steady, loud attack on the Klan as violent and un-American. Sheriffs cracked down on Klan violence, and a national scandal among Klan leaders in the 1920s turned many members away. The state voted for Democrat Al Smith in 1928, although he was Roman Catholic (a target of the KKK). The Klan's official membership plunged to under six thousand by 1930.\nWorld War II.\nAlabama was an important player in the United States home front during World War II. The state provided thousands of soldiers, sailors and airmen to the military. It provided large amounts of food, ammunition, and other supplies. Alabama was also the site of numerous military bases and factories that produced military supplies and equipment and warships. In addition, the state was home to several prisoner of war camps and Army and Navy hospitals. The iron and steel industries in Birmingham smoothly transitioned to wartime production, with furnaces that had closed during the Great Depression reopening to meet the demands of War Production Board contracts. Alabama's Ingalls Iron Works became a leader in the construction of Liberty ships, launching the first fully welded ship in October 1940, helping revolutionize the ship building industry.\nOn February 12, 1945, a devastating tornado outbreak occurred across the Southeastern United States, which killed 45 people and injured 427 others. This outbreak included a devastating tornado that struck Montgomery, Alabama, which killed 26 people. The United States Weather Bureau described this tornado as \"the most officially observed one in history\" as it reached within from the U.S. Weather Bureau's office. Tornado expert Thomas P. Grazulis estimated the intensity of the Montgomery tornado to be F3 on the Fujita scale.\nCivil Rights Movement and redistricting (1945\u20131975).\nEconomically, the major force in Alabama was the mechanization and consolidation of agriculture. Mechanical cotton pickers became available in the postwar era, reducing the need for many agricultural workers. They tended to move into the region's urban areas. Still, by 1963, only about a third of the state's cotton was picked by machine. Diversification from cotton into soybeans, poultry and dairy products also drove more poor people off the land. In the state's thirty-five Appalachian counties, twenty-one lost population between 1950 and 1960. What was once a rural state became more industrial and urban.\nFollowing service in World War II, many African-American veterans became activists for civil rights, wanting their rights under the law as citizens. The Montgomery bus boycott from 1955 to 1956 was one of the most significant African-American protests against the policy of racial segregation in the state. Although constituting a majority of bus passengers, African Americans were discriminated against in seating policy. The protest nearly brought the city bus system to bankruptcy and changes were negotiated. The legal challenge was settled in \"Browder v. Gayle\" (1956), a case in which the United States District Court for the Middle District of Alabama found the segregation policy to be unconstitutional under Fourteenth Amendment provisions for equal treatment; it ordered that public transit in Alabama be desegregated.\nThe rural white minority's hold on the legislature continued, however, suppressing attempts by more progressive elements to modernize the state. A study in 1960 concluded that because of rural domination, \"A minority of about 25 per cent of the total state population is in majority control of the Alabama legislature.\" Given the legislature's control of the county governments, the rural interests had even more power. Legislators and others filed suit in the 1960s to secure redistricting and reapportionment. It took years and Federal court intervention to achieve the redistricting necessary to establishing \"one man, one vote\" representation, as a result of \"Baker v. Carr\" (1962) and \"Reynolds v. Sims\" (1964). The court ruled that, in addition to the states having to redistrict to reflect decennial censuses in congressional districts, both houses of state governments had to be based on representation by population districts, rather than by geographic county as the state senate had been, as the senate's make-up prevented equal representation. These court decisions caused redistricting in many northern and western states as well as the South, where often rural interests had long dominated state legislatures and prevented reform.\nIn 1960 on the eve of important civil rights battles, 30% of Alabama's population was African American or 980,000.\nAs Birmingham was the center of industry and population in Alabama, in 1963 civil rights leaders chose to mount a campaign there for desegregation. Schools, restaurants and department stores were segregated; no African Americans were hired to work in the stores where they shopped or in the city government supported in part by their taxes. There were no African-American members of the police force. Despite segregation, African Americans had been advancing economically. But from 1947 to 1965, Birmingham suffered \"about 50 racially motivated bomb attacks.\" Independent groups affiliated with the KKK bombed transitional residential neighborhoods to discourage blacks' moving into them; in 19 cases, they bombed black churches with congregations active in civil rights, and the homes of their ministers.)\nTo help with the campaign and secure national attention, the Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth invited members of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to Birmingham to help change its leadership's policies, as non-violent action had produced good results in some other cities. The Reverends Martin Luther King Jr. and Wyatt Tee Walker, SCLC's president and executive director, and other civil rights movement leaders such as SCLC strategist James Bevel, travelled to Birmingham to help.\nIn the spring and summer of 1963, national attention became riveted on the movement's Birmingham campaign. The media covered the series of peaceful marches that the Birmingham police, headed by Police Commissioner Bull Connor, attempted to divert and control. Bevel invited high school students to join the marches, as he and King intended to fill the jails with nonviolent protesters to make a moral argument to the United States. Dramatic images of Birmingham police using police dogs and powerful streams of water against children protesters filled newspapers and television coverage, arousing national outrage. The 16th Street Baptist Church bombing during a Sunday service, which killed four African-American girls, caused a national outcry and gained support for the civil rights cause in the state. 16th Street Baptist Church had been a rallying point and staging area for civil rights activities in Birmingham prior to the bombing. Finally, Birmingham leaders King and Shuttlesworth agreed to end the marches when the businessmen's group committed to end segregation in stores and public facilities.\nBefore his November 1963 assassination, President John F. Kennedy had supported civil rights legislation. In 1964 President Lyndon B. Johnson helped secure its passage and signed the Civil Rights Act. The Selma to Montgomery marches in 1965 attracted national and international press and TV coverage. The nation was horrified to see peaceful protesters beaten as they entered the county. That year, Johnson helped achieve passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act to gain federal oversight and enforcement to ensure the ability of all citizens to vote.\nCourt challenges related to \"one man, one vote\" and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 finally provided the groundwork for federal court rulings. In 1972, the federal court required the legislature to create a statewide redistricting plan to correct the imbalances in representation in the legislature related to population patterns. Redistricting, together with federal oversight of voter registration and election practices, enabled hundreds of thousands of Alabama citizens, both white and black, to vote and participate for the first time in the political system.\nLate 20th century (1975\u20132000).\nThroughout the 1970s, Alabama continued to struggle with issues related to racial inequality and segregation. In 1972, federal court ordered the city of Birmingham to desegregate its public schools. The state continued to be a focal point of the Civil Rights Movement, with organizations such as the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee remaining active in the state. In 1991, a federal court ordered the state to redraw its congressional districts to ensure greater representation for African American voters.\nIn 1974, George Wallace, who as governor stood in the doorway of the University of Alabama in 1963 to block the enrollment of African American students, was re-elected to the governorship for a third term. However, Wallace was no longer a segregationist. He now focused more on issues such as economic development and support for education during his final terms in office.\nAs agriculture faded in importance, the manufacturing and finance sectors flourished. Tourist attractions such as Gulf Shores and Orange Beach drawing visitors from across the country. Crisis locations in the Civil Rights era became tourist attractions.\n21st century (2001\u2013present).\nThe 21st century saw Alabama continue to emphasize economic growth and a political transformation away from Democrats toward the Republican Party in state and national elections. It made significant investments in education, health care, infrastructure, and economic development. Alabama elected the first Republican governor since Reconstruction, Bob Riley, in 2002. He narrowly defeated incumbent Don Siegelman, the last Democrat to be governor. Riley improved the public education system, expanded Medicaid, and implemented a tax reform plan. He was reelected in 2006. In May 2007, he announced that the German corporation ThyssenKrupp would build a state-of-the-art steel mill north of Mobile. Total cost ran up to $5 billion, the largest foreign project in U.S. business history. The mill now employs 2,700 workers. Automobile manufacturers came to Alabama, with Mercedes-Benz in Tuscaloosa County, and Hyundai Motors in Montgomery County. Aerospace giant, Airbus, built a large manufacturing facility in Mobile County. Huntsville, in north Alabama's Tennessee River Valley, is the fastest growing metropolitan region of Alabama, that is home to one of the per capita most educated regions in the United States. Huntsville is home to NASA's U.S. Space &amp; Rocket Center and Space Camp. Huntsville also has a large defense industry presence.\nIn 2015, state budget reductions of $83\u00a0million resulted in the closing of five parks per Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ($3\u00a0million). In addition, the state cut services at driver's license offices, closing most in several black-majority counties. This made voter registration more difficult, as the offices had offered both services. As of 2018, the state of Alabama offers online voter registration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nLocal history.\nSee the individual articles on each locality."}
{"id": "39475", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39475", "title": "Commedia dell' arte", "text": ""}
{"id": "39476", "revid": "19569748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39476", "title": "History of Andorra", "text": " \nAndorra, officially the Principality of Andorra (), also called the Principality of the Valleys of Andorra (), is a sovereign landlocked microstate in southwestern Europe, located in the eastern Pyrenees mountain range and is bordered by Spain and France.\n9th to 19th centuries.\nAndorra claims it is the last independent survivor of the Marca Hispanica, a military buffer zone made up of counties, created by Charlemagne to keep the Islamic Moors from advancing into the Christian Frankish empire. Tradition holds that Charlemagne granted a charter to the Andorran people in return for fighting the Moors. In the 9th century, Charlemagne's grandson, Charles the Bald, named the Count of Urgell as overlord of Andorra. A descendant of the count later gave the lands to the Diocese of Urgell.\nIn the 11th century, fearing military action by neighboring lords, the Bishop of Urgell placed himself under the protection of the Lord of Caboet, a nobleman. Later, the Count of Foix became heir to the Lord of Caboet through marriage to Ermessenda de Castellb\u00f2 in 1208, and a dispute arose between the Occitan Count and the Catalan bishop over Andorra.\nIn 1278, the conflict was resolved by the signing of a pareage (\"pariatges\"), which provided that Andorra's sovereignty be shared between the Count of Foix and the Bishop of La Seu d'Urgell (Catalonia). The pareage, a feudal institution recognizing the principle of equality of rights shared by two rulers, gave the small state its territory and political form. Andorra's borders have remained unchanged since 1278.\nAndorra was briefly annexed to the Crown of Aragon twice, in 1396 and 1512.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nAndorra did not officially participate in World War I, although there were three Andorran volunteers who fought: Valent\u00ed Naudi, Josep Estany and Ren\u00e9 Huguet. North American newspapers in 1958 claimed that Andorra had declared war on Germany in 1914 but failed to sign a peace treaty until 1958, and this claim has appeared in later sources, but there appears to be no contemporary evidence of such declaration. In 2014, the news outlet R\u00e0dio i Televisi\u00f3 d'Andorra investigated the 1958 claim and could find no documentation of any original declaration of war. Historian Pere Cavero could only find an exchange of letters between the German consul in Marseille and the Catalan Ombudsman, where the former asks if there is a state of war with Andorra and the latter responds they could find nothing in their archive to indicate this.\nIn 1933, France occupied Andorra as a result of social unrest before elections. On 12 July 1934 an adventurer named Boris Skossyreff issued a proclamation in Urgel, declaring himself Boris I, sovereign prince of Andorra, simultaneously declaring war on the Bishop of Urgell. He was arrested by Spanish authorities on 20 July and ultimately expelled from Spain. From 1936 to 1940, a French detachment was garrisoned in Andorra to prevent encroachment as a result of the Spanish Civil War and Francoist Spain.\nDuring World War II, Andorra remained neutral and was an important smuggling route from Spain into France. The French Resistance used Andorra as part of their route to get downed airmen out of France.\nIn 1943, Andorra carried out its first execution since the 19th century: Antoni Arenis was executed for double fratricide by firing squad because a trained executioner was unavailable to operate the legal method, by garrote.\nLong an impoverished land with little contact with any nations other than adjoining France and Spain, Andorra, after World War II, achieved considerable prosperity through a developing tourist industry. That development, abetted by improvements in transport and communications, has tended to break down Andorra's isolation and to bring Andorrans into the mainstream of European history. Public demands for democratic reforms led to the extension of the franchise to women in the 1970s and to the creation of new and more fully autonomous organs of government in the early 1980s.\nSince the 1990s.\nAndorra formally became a parliamentary democracy in May 1993 following approval of a new constitution by a popular referendum in March 1993. The new constitution retained the French and Spanish co-princes although with reduced and narrowly defined powers. Civil rights were greatly expanded, including the legalisation of political parties and the provision for an independent judiciary.\nAndorra joined a customs union with the European Communities (now the European Union) in 1991 and was admitted to the United Nations on 28 July 1993. It became a member of the Council of Europe in 1994. Andorra opened diplomatic relations with other countries such as the United Kingdom in 1994 and the United States in 1995.\nThe country has been seeking ways to improve its export potential and increase its economic ties with its European neighbours. The financial services sector of the economy is highly important because of Andorra's status as a tax haven and its banking secrecy laws.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
