{"id": "37403", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37403", "title": "Eastern Europe", "text": "Subregion of the European continent\nEastern Europe is a subregion of the European continent. As a largely ambiguous term, it has a wide range of geopolitical, geographical, ethnic, cultural and socio-economic connotations. Its eastern boundary is marked by the Ural Mountains, and its western boundary is defined in various ways. Narrow definitions, in which Central and Southeast Europe are counted as separate regions, include Belarus, Russia and Ukraine. In contrast, broader definitions include Moldova and Romania, but also some or all of the Balkans, the Baltic states, the Caucasus, and the Visegr\u00e1d group. In Eastern Europe, Russia is the largest and most populous country.\nThe region represents a significant part of European culture; the main socio-cultural characteristics of Eastern Europe have historically largely been defined by the traditions of the Slavs, as well as by the influence of Eastern Christianity as it developed through the Eastern Roman Empire and the Ottoman Empire. Another definition was created by the Cold War, as Europe was ideologically divided by the Iron Curtain, with \"Eastern Europe\" being synonymous with communist states constituting the Eastern Bloc under the influence of the Soviet Union.\nThe term is sometimes considered to be pejorative, through stereotypes about Eastern Europe being inferior (poorer, less developed) to Western Europe; the term Central and Eastern Europe is sometimes used for a more neutral grouping.\nDefinitions.\nSeveral definitions of Eastern Europe exist in the early 21st century, but they often lack precision and may be anachronistic. These definitions are debated across cultures and among experts, even political scientists, as the term has a wide range of geopolitical, geographical, cultural, and socioeconomic connotations. It has also been described as a \"fuzzy\" term, as the idea itself of Eastern Europe is in constant redefinition. The solidification of the idea of an \"Eastern Europe\" dates back chiefly to the (French) Enlightenment.\nThere are \"almost as many definitions of Eastern Europe as there are scholars of the region\". A related United Nations paper adds that \"every assessment of spatial identities is essentially a social and cultural construct\".\nGeographical.\nWhile the eastern geographical boundaries of Europe are well defined, the boundary between Eastern and Western Europe is not geographical but historical, religious and cultural, and is harder to designate.\nThe Ural Mountains, Ural River, and the Caucasus Mountains are the geographical land border of the eastern edge of Europe. E.g. Kazakhstan, which is mainly located in Central Asia with the most western parts of it located west of the Ural River, also shares a part of Eastern Europe.\nIn the west, however, the historical and cultural boundaries of \"Eastern Europe\" are subject to some overlap and, most importantly, have undergone historical fluctuations, which makes a precise definition of the western geographic boundaries of Eastern Europe and the geographical midpoint of Europe somewhat difficult.\nReligious and cultural influence.\nAfter the East\u2013West Schism of 1054, significant parts of Eastern Europe developed cultural unity and resistance to Catholic Western and Central Europe within the framework of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Church Slavonic language and the Cyrillic alphabet.\nThe earliest concept of Europe as a cultural sphere (instead of simply a geographic term) was formed by Alcuin of York during the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century, limited to the territories that practised Western Christianity at the time. \"European\" as a cultural term did not include many of the territories under the influence of Eastern Christianity until the early nineteenth century.\nA large section of \"Eastern Europe\" is formed by countries with dominant Orthodox churches, like Belarus, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Romania, Russia, Serbia, and Ukraine, for instance, as well as Armenia, which is predominantly Armenian Apostolic. Moreover, followers of Eastern Orthodoxy form considerable portions of the populations of predominantly Muslim Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kazakhstan, and Kosovo, both historically and presently. The Eastern Orthodox Church has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern and Southeastern Europe. To a lesser degree, forms of Eastern Protestantism and Eastern Catholicism have also been influential in Eastern Europe. Countries where Eastern Protestantism or Eastern Catholicism hold historical significance include Belarus, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.\nThe schism refers to the historical break of communion and theology between the Eastern (Orthodox) and Western (Catholic) churches. Later developments meant that the divide was no longer solely between Catholic and Orthodox churches. From the 16th century, both Western and Eastern forms of Protestantism began to emerge in Europe. Additionally, Eastern Catholic Churches began to spread in Europe during the 16th and 17th centuries, following the establishment of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in 1596. However, the concept of Eastern Catholicism itself predates this.\nSince the Great Schism of 1054, Europe has been divided between Catholic (and later additionally Protestant) churches in the West, and the Eastern Orthodox Christian (often incorrectly labelled \"Greek Orthodox\") churches in the east. The religious cleavage causes Eastern Orthodox countries to be often associated with Eastern Europe. A cleavage of this sort is, however, often problematic; for example, Greece is overwhelmingly Orthodox but is very rarely included in \"Eastern Europe\" for a variety of reasons, the most prominent being that Greece's history, for the most part, was more influenced by Mediterranean cultures and dynamics.\nCold War (1947\u20131991).\nThe fall of the Iron Curtain brought the end of the Cold War east\u2013west division in Europe, but this geopolitical concept is sometimes still used for quick reference by the media. Another definition was used during the 40 years of Cold War between 1947 and 1989, and was more or less synonymous with the terms \"Eastern Bloc\" and \"Warsaw Pact\". A similar definition names the formerly communist European states outside the Soviet Union as Eastern Europe.\nHistorians and social scientists generally view such definitions as outdated or relegated.\nEuroVoc.\nEuroVoc, a multilingual thesaurus maintained by the Publications Office of the European Union, classifies Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia, plus the candidate countries Albania, North Macedonia and Serbia as Central and Eastern European.\nContemporary developments.\nIn broadest definition, there are 28 countries that constitute the region of Eastern Europe: Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey (East Thrace), and Ukraine, all of which can be classified into any of the 6 categories below.\nBaltic states.\nUNESCO, EuroVoc, National Geographic Society, Committee for International Cooperation in National Research in Demography, and the STW Thesaurus for Economics place the Baltic states in Northern Europe, whereas the CIA World Factbook places the region in Eastern Europe with a strong assimilation to Northern Europe. Lithuania may alternatively be included in definitions of Central Europe because of its historical ties to Poland and the Catholic Church. Occasionally, Estonia and Latvia are also included. However, these countries are members of the Nordic-Baltic Eight regional cooperation forum whereas Central European countries formed their own alliance called the Visegr\u00e1d Group. The Northern Future Forum, the Nordic Investment Bank, the Nordic Battlegroup, the Nordic-Baltic Eight and the New Hanseatic League are other examples of Northern European cooperation that includes the three countries collectively referred to as the Baltic states.\nCaucasus states.\nThe South Caucasus nations of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia are included in definitions or histories of Eastern Europe. They are located in the transition zone of Eastern Europe and Western Asia. They participate in the European Union's Eastern Partnership program, the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly, and are members of the Council of Europe, which specifies that all three have political and cultural connections to Europe. In January 2002, the European Parliament noted that Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia may enter the EU in the future. Georgia and Armenia are seeking EU membership, with Georgia also seeking NATO membership alongside.\nThere are two de facto republics with limited recognition in the South Caucasus region that exist under the presence of Russian military. Both states participate in the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations: \nFormer republics with limited recognition:\nPost-Soviet states.\nSome European republics of the former Soviet Union are considered a part of Eastern Europe:\nUnrecognized states:\nCentral Europe.\nThe term \"Central Europe\" is often used by historians to designate states formerly belonging to the Holy Roman Empire, the Habsburg Empire, and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nIn some media, \"Central Europe\" can thus partially overlap with \"Eastern Europe\" of the Cold War Era. The following countries are labelled Central European by some commentators, though others still consider them to be Eastern European.\nSoutheastern Europe / Balkan states.\nSome countries in Southeast Europe can be considered part of Eastern Europe. Some of them can sometimes, albeit rarely, be characterized as belonging to Southern Europe, and some may also be included in Central Europe.\nIn some media, \"Southeast Europe\" can thus partially overlap with \"Eastern Europe\" of the Cold War Era. The following countries are labelled Southeast European by some commentators, though others still consider them to be Eastern European.\nThe following eleven countries are generally considered to be part of the Balkans by most definitions:\nAdditionally, although they have no territory on the Balkan Peninsula, the following countries are sometimes incorporated in the Balkans region, or Southeastern Europe, for cultural and historical affiliations:\nPartially recognized states:\nKazakhstan.\nDespite being frequently classified as a Central Asian country, about 4% of Kazakhstan's territory, situated west of the Ural River, geographically lies in Eastern Europe, thus technically making it a transcontinental country.\nHistory.\nClassical antiquity and medieval origins.\nAncient kingdoms of the region included Orontid Armenia, Caucasian Albania, Colchis and Iberia (not to be confused with the Iberian Peninsula in Western Europe), of which the former two were the predecessor states of Armenia and Azerbaijan respectively, while the latter two were the predecessor states of modern-day Georgia. These peripheral kingdoms were, either from the start or later on, incorporated into various Iranian empires, including the Achaemenid Persian, Parthian, and Sassanid Persian Empires. Parts of the Balkans and some more northern areas were ruled by the Achaemenid Persians as well, including Thrace, Paeonia, Macedon, and most of the Black Sea coastal regions of Romania, Ukraine, and Russia. Owing to the rivalry between the Parthian Empire and Rome, and later between Byzantium and the Sassanid Persians, the Parthians would invade the region several times, although it was never able to hold the area, unlike the Sassanids who controlled most of the Caucasus during their entire rule.\nThe earliest known distinctions between east and west in Europe originate in the history of the Roman Republic. As the Roman domain expanded, a cultural and linguistic division appeared. The mainly Greek-speaking eastern provinces had formed the highly urbanized Hellenistic civilization. In contrast, the western territories largely adopted the Latin language. The cultural and linguistic division was eventually reinforced by the later political east\u2013west division of the Roman Empire. The division between these two spheres deepened during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages because of a number of events. The Western Roman Empire collapsed in the 5th century, marking the start of the Early Middle Ages. By contrast, the Eastern Roman Empire, called the \"Byzantine Empire\" in the West, had a survival strategy that kept it alive for another 1,000 years.\nThe rise of the Frankish Empire in the west and in particular the Great Schism, which formally divided Eastern and Western Christianity in 1054, heightened the cultural and religious distinctiveness between Eastern and Western Europe. Much of Eastern Europe was invaded and occupied by the Mongols.\nDuring the , towns founded under Magdeburg rights became centres of economic development and scattered German settlements were founded in parts of Eastern Europe. Introduction of German town law is often seen as a second great step after introduction of Christianity at the turn of the first and the second millennia. The ensuing modernization of society and economy allowed the increased role played by the rulers of Bohemia and Poland.\n1453 to 1918.\nThe conquest of the Byzantine Empire, the centre of the Eastern Orthodox Church, by the Ottoman Empire in the 15th century and the gradual fragmentation of the Holy Roman Empire (which had replaced the Frankish Empire) led to a change of the importance of Catholic/Protestant vs. Eastern Orthodox concept in Europe. Armour points out that Cyrillic-alphabet use is not a strict determinant for Eastern Europe, where from Croatia to Poland and everywhere in between, the Latin alphabet is used. Greece's status as the cradle of Western civilization and an integral part of the Western world in the political, cultural and economic spheres has led to it being nearly always classified as belonging not to Eastern but Southern or Western Europe. During the late-sixteenth and early-seventeenth centuries, Eastern Europe enjoyed a relatively high standard of living. This period is also called the east-central European golden age of around 1600. At the beginning of the 17th century, numeracy levels in eastern Europe were relatively low although regional differences existed. During the 18th century, the region began to catch up with western Europe but did not develop as rapidly. Areas with stronger female autonomy developed more quickly in terms of numeracy.\nSerfdom.\nSerfdom was a prevalent status of agricultural workers until the 19th century. It resembled slavery in terms of lack of freedom, with the distinction that the landowners could not buy and sell serfs separately from the specific plots of land to which they were permanently attached. The system emerged in the 14th and the 15th centuries while it was declining in Western Europe. The climax came in the 17th and 18th century. The early 19th century saw its decline, marked especially by the abolition of serfdom in Russia in 1861. Emancipation meant that the ex-serfs paid for their freedom with annual cash payments to their former masters for decades. The system varied widely by country and was not as standardized as in Western Europe. Historians until the 20th century focused on master-serf economic and labor relations, portraying the serfs as slave-like, passive, and isolated, and 20th-century scholars downplayed the evils and emphasized the complexities.\nLack of industrialization during the long nineteenth century.\nBefore 1870 and to some extent until World War I (the end of the long nineteenth century), the industrialization that had started to develop in Northwestern and Central Europe and the United States did not extend in any significant way to the rest of the world. Even in Eastern Europe, industrialization lagged far behind. Russia, for example, remained largely rural and agricultural, and its autocratic rulers kept the peasants largely in serfdom.\nInterwar period (1919\u20131939).\nA major result of World War I was the breakup of the Russian, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman Empires, as well as partial losses to the German Empire. A surge of ethnic nationalism created a series of new states in Eastern Europe, validated by the Versailles Treaty of 1919. Poland was reconstituted after the partitions of the 1790s had divided it between Prussia, Austria, and Russia. New or renewed countries included Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Ukraine (which was soon absorbed by the Soviet Union), Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia. Austria and Hungary had much-reduced boundaries. The new states included sizeable ethnic minorities, which were to be protected according to the League of Nations minority protection regime. Throughout Eastern Europe, ethnic Germans constituted by far the largest single ethnic minority. In some areas, as in the Sudetenland, regions of Poland and parts of Slovenia, German-speakers constituted the local majority, which created conflict regarding demands of self-determination.\nRomania, Bulgaria and Albania likewise were independent. Many of the countries were still largely rural, with little industry and only a few urban centres. Nationalism was the dominant force, but most of the countries had ethnic or religious minorities, which felt threatened by majority elements. Nearly all became democratic in the 1920s, but all of them (except Czechoslovakia and Finland) gave up democracy during the depression years of the 1930s in favour of autocratic, strong-man or single-party states. The new states were unable to form stable military alliances and one by one were too weak to stand up against Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union, which took them over between 1938 and 1945.\nWorld War II and onset of the Cold War.\nRussia ended its participation in World War I in March 1918 and lost territory, as the Baltic countries and Poland became independent. The region was the main battlefield in the Second World War (1939\u201345), with the German and Soviet Armies sweeping back and forth; millions of Jews and others being killed by the Nazis in ; and millions of others killed by disease, starvation, and military action, or executed after being deemed as politically dangerous. During the final stages of World War II, the future of Eastern Europe was decided by the overwhelming power of the Soviet Army, which swept the Germans aside. It did not reach Yugoslavia and Albania, however. Finland was free but forced to be neutral in the upcoming Cold War.\nThroughout Eastern Europe, German-speaking populations were expelled to the reduced borders of Germany (or even Austria) in one of the largest ethnic cleansing operations in history. Regions where Germans had formed the local population majority were re-settled with Polish- or Czech-speakers.\nThe region fell to Soviet control, and communist governments were imposed. Yugoslavia, Albania and later Romania had their own communist regimes independent of Moscow. The Eastern Bloc at the onset of the Cold War in 1947 was far behind the Western European countries in economic rebuilding and economic progress. Winston Churchill, in his well-known \"Sinews of Peace\" address of 5 March 1946, at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri, stressed the geopolitical impact of the \"iron curtain\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic an \"iron curtain\" has descended across the Continent. Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe: Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest, and Sofia.\nEastern Bloc.\nEastern Europe after 1945 usually meant all the European countries liberated from Nazi Germany and then occupied by the Soviet Army. It included the German Democratic Republic (also known as East Germany), formed by the Soviet occupation zone of Germany. All countries in Eastern Europe adopted communist modes of control by 1948. They were officially independent of the Soviet Union, but the practical extent of this independence was quite limited. Yugoslavia and Albania had Communist control that was independent of the Kremlin.\nThe communists had a natural reservoir of popularity in that they had destroyed the German invaders. Their goal was to guarantee long-term working-class solidarity. The Soviet secret police, the NKVD, working in collaboration with local communists, created secret police forces using leadership trained in Moscow. This new secret police arrived to arrest political enemies according to prepared lists. The national communists then took power in a gradualist manner and were backed by the Soviets in many, but not all, cases. For a while, co-operative non-communist parties were tolerated. The communist governments nationalized private businesses, placed them under state ownership and monitored the media and the churches. When dividing up government offices with coalition partners, the communists took control of the interior ministries, which controlled the local police. They also took control of the mass media, especially radio, as well as the education system. They confiscated and redistributed farmland and seized control of or replaced the organizations of civil society, such as church groups, sports, youth groups, trade unions, farmers' organizations, and civic organizations. In some countries, they engaged in large-scale ethnic cleansing by moving ethnic groups such as Germans, Poles, Ukrainians and Hungarians far away from where they had lived, often with high loss of life, and relocating them within the new post-war borders of their respective countries.\nUnder Stalin's direct instructions, these nations rejected grants from the American Marshall Plan. Instead, they joined the Molotov Plan, which later evolved into the Comecon (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance). When NATO was created in 1949, most countries of Eastern Europe became members of the opposing Warsaw Pact, forming a geopolitical concept that became known as the \"Eastern Bloc\". This consisted of:\nAlbania and especially Yugoslavia were not unanimously appended to the Eastern Bloc, as they were neutral for a large part of the Cold War.\nSince 1989.\nWith the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989, the political landscape of the Eastern Bloc, and indeed the world, changed. In the German reunification, the Federal Republic of Germany peacefully absorbed the German Democratic Republic in 1990. In 1991, COMECON, the Warsaw Pact, and the Soviet Union were dissolved. Many European nations that had been part of the Soviet Union declared or regained their independence (Belarus, Moldova, Ukraine, as well as the Baltic States of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia). Czechoslovakia peacefully separated into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993. Many countries of this region joined the European Union, namely Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. The term \"EU11 countries\" refer to the Central and Eastern European member states, including the Baltic states, that accessed in 2004 and after: in 2004 the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia, and the Slovak Republic; in 2007 Bulgaria, Romania; and in 2013 Croatia.\nThe economic changes were in harmony with the constitutional reforms: constitutional provisions on public finances can be identified and, in some countries, a separate chapter deals with public finances. Generally, they soon encountered the following problems: high inflation, high unemployment, low economic growth, and high government debt. By 2000 these economies were stabilized, and between 2004 and 2013 all of them joined the European Union. Most of the constitutions define directly or indirectly the economic system of the countries parallel to the democratic transition of the 1990s: free-market economy (sometimes complemented with the socially [and ecologically] oriented sector), economic development, or only economic rights are included as a ground for the economy.\nIn the case of fiscal policy, the legislative, the executive and other state organs (Budget Council, Economic and Social Council) define and manage the budgeting. The average government debt in the countries is nearly 44%, but the deviation is great because the lowest figure is close to 10% but the highest is 97%. The trend shows that the sovereign debt ratio to GDP in most countries has been rising. Only three countries are affected by high government debt: Croatia, Hungary and Slovenia (over 70% of the GDP), while Slovakia and Poland fulfill the Maastricht requirement but only 10% below the threshold. The contribution to cover the finances for common needs is declared, the principle of just tax burden-sharing is supplemented sometimes with special aspects. Tax revenues expose typically 15\u201319 % of the GDP, and rates above 20% only rarely can be found.\nThe state audit of the government budget and expenditures is an essential control element in public finances and an important part of the concept of checks and balances. The central banks are independent state institutions, which possess a monopoly on managing and implementing a state's or federation's monetary policy. Besides monetary policy, some of them even perform the supervision of the financial intermediary system. In the case of a price stability function, the inflation rate, in the examined area, relatively quickly dropped to below 5% by 2000. In monetary policy the differences are based on the euro-zone: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia use the common currency. The economies of this decade \u2013 similar to the previous one \u2013 show a moderate inflation. As a new phenomenon, a slight negative inflation (deflation) appeared in that decade in several countries (Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia), which demonstrates sensitivity regarding international developments. The majority of the constitutions determine the national currency, legal tender or monetary unit. The local currency exchange rate to the U.S. dollar shows that drastic interventions were not necessary. National wealth or assets are the property of the state or local governments and, as an exclusive property, the management and protection of them aim at serving the public interest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37404", "revid": "53396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37404", "title": "KFC", "text": "American fast food restaurant chain\nKFC Corporation, doing business as KFC (an abbreviation of Kentucky Fried Chicken), is an American multinational fast food restaurant chain specializing in Southern fried chicken and chicken sandwiches. Headquartered in Louisville, Kentucky, it is the world's second-largest restaurant chain (as measured by sales) after McDonald's, with over 31,980 locations globally in 150 countries, as of September 2025[ [update]]. The chain is a subsidiary of Yum! Brands, a restaurant company that also owns the Pizza Hut and Taco Bell chains.\nKFC was founded by Colonel Harland Sanders (1890\u20131980), an entrepreneur who began selling fried chicken from his roadside restaurant in Corbin, Kentucky, during the Great Depression. Sanders identified the potential of the restaurant-franchising concept, and the first \"Kentucky Fried Chicken\" franchise opened in South Salt Lake, Utah, in 1952. KFC popularized chicken in the fast-food industry, diversifying the market by challenging the established dominance of the hamburger. By branding himself as \"Colonel Sanders\", Harland became a prominent figure of American cultural history, and his image remains widely used in KFC advertising to this day. However, the company's rapid expansion overwhelmed the aging Sanders, and he sold it to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown Jr. and Jack C. Massey in 1964.\nKFC was one of the first American fast-food chains to expand internationally, opening outlets in Canada, the United Kingdom, Mexico and Jamaica by the mid-1960s. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, it experienced mixed fortunes domestically, as it went through a series of changes in corporate ownership with little or no experience in the restaurant business. In the early 1970s, KFC was sold to the spirits distributor Heublein, which was taken over by the R. J. Reynolds food and tobacco conglomerate; that company sold the chain to PepsiCo. The chain continued to expand overseas, however, and in 1987 it became the first Western restaurant chain to open in China. It has since expanded rapidly in China, which is now the company's single largest market. PepsiCo spun off its restaurants division as Tricon Global Restaurants, which later changed its name to Yum! Brands.\nKFC's original product is pressure-fried chicken pieces, seasoned with Sanders' signature recipe of \"11 herbs and spices\". The constituents of the recipe are a trade secret. Larger portions of fried chicken are served in a cardboard \"bucket\", which has become a feature of the chain since it was first introduced by franchisee Pete Harman in 1957. Since the early 1990s, KFC has expanded its menu to offer other chicken products such as chicken fillet sandwiches and wraps, as well as salads and side dishes such as french fries and coleslaw, desserts and soft drinks; the latter often supplied by PepsiCo. KFC is known for its slogans \"It's Finger Lickin' Good!\", \"Nobody does chicken like KFC\", \"We do chicken right\", and \"So good\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nSanders Court &amp; Caf\u00e9.\nHarland Sanders was born in 1890 and raised on a farm outside Henryville, Indiana (near Louisville, Kentucky). When Sanders was five years old, his father died, forcing his mother to work at a canning plant. This left Sanders, as the eldest son, to care for his two younger siblings. After he reached seven years of age, his mother taught him how to cook. After leaving the family home at the age of 13, Sanders passed through several professions with mixed success.\nIn 1930, Sanders took over a Shell filling station on U.S. Route 25 just outside North Corbin, Kentucky, a small town on the edge of the Appalachian Mountains. It was here that he first served to travelers the recipes that he had learned as a child: fried chicken and other dishes such as steaks and country ham. After four years of serving from his own dining room table, Sanders purchased the larger filling station on the other side of the road and expanded to six tables. By 1936, this had proven successful enough for Sanders to be given the honorary title of Kentucky Colonel by Governor Ruby Laffoon. In 1937 he expanded his restaurant to 142 seats and added a motel he purchased across the street, naming it Sanders Court &amp; Caf\u00e9.\nSanders was unhappy with the 35 minutes it took to prepare his chicken in an iron frying pan, but he refused to deep fry the chicken, which he believed lowered the quality of the product. If he pre-cooked the chicken in advance of orders, there was sometimes wastage at day's end. In 1939, the first commercial pressure cookers were released onto the market, mostly designed for steaming vegetables. Sanders bought one and modified it into a pressure fryer, which he then used to fry chicken. The new method reduced production time to be comparable with deep frying while, in the opinion of Sanders, retaining the quality of pan-fried chicken.\n\"Original Recipe\" and franchising.\nIn July 1940, Sanders finalized what came to be known as his \"Original Recipe\" of 11 herbs and spices. Although he never publicly revealed the recipe, he said the ingredients included salt and pepper and that the rest \"stand on everybody's shelf\". After being recommissioned as a Kentucky Colonel in 1950 by Governor Lawrence Wetherby, Sanders began to dress the part, growing a goatee, wearing a black frock coat (later switched to a white suit) and a string tie and referring to himself as \"the Colonel\". His associates went along with the title change, \"jokingly at first and then in earnest\", according to biographer Josh Ozersky.\nIn 1952, Sanders franchised his recipe to his friend Pete Harman of South Salt Lake, Utah, the operator of one of the city's largest restaurants. The Sanders Court &amp; Caf\u00e9 generally served travelers, so when the route planned in 1955 for Interstate 75 bypassed his properties, Sanders sold them and traveled the US to franchise his recipe to restaurant owners. Independent restaurants would pay four (later five) cents on each chicken as a franchise fee in exchange for Sanders' recipe and the right to feature it on their menus and use his name and likeness for promotional purposes.\nDon Anderson, a sign painter hired by Harman, coined the name \"Kentucky Fried Chicken\". For Harman, the addition of KFC was a way of differentiating his restaurant from competitors; a product from Kentucky was exotic and evoked imagery of Southern hospitality. Harman trademarked the phrase \"It's finger lickin' good\", which eventually became the company slogan. He also introduced the \"bucket meal\" in 1957 (14 pieces of chicken, five bread rolls and a pint of gravy in a cardboard bucket). Serving their signature meal in a paper bucket was to become an iconic feature of the company.\nBy 1963, there were 600 KFC restaurants, making the company the largest fast food operation in the United States. KFC popularized chicken in the fast food industry, diversifying the market by challenging the dominance of the hamburger.\nWith significant growth in tow, the fledgling Kentucky Fried Chicken decided in 1964 that they would begin offering franchise opportunities beyond the Atlantic, and landed on the United Kingdom as its entry point into Europe. As such, the first British KFC eatery opened its doors at 92 Fishergate in Preston, Lancashire, on May 1, 1965, and still operates today.\nPat Grace met with Sanders at his holiday home near Toronto, Canada, and agreed to franchise the brand in Ireland. In 1970 Grace returned to Ireland after a number of years in Canada to open his first Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants in Phibsboro shopping center in Dublin. Eventually he opened another six restaurants located in Dublin, Limerick and Cork. After disagreements over cost cutting with KFC management in the early 1980s, the Irish restaurants were renamed to Pat Grace's Famous Fried Chicken reportedly retaining the original recipe. These stores were closed in the late 1980s. Pat Grace went on to wholesale the chicken spice blend under the brand Grace's Perfect Blend.\nSale and global expansion.\nIn 1964, Sanders sold KFC to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown Jr. and Jack C. Massey for US$2 million (around US$17 million in 2020). The contract included a lifetime salary for Sanders and the agreement that he would be the company's quality controller and trademark. The chain had reached 3,000 outlets in 48 countries by 1970. In July 1971, Brown sold the company to the Connecticut-based Heublein, a packaged food and drinks corporation, for US$285 million (around US$1.8 billion in 2020). Sanders died in 1980, his promotional work making him a prominent figure in American cultural history. By the time of his death, there were an estimated 6,000 KFC outlets in 48 countries worldwide, with $2 billion worth of sales annually.\nIn 1982, Heublein was acquired by R. J. Reynolds, the tobacco giant. In July 1986, Reynolds announced the sale of KFC to PepsiCo for $850 million (around US$2.0 billion in 2020). The actual sale took place in early October for $840 million. PepsiCo made the chain a part of its restaurants division alongside Pizza Hut and Taco Bell. KFC entered the Chinese market in November 1987, with an outlet in Beijing.\nIn 1991, the KFC name was officially adopted, although it had already been widely known by that initialism. Kyle Craig, president of KFC U.S., admitted the change was an attempt to distance the chain from the unhealthy connotations of \"fried\". The early 1990s saw a number of successful major product launches, including spicy \"Hot Wings\" (launched in 1990), popcorn chicken (1992) and, internationally, the \"Zinger\", a spicy chicken fillet sandwich (1993). By 1994 KFC had 5,149 outlets in the US and 9,407 overall, with over 100,000 employees. In August 1997, PepsiCo spun off its restaurants division as a public company valued at US$4.5 billion (around US$7.3 billion in 2020). The new company was named Tricon Global Restaurants and, at the time, had 30,000 outlets and annual sales of US$10 billion (around US$16 billion in 2020), making it second in the world only to McDonald's. Tricon was renamed Yum! Brands in May 2002.\nOn March 31, 2011, Priszm, who was the largest franchisee of KFC restaurants in Canada at the time, went into bankruptcy protection in Ontario and British Columbia.\nBy 2015, KFC was struggling, having lost business to other retailers and being surpassed by Chick-fil-A as the leading chicken retailer in the US three years previously. The company launched a new initiative with a plan to revamp its packaging, decor and uniforms and expand its menu. Additionally, beginning in May 2015, a new series of US advertisements was launched featuring Darrell Hammond as Colonel Sanders. In a planned rotation of actors, Norm Macdonald, Jim Gaffigan, George Hamilton and Rob Riggle portrayed Sanders in similar ads through the fall of 2016. In January 2018, country music icon Reba McEntire played the first female Colonel Sanders.\nBefore leaving as CEO in 2021, Andrea Zahumensky told \"Ad Age\" the \"brand assets that we're so lucky to have\" were the bucket, the three stripes and the full name Kentucky Fried Chicken. All of these were being used more by the chain.\nAustralia rebranded KFC back to its original name, \"Kentucky Fried Chicken\" in 2019.\nOperations.\nKFC is a subsidiary of Yum! Brands, one of the largest restaurant companies in the world. KFC had sales of $23 billion in 2013. KFC is incorporated under Delaware General Corporation Law, and has its headquarters at 1441 Gardiner Lane, Louisville, Kentucky, in a three-story colonial style building known colloquially as the \"White House\" due to its resemblance to the US president's home. The headquarters contain executive offices and the company's research and development facilities.\nYum! Brands plans to move the KFC headquarters to Plano, Texas, in 2025.\nProducts.\nKFC's core product offering is pressure fried on-the-bone chicken pieces seasoned with Colonel Harland Sanders' \"Original Recipe\" of 11 herbs and spices. The product is typically available in either two- or three-piece individual servings or in a family size cardboard bucket typically holding between six and 16 chicken pieces. In territories that follow the system handed down by Colonel Sanders, such as Canada and the UK, each chicken is divided into nine different cuts (two drumsticks, two thighs, two wings, two breast pieces and one keel); however, the United States now uses an eight-piece cut.\nThe chicken is hand-breaded at individual KFC outlets with wheat flour mixed with seasoning in a two- to four-minute process. It is then pressure fried for between seven and 10 minutes (the timing differs between countries) in oil at 185 degrees Celsius. Following this, the chicken is left to stand for 5 minutes in order for it to sufficiently cool before it is placed in the warming oven. It is KFC policy to discard chicken if it has not been sold within 90 minutes in order to ensure freshness. The frying oil varies regionally and versions used include sunflower, soybean, rapeseed and palm oil. A KFC executive stated that the taste of the chicken will vary between regions depending on the oil variety used and whether the chicken has been corn-fed or wheat-fed.\nAs well as its core chicken on the bone offering, KFC's major products include chicken burgers (including the Zinger and the Tower); wraps (\"Twisters\" and \"Boxmasters\"); and a variety of finger foods, including crispy chicken strips and hot wings. Popcorn chicken, which consists of bite-sized pieces of fried chicken, is one of the most widely available KFC products. In some locations, such as in Australia, Belarus, Malaysia and South Africa, chicken nuggets are also sold.\nMcCormick &amp; Company is KFC's largest supplier of sauces, seasonings and marinades and is a long-term partner in new product development.\nDue to the company's previous relationship with PepsiCo, most territories supply PepsiCo products, but exceptional territories include Barbados, Greece, Mexico, New Zealand, the Philippines, Romania, South Africa, Turkey, Indonesia (since 2019), Singapore (since 2022) and Malaysia (since 2022) which stock drinks supplied by The Coca-Cola Company, and Aruba, which stocks RC Cola from the Cott Corporation. In Peru, the locally popular Inca Kola is sold.\nLaunched in 2009, the Krusher/Krushem range of frozen beverages containing \"real bits\" such as Kit Kat, Oreo and strawberry shortcake is available in over 2,000 outlets. Egg custard tart is a popular dessert worldwide, but other items include ice cream sundaes and tres leches cake in Peru.\nIn 2012, the \"KFC AM\" breakfast menu began to be rolled out internationally, including such items as pancakes, waffles and porridge, as well as fried chicken.\nOn August 27, 2019, KFC tested meatless boneless wings and nuggets in Atlanta, Georgia.\nIn February 2023, Kentucky Fried Chicken in Australia announced that several items would no longer be sold in their menu, including wings, popcorn chicken, Nashville hot sauce and strawberry lemonade.\nThe 11 herbs and spices.\nSanders' Original Recipe of \"11 herbs and spices\" is one of the best known trade secrets in the catering industry. The recipe is not patented, because patent law requires public disclosure of an invention and provides protection only for a strictly limited term, whereas trade secrets can remain the intellectual property of their holders in perpetuity.\nA copy of the recipe, signed by Sanders, is held inside a safe inside a vault in KFC's Louisville headquarters, along with 11 vials containing the herbs and spices. To maintain the secrecy of the recipe, half of it is produced by Griffith Laboratories before it is given to McCormick, who add the second half.\nIn 1999, a couple who bought the house formerly occupied by Colonel Sanders found scribbled notes purported to be the secret recipe. Initially, KFC wanted to file a lawsuit against the couple to stop an auction of the notes but, by early 2001, it dropped the lawsuit, claiming the scribbled notes are \"nowhere close\" to the original recipe.\nJoe Ledington of Kentucky, a nephew by marriage of Colonel Sanders, claimed to have found a copy of the original KFC fried chicken recipe on a handwritten piece of paper in an envelope in a scrapbook. In August 2016, \"Chicago Tribune\" staffers conducted a cooking test of this recipe and claimed after a few attempts that, with the addition of the MSG flavor-enhancer Ac'cent, they produced fried chicken which tasted \"indistinguishable\" from the chicken they purchased at KFC.\nRegionalized menus.\nKFC adapts its menu internationally to suit regional tastes and there are over 300 KFC menu items worldwide. Some locations, such as the UK and the US, sell grilled chicken. In predominantly Islamic countries, the chicken served is halal. In Asia, there is a preference for spicy foods, such as the Zinger chicken burger. In many international markets, the seasoning used for the core chicken pieces product is available as a hot and spicy version as an alternative to the classic KFC recipe. The hot and spicy coating, as well as having a spicier flavour, also has a crispy consistency. In Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Sri Lanka, a grilled chicken known as \"Smoky Red\" is available. KFC locations in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau and Vietnam offer a roasted option known as Flava Crava. KFC's menu in China includes, among other items incorporating Chinese food items, rice bowls, noodle dishes, and chicken prepared in the style of Peking duck. Some locations in the US sell fried chicken livers and gizzards. A small number of US outlets offer an all-you-can-eat buffet option with a limited menu.\nValue menu items are sold under the \"Streetwise\" name in locations such as Canada, Nigeria, South Africa and Mauritius. Side dishes often include French fries, coleslaw, barbecue baked beans, corn on the cob, mashed potato, bread rolls and American biscuits. Salads include the bean salad, the Caesar salad and the garden salad. In a number of territories, KFC sells onion rings. In most of Asia, several Sub-Saharan Africa and Pacific markets, rice based side dishes are often sold. In Greece and Bulgaria, potato wedges are sold instead of French fries.\nIn a number of Eastern European locations and Portugal, beer is offered in addition to soft drinks. In 2023 KFC branches in UK and Ireland introduced new 'signature fries' (fries coated in herbs and spice) in an attempt to improve the taste of the fries.\nEquipment.\nKFC initially used stove-top covered cooking pots to fry its chicken. In the 1960s, the officially recommended model was the L S Hartzog developed \"KFC 20-Head Cooker\", a large device that cost $16,000. The Hartzog model had no oil filtration system, meaning that filtering had to be done manually, and the pressure fryers occasionally exploded often harming employees. In 1969, inventor and engineer Winston L. Shelton developed the \"Collectramatic\" pressurized fryer to overcome the problems KFC faced in quickly frying chicken to meet growing customer demand. The Collectramatic used precision time and temperature controls and self-filtered the cooking oil \u2013 all while meeting Colonel Sanders' high standards. Fred Jeffries, then vice president of purchasing at KFC, claimed that the invention helped fuel the company's rapid expansion and success:\nThere's no way it (KFC) could have grown as it did without the Collectramatic. Stores were doing about $200,000 a year in sales on average with the pots...but they could never have done the $900,000 a year it became without Win's fryer. He (Shelton) helped set the stage for that with true engineering thinking.\nAlthough a number of franchisees bought the Collectramatic, which had the support of Colonel Sanders from 1970 onwards, John Y. Brown Jr. had given tacit approval to franchisees to exclusively use the older L S Hartzog fryer, saying \"Though those old pots were damn dangerous, at least we knew they worked! I was mostly afraid these new fryers would break down in the middle of business.\" Brown warned franchisees that they were in violation of their contract if they used the Collectramatic. Brown held his ground on the issue until he learned that his father, John Y. Brown Sr., who owned multiple KFC franchises, was successfully using the Collectramatic in every franchise he owned. The issue was eventually resolved after Heublein purchased KFC, acquired Hartzog and nullified the contract. The Collectramatic has been an approved pressure fryer for KFC from 1972 onwards.\nFrom 2013 onwards, KFC has been transitioning from using Collectramatic cookers to pressure fryers produced by Henny Penny, which supplies KFC with various equipment. The 'Velocity' series of pressure fryers includes increased load capacity, automatic oil filtration and increased oil longevity.\nAdvertising.\nColonel Sanders was a key component of KFC advertising until his death in 1980. Despite his death, Sanders remains a key icon of the company as an \"international symbol of hospitality\". Early official slogans for the company included \"North America's Hospitality Dish\" (from 1956) and \"We fix Sunday dinner seven nights a week\". The \"finger lickin' good\" slogan was used from 1956 and went on to become one of the best-known slogans of the 20th century. The trademark expired in the US in 2006. The first KFC logo was introduced in 1952 and featured a \"Kentucky Fried Chicken\" typeface and a logo of the Colonel. In 1962, Dave Thomas took Colonel Sanders' bucket and turned it into a sign that revolved in a circular motion in front of almost every American KFC outlet.\nAdvertising played a key role at KFC after it was sold by Sanders and the company began to advertise on US television with a budget of US$4 million in 1966. In order to fund nationwide advertising campaigns, the Kentucky Fried Chicken Advertising Co-Op was established, giving franchisees 10 votes and the company three when deciding on budgets and campaigns. In 1969, KFC hired its first national advertising agency, Leo Burnett. A notable Burnett campaign in 1972 was the \"Get a bucket of chicken, have a barrel of fun\" jingle, performed by Barry Manilow. By 1976, KFC was one of the largest advertisers in the US.\nControversies and criticism.\nSince the beginning of the 21st century, fast food has been criticized for its animal welfare record, its links to obesity and its environmental impact. Eric Schlosser's book \"Fast Food Nation\" (2002) and Morgan Spurlock's film \"Super Size Me\" (2004) reflected these concerns. Since 2003, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has protested KFC's choice of poultry suppliers worldwide. The exception is KFC Canada, which signed an agreement pledging to only use \"animal-friendly\" suppliers. President of KFC's US division Gregg Dedrick said PETA mischaracterized KFC as a poultry producer rather than a purchaser of chickens. In 2008, Yum! stated: \"[As] a major purchaser of food products, [Yum!] has the opportunity and responsibility to influence the way animals supplied to us are treated. We take that responsibility very seriously, and we are monitoring our suppliers on an ongoing basis.\"\nIn 2006, Greenpeace accused KFC Europe of sourcing the soya bean for its chicken feed from Cargill, which had been accused of clearing large swathes of the Amazon rainforest in order to grow the crop.\nIn 2010, according to \"The Guardian\", \"in the US where fried chicken remains closely associated with age-old racist stereotypes about black people in the once segregated south\", KFC Australia aired the 30-second promotion on television named \"KFC's cricket survival guide\" which shows a white cricket fan surrounded by black fans from the opposing team. The television announcer asks, \"Need a tip when you're stuck in an awkward situation?\" The fan passes around his \"bucket of KFC\", even though the commercial was intended for an Australian audience, which found its way to social media in the United States, prompting sharp disapproval. KFC Australia made a statement to the fact the commercial was \"misinterpreted by a segment of people in the US\" and it was a \"light-hearted reference to the West Indian cricket team\" and \"The ad was reproduced online in the US without KFC's permission, where we are told a culturally-based stereotype exists, leading to the incorrect assertion of racism...We unequivocally condemn discrimination of any type and have a proud history as one of the world's leading employers for diversity\".\nIn May 2012, Greenpeace accused KFC of sourcing paper pulp for its food packaging from Indonesian rainforest wood. Independent forensic tests showed that some packaging contained more than 50 percent mixed tropical hardwood fiber, sourced from Asia Pulp &amp; Paper (APP). APP said such fiber can be found in recycled paper, or: \"It can also come from tree residues that are cleared, after a forest area has become degraded, logged-over or burned, as part of a sustainable development plan. APP has strict policies and practices in place to ensure that only residues from legal plantation development on degraded or logged-over forest areas and sustainable wood fiber enters the production supply chain.\" KFC said: \"From a global perspective, 60 percent of the paper products that Yum! (our parent company) sources are from sustainable sources. Our suppliers are working towards making it 100 percent.\"\nIn December 2012, the chain was criticized in China when it was discovered that a number of KFC suppliers had been using growth hormones and an excessive amount of antibiotics on its poultry in ways that violated Chinese law. In February 2013, Yum! CEO David Novak admitted that the scandal had been \"longer lasting and more impactful than we ever imagined\". The issue is of major concern to Yum!, which earns almost half of its profits from China, largely through the KFC brand. In March 2013, Yum! reported that sales had rebounded in February, but that lower sales in December and January would result in a decline in same-store sales of 20 percent in the first quarter.\nIn 2017, KFC was fined \u00a3950,000 after two workers in the UK were scalded by boiling hot gravy. The company admitted to charges of failing in a duty of care to employees and was ordered by Teesside Crown Court in Middlesbrough to pay fines of \u00a3800,000 and \u00a3150,000.\nIn February 2018, logistics mismanagement by DHL, which had been selected by KFC UK as their new delivery partner, caused a chicken shortage in the United Kingdom \u2013 KFC's largest market in Europe \u2013 forcing the company to temporarily close hundreds of restaurants around the country. KFC apologized by taking out adverts in British newspapers showing the company's initials rearranged to read \"FCK\", followed by an apology, which was well received.\nIn November 2021, Finland's first KFC restaurant was opened at the Itis shopping center in It\u00e4keskus, Helsinki. A few days before the opening day, a tent had appeared in front of the restaurant, where a man who had kept his identity secret for a few days had stayed, and who on the opening day revealed himself to the public as a vegan activist defending animal rights. After trying to give his speech to those present, the security company carried him away. Even before the opening of the restaurant, in October, news of a controversy over the procurement of a broiler for food from Poland; the cause is mainly related to the risk of salmonella in broilers, which is a significant problem in Poland, whereas its prevalence in Finland is low.\nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, a number of companies have faced growing pressure to halt operations in Russia but have not yet done so. This includes KFC, which has over 1,000 outlets in Russia, more than any other Western fast food chain.\nHowever, within a few years, all Russian KFC restaurants were rebranded as \"Rostic's\".\nIn early 2022 a promotional video was shot with influencer Niko Omilana showing a chicken farm in the KFC supply chain. The video depicted birds with a good quality of life. Animal rights activists entered the same farm months later and found vastly different conditions, with instances of \"severe overcrowding\" and \"lame and dead birds\". Paul Roger, a vet and founder member of AWSELVA, said birds in the footage were exhibiting \"behavioural signs of stress such as feather pecking and topical skin infection\". KFC's actions were branded \"misleading\".\nOn November 9, 2022, KFC Germany issued an announcement inviting its German audience to celebrate Kristallnacht with \"Cheesy Chicken\". An apology was issued shortly afterwards, blaming the original message as an \"error in our system\".\nIn May 2024, the closure of the outlet in Malaysia was reported due to the ongoing Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. Attacks on two outlets in Baghdad, Iraq were also reported.\nIn September 2024, KFC announced that it would not meet the Better Chicken Commitment, an animal welfare pledge made in 2019. The commitment includes several welfare standards, such as adopting slower-growing breeds by 2026, but as of 2024, only 1% of KFC's chickens were from such breeds.\nIn June 2025, KFC temporarily closed all its 11 restaurants in Denmark and dismissed its franchise holder in the country, after a TV show (broadcast on June 23) revealed that in multiple restaurants, employees were systematically falsifying (\"extending\") use-by dates on raw chicken, and possibly other problems. Before broadcast, the questions by the TV reporter caused the national food authority to launch simultaneous inspection raids on all 11 restaurants. None got an all-clear, seven received strict warnings and four were given punishments (fines/charges or forced instant closure). Among the issues found by the authorities were moldy residue in multiple restaurants; a common procedure of reusing the breading mix continuously instead of using fresh breading mix every three hours, as stated in written procedures that were hastily changed during the raids (some inspections only saw the new procedure, which they found dubious); a common thawing procedure (with no written risk assessment documentation) for raw chicken which would allow chicken to be served up to four days after the start of defrosting and made it difficult to confirm the actual age of the raw chicken; and suspect messages between restaurant bosses and the national franchise holder about deceiving inspectors from both the government and KFC Western Europe. Furthermore, various formal and legal issues were found in multiple restaurants, such as dirty waste buckets too close to fresh food, parts of operations done under the company ID of the parent company instead of the actual restaurant as registered with food safety authorities, and incomplete paperwork on deliveries.\nIn September 2025, Czech journalist Jan Tuna reported that the practices of artificially extending the shelf life of meat that led to the closure of all KFC outlets in Denmark may also be used by some branches in the Czech Republic. He cited the testimony of a former employee from the Jablonec nad Nisou branch. The State Agricultural and Food Inspection Authority later revealed that similar practices were used by the KFC outlet in Liberec. The inspection subsequently decided to carry out mass inspections of KFC restaurants throughout the country. In November the spokesperson of the State Agricultural and Food Inspection Authority revealed that employees of the KFC outlet in Prague-Dejvice defrosted chicken meat in standing water, which increases microbiological risks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37406", "revid": "1827553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37406", "title": "Kristiansund Municipality", "text": "Municipality in M\u00f8re og Romsdal, Norway\nKristiansund (, ; historically spelled Christianssund and earlier named Fosna) is a municipality on the western coast of Norway in the Nordm\u00f8re district of M\u00f8re og Romsdal county. The administrative center of the municipality is the town of Kristiansund (established in 1742), which is the major town for the whole Nordm\u00f8re region. Other notable settlements in the municipality include the villages of Kvalv\u00e5g, Rensvik, and Nedre Frei.\nThe municipality is the 334th largest by area out of the 357 municipalities in Norway. Kristiansund Municipality is the 53rd most populous municipality in Norway with a population of 24,404. The municipality's population density is and its population has increased by 0.04% over the previous 10-year period.\nGeneral information.\nThe parish of \"Christianssund\" was established as a municipality on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). Initially, the small island municipality included just the town of Christianssund and its immediate surrounding area. During the 1960s, there were many municipal mergers across Norway due to the work of the Schei Committee. On 1 January 1964, Kristiansund Municipality was merged with the tiny Grip Municipality (population: 104), an island municipality to the northwest and the \"Dale\" area of Bremsnes Municipality on Nordlandet island (population: 963). The neighboring Frei Municipality was merged with Kristiansund on 1 January 2008 creating a much larger Kristiansund Municipality.\nToponymy.\nThe municipality is named after the town of Kristiansund. Historically, it was spelled \"Christianssund\". The first element of the name comes from the Danish-Norwegian King Christian VI who founded the town in 1742. The last element of the name is which means \"strait\" or \"sound\". The old name of the town/village (originally the island Kirkelandet) was \"Fosna\" or \"Fosen\" () which means \"hiding place\" (here 'hidden port'). It was also often named \"Lille Fosen\" (\"the small Fosen\") to distinguish it from the island \"Storfosna\" (\"the big Fosen\") in \u00d8rland.\nBefore 1877, the name was spelled \"Christianssund\", from 1877 to 1888 it was spelled \"Kristianssund\", and since 1889 it has had its present spelling, \"Kristiansund\".\nBefore the introduction of postal codes in Norway in 1968, it was easy to confuse the name \"Kristiansund\" with Kristiansand in the south. It was therefore obligatory to always add an \"N\" (for north) to Kristiansund \"(Kristiansund N)\" and an \"S\" (for south) to Kristiansand \"(Kristiansand S)\". This is pretty much still practiced and also occurs in some other contexts than postal addresses.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms was granted on 27 June 1742. The arms were granted by King Christian VI and are described as a silver or white river flowing from a cliff, with salmon swimming upwards on a blue background. The waterfall is most likely based on a misinterpretaion of the old name for the town \"Fosen\", as it resembles the Norwegian word for \"waterfall\". A replica of the waterfall shown in the arms was eventually constructed in 1992 for the towns 250th anniversary.\nChurches.\nThe Church of Norway has three parishes () within Kristiansund Municipality. It is part of the Ytre Nordm\u00f8re prosti (deanery) in the Diocese of M\u00f8re.\nSt. Eystein Catholic Church is the only Catholic church in Kristiansund.\nGeography.\nThe municipality borders Sm\u00f8la Municipality and Aure Municipality to the northeast, Tingvoll Municipality to the east, Gjemnes Municipality to the south, and Aver\u00f8y Municipality to the southwest. The small Grip archipelago is located in the northwestern part of the municipality. The municipality is surrounded by the Freifjorden and Kvernesfjorden with the open sea to the northwest.\nThe town of Kristiansund is built on four main islands, with many smaller islands. The island of Nordlandet (\"North Land\", humorously nicknamed \"Marokko\"), is the second largest island and the site of the local airport, Kristiansund Airport, Kvernberget (IATA code: KSU). Kirklandet, third in size is made up of two areas \"Kirkelandet\" and \"Gomalandet\". In the local dialect, \"Kirkelandet\" (the \"Church Land\") is pronounced \"Kirklandet\", without the middle \"e\". The smallest island is Innlandet (\"Innermost Land\"; humorously, \"Tahiti\"). The largest island in the municipality is Frei which was part of the old Frei Municipality which was merged into Kristiansund on 1 January 2008. The highest point of the municipality is located on Frei island, Freikollen at a height of .\nThe islands of Grip, located northwest of Kristiansund are also a part of the municipality. Grip Municipality was Norway's smallest municipality, and also one of the most remote until it merged with Kristiansund in 1964. Today the island of Grip holds status as a deserted fishing village, but in the summer season it is a popular tourist attraction due to the very special location and architecture. Grip Stave Church, the second smallest stave church of Norway (Undredal Stave Church is smaller), is also located at Grip. It is also where Grip Lighthouse is located.\nKristiansund includes the town of Kristiansund which is one of the most densely populated cities of Norway, having what is arguably the country's most urban small city centre, due to the relatively small size of the islands on which it is built and the very constricted central harbor/town area of Kirkelandet.\nHistory.\n8000 BC\u20131066.\nArcheological evidence exists of settlement in the area which is now Kristiansund from as early as 8000 BCE. At the end of the last ice age some areas at the western coast of Norway were ice-free. The first evidence of such settlements were discovered at Voldvatnet in Kristiansund in 1909. More have since been found, a discovery at Kvernberget in 2007 when archeological digs were conducted before the extension of the city's airport. Finds have also been discovered from the Bronze Age, and early Iron Age.\nDuring the Viking era, there were many battles around Kristiansund. The most famous one was the Battle of Rastarkalv on the island of Frei, where the Norwegian King H\u00e5kon the Good fought against the Eirikss\u00f8nnene group. There is now a monument located near at Nedre Frei, where the battle was fought.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe island of Grip was an important fishing community during the Middle Ages, and was considered to be the most important municipality in the region at the time. The natural harbour in Lille-fosen, close to where Kristiansund is located today was also frequently used for fishing purposes.\n17th to 18th century.\nDuring the 17th century, a small settlement developed around the area we know today as Kristiansund harbour. As more and more settlers arrived, the area became an important trading port for fishing and the lumber transportation along the coast. The Dano-Norwegian government established a customs station here, which was controlled by the main trading port in Trondheim. In 1631, the port was declared to be a ladested.\nDutch sailors brought the knowledge of clipfish production to Kristiansund at the end of the 17th century, and for a number of years the town was the largest exporter of clipfish in Norway, exporting goods mainly to the Mediterranean countries as Spain and Portugal. The city's clipfish production was also part of the reason why it was given town status as a kj\u00f8pstad in 1742.\n19th century to present.\nThe town of \"Christianssund\" was established as the municipality of Christianssund on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). \nThe bombing of Kristiansund occurred from April 28 to May 1, 1940, during the German occupation of Norway in World War II. German air raids destroyed around 800 buildings, causing major damage and killing six people. In 1944, Royal Air Force planes accidentally hit civilian homes during a bombing raid, killing 12.\nDuring the 1960s, there were many municipal mergers across Norway due to the work of the Schei Committee. On 1 January 1964, Kristiansund Municipality was merged with the tiny Grip Municipality (population: 104) to the northwest and the \"Dale\" area of Bremsnes Municipality on Nordlandet island (population: 963). The neighboring Frei Municipality was merged with Kristiansund on 1 January 2008 creating a much larger Kristiansund Municipality.\nMedia.\nThe local newspaper of Kristiansund is \"Tidens Krav\", which also functions as a semi-regional newspaper for the other municipalities located nearby the city. Other online newspapers for the city exists, such as \"KSU.no\". A local radio station, also named KSU 24/7, was founded in 2016.\nClimate.\nKristiansund has a temperate oceanic climate (Cfb) with cool-to-warm summers and mild winters. The city structure with the unique natural harbour of the city combined with Atlantic air from the southwest and the Gulf Stream gives Kristiansund a much warmer climate than its latitude would indicate. The all-time high was set 28 July 2018. The warmest month on record at Kristiansund Airport was July 2014 with mean and average daily high . The all-time low was recorded 23 February 2010. The coldest month on record at Kristiansund Airport was December 2010 with mean and average daily low . The coldest month recorded at earlier weather stations in Kristiansund was February 1947 with mean (recordings since 1871).\nGovernment.\nKristiansund Municipality is responsible for primary education (through 10th grade), outpatient health services, senior citizen services, welfare and other social services, zoning, economic development, and municipal roads and utilities. The municipality is governed by a municipal council of directly elected representatives. The mayor is indirectly elected by a vote of the municipal council. The municipality is under the jurisdiction of the Nordm\u00f8re og Romsdal District Court and the Frostating Court of Appeal.\nMunicipal council.\nThe municipal council () of Kristiansund Municipality is made up of 45 representatives that are elected to four-year terms. The tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMayor.\nThe mayor () of Kristiansund Municipality is the political leader of the municipality and the chairperson of the municipal council. Here is a list of people who have held this position:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns.\nKirstiansund has sister city agreements with the following places:\nTogether the three cities hold a tournament called \"Nordiske Dager\" (\"Nordic Days\").\nParks and gardens.\nThough fairly small in size, the city of Kristiansund contains many green parks and gardens, frequently used by the city's inhabitants. There are two larger parks near the city centre. The first one is located near Langveien, and was constructed in the aftermath of World War II . The second one is located in Vanndamman. This area used to be part of the city water supply, due to the large amount of small lakes in the area. (hence the name \"Vanndamman\" (The Water ponds)) The two parks are partly linked together, but the Langveien-park serve more as an urban recreation area due to the short walking distance from the city centre, while the Vanndamman-park is more suitable for outings and jogging.\nTransport.\nStarted in 1876 and still going strong is the \"Sundb\u00e5t\" (\"Sound Boat\"/\"Strait Crossing Boat\") shuttle service with a capacity of a few tens of passengers, travelling between the islands. The small motor ferry crosses the harbour from Kirkelandet to Innlandet, then goes on to Nordlandet, to Gomalandet, and back to Kirkelandet, repeating the round trip in half-hour intervals morning to evening on weekdays. The Sundb\u00e5t bears the distinction of being \"the world's oldest motorized regular public transport system in continuous service\".\nThe road to Kristiansund from the mainland, Norwegian National Road 70 is connected to European route E39 by the bridge/tunnel system called Krifast. After passing through the underwater Freifjord Tunnel from the central part of Krifast, National Road 70 crosses Frei, and enters Kristiansund over the Omsund Bridge onto Nordlandet. The Nordsund Bridge brings the Rv 70 to Gomalandet and its terminus in downtown at Kirkelandet. Another high bridge, the S\u00f8rsund Bridge, leads from Kirkelandet to Innlandet. E39 leads southwest to the town of Molde and northeast via the European route E6 to Tr\u00f8ndelag and the city of Trondheim.\nThere used to be a car ferry going from Kirkelandet island to neighboring Aver\u00f8y Municipality to the west, whose people have been commuting to town for many years for work as well as selling agricultural products. The ferry to Aver\u00f8y connected Kristiansund to Norwegian National Road 64, which continued along the scenic Atlanterhavsvegen to Molde. The ferry was replaced by the long underwater Atlantic Ocean Tunnel in December 2009. Because both tunnels are forbidden for bicyclists, Kristiansund cannot easily be reached by bicycle.\nA second car ferry goes from \"Seivika\" on Nordlandet to Tustna in the northeast (road: \"RV 680\"), with further road and ferry connections to the islands of Sm\u00f8la and Hitra, and to Aure Municipality on the mainland.\nBesides roads and car ferries and Kristiansund Airport, Kvernberget, connections to/from Kristiansund consist of the traditional coastal express Hurtigruten connecting coastal towns from Bergen in the south to Kirkenes in the north, and the high speed catamaran passenger service Kystekspressen to Trondheim. Another option to get to Kristiansund is to fly with Scandinavian Airlines from several other Norwegian cities.\nCommerce and industry.\nKristiansund is known as the major \"bacalhau\" city of Norway. Bacalhau is made of salted, dried codfish, and has traditionally been exported in large amounts to Spain, Portugal and Latin America as food suitable during Lent. In recent years Kristiansund has become the major oil and gas city at the mid-northwestern coast. Oil companies like Royal Dutch Shell and Statoil have offices in Kristiansund from where they serve their offshore installations at Haltenbanken (one of the northernmost underwater oil fields in the world).\nDue to the city's heavy involvement in fish processing and international shipping, there used to be as many as seven consulates in Kristiansund, mainly to Latin countries. Currently, there are only five left: Britain, Finland, Latvia, the Netherlands, and Portugal.\nCulture and sports.\nKristiansund is an important cultural centre in the region of Nordm\u00f8re. The city is probably best known for housing one of Norway's oldest operas, which was established in 1928 by Edvard Br\u00e6in. There is an annual opera festival held every February in Kristiansund named The Opera Weeks (Operafestukene). In addition to this, Kristiansund is also host city of Northern Europes largest photo festival, Nordic Light. Even though this is a rather \"young\" festival, (Est. 2006) it has grown to become one of the most important of its kind in Europe, attracting famous photographers from all around the world, like Don McCullin, Jock Sturges and William Klein. Other smaller festivals held in Kristiansund include The Tahiti Festival and Kristiansund Church, Art and Culture Festival (shortened to the KKKK-festival in Norwegian).\nKristiansund's main football team, Kristiansund BK, is a result of the 2003 merger between the two largest football teams in the city, KFK and Clausenengen, which together with support from local businesses helped in creating a united elite club commitment. The club started at the 4th level (tredje divisjon) of the Norwegian football league system, and qualified for the 2017 season to play at the top level (Eliteserien). The team finished 7th in its first season at the top level, beating all expectation, and has since climbed upwards; Finishing 5th at the top level in 2020.\nOther popular sports in Kristiansund include Volleyball, Wrestling, Swimming, Ice skating and Handball.\nNotable people.\nThe following people are from, or have their roots in, Kristiansund.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37407", "revid": "47844293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37407", "title": "Strasbourg", "text": "Prefecture and commune in Grand Est, France\nStrasbourg ( , ; ; ) is the prefecture and largest city of the Grand Est region of eastern France, in the historic region of Alsace. It is the prefecture of the Bas-Rhin department and the official seat of the European Parliament.\nThe city has about three hundred thousand inhabitants, and together Greater Strasbourg and the arrondissement of Strasbourg have over five hundred thousand. Strasbourg's metropolitan area had a population of 860,744 in 2020, making it the eighth-largest metro area in France and home to 14% of the Grand Est region's inhabitants. The transnational Eurodistrict Strasbourg-Ortenau had a population of roughly 1,000,000 in 2022. Strasbourg is one of the \"de facto\" four main capitals of the European Union (alongside Brussels, Luxembourg and Frankfurt), as it is the seat of several European institutions, such as the European Parliament, the Eurocorps and the European Ombudsman of the European Union. An organization separate from the European Union, the Council of Europe (with its European Court of Human Rights, its European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines most commonly known in French as \"Pharmacop\u00e9e Europ\u00e9enne\", and its European Audiovisual Observatory) is also located in the city.\nTogether with Basel (Bank for International Settlements), Geneva (United Nations), The Hague (International Court of Justice) and New York City (United Nations world headquarters), Strasbourg is among the few cities in the world that is not a national capital that hosts international organisations of the first order. The city is the seat of many non-European international institutions such as the Central Commission for Navigation on the Rhine and the International Institute of Human Rights. It is the second city in France in terms of international congresses and symposia, after Paris. Strasbourg's historic city centre, the \"Grande \u00cele\" (Grand Island), was classified a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1988, with the newer \"Neustadt\" being added to the site in 2017. Strasbourg is immersed in Franco-German culture and although violently disputed throughout history, has been a cultural bridge between France and Germany for centuries, especially through the University of Strasbourg, currently the second-largest in France, and the coexistence of Catholic and Protestant culture. It is also home to the largest Islamic place of worship in France, the Strasbourg Grand Mosque.\nEconomically, Strasbourg is an important centre of manufacturing and engineering, as well as a hub of road, rail, and river transportation. The port of Strasbourg is the second-largest on the Rhine after Duisburg in Germany, and the second-largest river port in France after Paris.\nEtymology and names.\nUntil the fifth century AD, the city was known as \"Argantorati\" (in the nominative, \"Argantorate\" in the locative), a Celtic Gaulish name Latinised first as \"Argentorate\" (with Gaulish locative ending, as appearing on the first Roman milestones in the first century) and then as \"Argentoratum\" (with regular Latin nominative ending, in later Latin texts). The Gaulish name is a compound of \"arganto(n)-\" (cognate to Latin \"argentum\", which gave modern French \"argent\"), the Gaulish word for silver; and \"-rati\", the Gaulish word for fortified enclosures, cognate to the Old Irish \"r\u00e1th\" (see ringfort). \"Arganto\" also referred to any precious metal, particularly gold, which suggests that the settlement began either as a fortified enclosure located by a river gold mining site, or as a hoard of gold mined from the nearby rivers.\nAfter the fifth century the city became known by a completely different name, later Gallicized as Strasbourg (Lower Alsatian: \"Strossburi\"; ). That name is of Germanic origin and means 'town (at the crossing) of roads'. The modern \"Stras-\" is cognate with the German \"Stra\u00dfe\" and English \"street\", both derived from Latin \"strata\" (\"paved road\"), while \"-bourg\" is cognate with the German \"Burg\" and English \"borough\", both derived from Proto-Germanic \"*burgz\" (\"hill fort, fortress\").\nGregory of Tours was the first to mention the name change: in the tenth book of his \"History of the Franks\" written shortly after 590 he said that Egidius, Bishop of Reims, accused of plotting against King Childebert II of Austrasia in favor of his uncle King Chilperic I of Neustria, was tried by a synod of Austrasian bishops in Metz in November 590, found guilty and removed from the priesthood, then taken \"ad Argentoratensem urbem, quam nunc Strateburgum vocant\" (\"to the city of Argentoratum, which they now call \"Strateburgus\"\"), where he was exiled.\nHistory.\nThe Roman camp of Argentoratum was first mentioned in 12 BC; the city of Strasbourg which grew from it celebrated its 2,000th anniversary in 1988. The fertile area in the Upper Rhine Plain between the rivers Ill and Rhine had already been populated since the Middle Paleolithic.\nBetween 362 and 1262, Strasbourg was governed by the bishops of Strasbourg; their rule was reinforced in 873 and then more in 982. In 1262, the citizens violently rebelled against the bishop's rule (Battle of Hausbergen) and Strasbourg became a free imperial city. It became a French city in 1681, after the conquest of Alsace by the armies of Louis XIV. In 1871, after the Franco-Prussian War, the city, as part of the Imperial Territory of Alsace\u2013Lorraine, became German again, until 1918 (end of World War I), when it reverted to France. Strasbourg was captured by the German army in June 1940 at the end of the Battle of France (World War II), and subsequently came under German control again through formal annexation into the Gau Baden-Elsa\u00df under the Nazi Gauleiter Robert Wagner; since the liberation of the city by the 2nd French Armoured Division under General Leclerc in November 1944, it has again been a French city. In 2016, Strasbourg was promoted from capital of Alsace to capital of Grand Est.\nStrasbourg played an important part in the Protestant Reformation, with personalities such as John Calvin, Martin Bucer, Wolfgang Capito, Matthew and Katharina Zell, but also in other aspects of Christianity such as German mysticism, with Johannes Tauler, Pietism, with Philipp Spener, and Reverence for Life, with Albert Schweitzer. Delegates from the city took part in the Protestation at Speyer. It was also one of the first centres of the printing industry with pioneers such as Johannes Gutenberg, Johannes Mentelin, and Heinrich Eggestein. Among the darkest periods in the city's long history were the years 1349 (Strasbourg massacre), 1518 (Dancing plague), 1793 (Reign of Terror), 1870 (Siege of Strasbourg) and the years 1940\u20131944 with the Nazi occupation (atrocities such as the Jewish skull collection) and the British and American bombing raids. Some other notable dates were the years 357 (Battle of Argentoratum), 842 (Oaths of Strasbourg), 1538 (establishment of the university), 1605 (world's first newspaper printed by Johann Carolus), 1792 (), and 1889 (pancreatic origin of diabetes discovered by Minkowski and Von Mering).\nStrasbourg has been the seat of European institutions since 1949: first of the International Commission on Civil Status and of the Council of Europe, later of the European Parliament, of the European Science Foundation, of Eurocorps, and others as well.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nStrasbourg is situated at the eastern border of France with Germany. This border is formed by the Rhine, which also forms the eastern border of the modern city, facing across the river to the German town Kehl. The historic core of Strasbourg, however, lies on the Grande \u00cele in the river Ill, which here flows parallel to, and roughly from, the Rhine. The natural courses of the two rivers eventually join some distance downstream of Strasbourg, although several artificial waterways now connect them within the city.\nThe city lies in the Upper Rhine Plain, at between above sea level, with the upland areas of the Vosges Mountains some to the west and the Black Forest to the east. This section of the Rhine valley is a major axis of north\u2013south travel, with river traffic on the Rhine itself, and major roads and railways paralleling it on both banks.\nThe city is some east of Paris. The mouth of the Rhine lies approximately to the north, or as the river flows, whilst the head of navigation in Basel is some to the south, or by river.\nClimate.\nIn spite of its position far inland, Strasbourg has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), though with less maritime influence than the milder climates of Western and Southern France. The city has warm, relatively sunny summers and cool, overcast winters.\nThe third highest temperature ever recorded was in August 2003, during the 2003 European heat wave. This record was broken, on 30 June 2019, when it reached and then on 25 July 2019, when it reached . The lowest temperature ever recorded was in December 1938.\nStrasbourg's location in the Rhine valley, sheltered from strong winds by the Vosges and Black Forest mountains, results in poor natural ventilation, making Strasbourg one of the most atmospherically polluted cities of France. Nonetheless, the progressive disappearance of heavy industry on both banks of the Rhine, as well as effective measures of traffic regulation in and around the city have reduced air pollution in recent years.\nDistricts.\nStrasbourg is divided into the following districts:\nMain sights.\nArchitecture.\nThe city is chiefly known for its sandstone Gothic Cathedral with its famous astronomical clock, and for its medieval cityscape of Rhineland black and white timber-framed buildings, particularly in the \"Petite France\" district or \"Gerberviertel\" (\"tanners' district\") alongside the Ill and in the streets and squares surrounding the cathedral, where the renowned \"Maison Kammerzell\" stands out.\nNotable medieval streets include \"Rue Merci\u00e8re\", \"Rue des Dentelles\", \"Rue du Bain aux Plantes\", \"Rue des Juifs\", \"Rue des Fr\u00e8res\", \"Rue des Tonneliers\", \"Rue du Maroquin\", \"Rue des Charpentiers\", \"Rue des Serruriers\", \"Grand' Rue\", \"Quai des Bateliers\", \"Quai Saint-Nicolas\" and \"Quai Saint-Thomas\". Notable medieval squares include \"Place de la Cath\u00e9drale\", \"Place du March\u00e9 Gayot\", \"Place Saint-\u00c9tienne\", \"Place du March\u00e9 aux Cochons de Lait\" and \"Place Benjamin Zix\".In addition to the cathedral, Strasbourg houses several other medieval churches that have survived the many wars and destructions that have plagued the city: the Romanesque \"\u00c9glise Saint-\u00c9tienne\", partly destroyed in 1944 by Allied bombing raids; the part-Romanesque, part-Gothic, very large \"\u00c9glise Saint-Thomas\" with its Silbermann organ on which Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Albert Schweitzer played; the Gothic \"\u00c9glise protestante Saint-Pierre-le-Jeune\" with its crypt dating back to the seventh century and its cloister partly from the eleventh century; the Gothic \"\u00c9glise Saint-Guillaume\" with its fine early-Renaissance stained glass and furniture; the Gothic \"\u00c9glise Saint-Jean\"; the part-Gothic, part-Art Nouveau \"\u00c9glise Sainte-Madeleine\" etc. The Neo-Gothic church \"Saint-Pierre-le-Vieux Catholique\" (there is also an adjacent church \"Saint-Pierre-le-Vieux Protestant\") serves as a shrine for several 15th-century wood-worked and painted altars coming from other, now destroyed churches and installed there for public display; especially the Passion of Christ. Among the numerous secular medieval buildings, the monumental \"Ancienne Douane\" (old custom-house) stands out.\nThe German Renaissance has bequeathed the city some noteworthy buildings (especially the current \"Chambre de commerce et d'industrie\", former town hall, on \"Place Gutenberg\"), as did the French Baroque and Classicism with several \"h\u00f4tels particuliers\" (i.e. palaces), among which the \"Palais Rohan\" (completed 1742, used for university purposes from 1872 to 1895, now housing three museums) is the most spectacular. Other buildings of its kind are the \"H\u00f4tel de Hanau\" (1736, now the city hall); the \"H\u00f4tel de Klinglin\" (1736, now residence of the ); the \"H\u00f4tel des Deux-Ponts\" (1755, now residence of the military governor); the \"H\u00f4tel d'Andlau-Klinglin\" (1725, now seat of the administration of the Port autonome de Strasbourg) etc. The largest baroque building of Strasbourg though is the 1720s main building of the \"H\u00f4pital civil\". As for French Neo-classicism, it is the Opera House on Place Broglie that most prestigiously represents this style.\nStrasbourg also offers high-class eclecticist buildings in its very extended German district, the \"Neustadt\", being the main memory of Wilhelmian architecture since most of the major cities in Germany proper suffered intensive damage during World War II. Streets, boulevards and avenues are homogeneous, surprisingly high (up to seven stories) and broad examples of German urban lay-out and of this architectural style that summons and mixes up five centuries of European architecture as well as Neo-Egyptian, Neo-Greek and Neo-Babylonian styles. The former imperial palace \"Palais du Rhin\", the most political and thus heavily criticized of all German Strasbourg buildings epitomizes the grand scale and stylistic sturdiness of this period. But the two most handsome and ornate buildings of these times are the \u00c9cole internationale des Pontonniers (the former \"H\u00f6here M\u00e4dchenschule\", with its towers, turrets and multiple round and square angles and the \"Haute \u00e9cole des arts du Rhin\" with its lavishly ornate fa\u00e7ade of painted bricks, woodwork and majolica.\nNotable streets of the German district include: \"Avenue de la For\u00eat Noire\", \"Avenue des Vosges\", \"Avenue d'Alsace\", \"Avenue de la Marseillaise\", \"Avenue de la Libert\u00e9\", \"Boulevard de la Victoire\", \"Rue Sell\u00e9nick\", \"Rue du G\u00e9n\u00e9ral de Castelnau\", \"Rue du Mar\u00e9chal Foch\", and \"Rue du Mar\u00e9chal Joffre\". Notable squares of the German district include \"Place de la R\u00e9publique\", \"Place de l'Universit\u00e9\", \"Place Brant\", and \"Place Arnold\".\nImpressive examples of Prussian military architecture of the 1880s can be found along the newly reopened \"Rue du Rempart\", displaying large-scale fortifications among which the aptly named \"Kriegstor\" (war gate).\nAs for modern and contemporary architecture, Strasbourg possesses some fine Art Nouveau buildings (such as the huge \"Palais des F\u00eates\" and houses and villas like \"Villa Schutzenberger\" and \"H\u00f4tel Brion\"), good examples of post-World War II functional architecture (the \"Cit\u00e9 Rotterdam\", for which Le Corbusier did not succeed in the architectural contest) and, in the very extended \"Quartier Europ\u00e9en\", some spectacular administrative buildings of sometimes utterly large size, among which the European Court of Human Rights building by Richard Rogers is arguably the finest. Other noticeable contemporary buildings are the new Music school \"Cit\u00e9 de la Musique et de la Danse\", the \"Mus\u00e9e d'Art moderne et contemporain\" and the \"H\u00f4tel du D\u00e9partement\" facing it, as well as, in the outskirts, the tramway-station Hoenheim-Nord designed by Zaha Hadid.\nThe city has many bridges, including the medieval and four-towered \"Ponts Couverts\" that, despite their name, are no longer covered. Next to the \"Ponts Couverts\" is the \"Barrage Vauban\", a part of Vauban's 17th-century fortifications, that does include a covered bridge. Other bridges are the ornate 19th-century \"Pont de la Fonderie\" (1893, stone) and \"Pont d'Auvergne\" (1892, iron), as well as architect 's futuristic \"Passerelle\" over the Rhine, opened in 2004.\nThe largest square at the centre of the city of Strasbourg is the Place Kl\u00e9ber. Located in the heart of the city's commercial area, it was named after general Jean-Baptiste Kl\u00e9ber, born in Strasbourg in 1753 and assassinated in 1800 in Cairo. In the square is a statue of Kl\u00e9ber, under which is a vault containing his remains. On the north side of the square is the Aubette (Orderly Room), built by Jacques Fran\u00e7ois Blondel, architect of the king, in 1765\u20131772.\nParks.\nStrasbourg features a number of prominent parks, of which several are of cultural and historical interest: the \"Parc de l'Orangerie\", laid out as a French garden by Andr\u00e9 le N\u00f4tre and remodeled as an English garden on behalf of Jos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais, now displaying noteworthy French gardens, a neo-classical castle and a small zoo; the \"Parc de la Citadelle\", built around impressive remains of the 17th-century fortress erected close to the Rhine by Vauban; the \"Parc de Pourtal\u00e8s\", laid out in English style around a baroque castle (heavily restored in the 19th century) that now houses a small three-star hotel, and featuring an open-air museum of international contemporary sculpture. The Jardin botanique de l'Universit\u00e9 de Strasbourg (botanical garden) was created under the German administration next to the Observatory of Strasbourg, built in 1881, and still owns some greenhouses of those times. The \"Parc des Contades\", although the oldest park of the city, was completely remodeled after World War II. The futuristic \"Parc des Poteries\" is an example of European park-conception in the late 1990s. The \"Jardin des deux Rives\", spread over Strasbourg and Kehl on both sides of the Rhine opened in 2004 and is the most extended (60-hectare) park of the agglomeration. The most recent park is \"Parc du Heyritz\" (8,7 ha), opened in 2014 along a canal facing the \"h\u00f4pital civil\".\nMuseums.\nAs of 2020, the city of Strasbourg has eleven municipal museums (including \"Aubette 1928\"), eleven university museums, and at least two privately owned museums (\"Mus\u00e9e vodou\" and \"Mus\u00e9e du barreau de Strasbourg\"). Five communes in the metropolitan area also have museums (see below), three of them dedicated to military history.\nOverview.\nThe collections in Strasbourg are distributed over a wide range of museums, according to a system that takes into account not only the types and geographical provenances of the items, but also the epochs. This concerns in particular the following domains:\nUniversity museums.\nThe Universit\u00e9 de Strasbourg is in charge of a number of permanent public displays of its collections of scientific artefacts and products of all kinds of exploration and research.\nDemographics.\nThe commune of Strasbourg proper had a population of 291,313 on 1 January 2021, the result of a constant moderate annual growth which is also reflected in the constant growth of the number of students at its university (e. g. from 42,000 students in 2010 to 52,000 students in 2019). The metropolitan area of Strasbourg had a population of 853,110 inhabitants in 2019 (French side of the border only), while the transnational Eurodistrict had a population of 1,000,000 in 2022.\nIn the Middle Ages, Strasbourg (a free imperial city since 1262), was an important town. According to a 1444 census, the population was circa 20,000; only one third less than Cologne, then a major European city.\nPopulation growth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nStrasbourg is the seat of internationally renowned institutions of music and drama:\nOther theatres are the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre jeune public\", the \"TAPS Scala\" and the \"Kafteur\".\nEducation.\nUniversities and tertiary education.\nStrasbourg, well known as a centre of humanism, has a long history of excellence in higher education, at the crossroads of French and German intellectual traditions. Although Strasbourg had been annexed by the Kingdom of France in 1683, it still remained connected to the German-speaking intellectual world throughout the 18th century, and the university attracted numerous students from the Holy Roman Empire, with Goethe, Metternich and Montgelas, who studied law in Strasbourg, among the most prominent. With 19 Nobel prizes in total, Strasbourg is the most eminent French university outside of Paris.\nUntil 2009, there were three universities in Strasbourg, with an approximate total of 48,500 students in 2007, and another 4,500 students attended one of the diverse post-graduate schools:\nThe three institutions merged in 2009, forming the Universit\u00e9 de Strasbourg. Its component schools include:\nOther tertiary institutions.\nTwo American colleges have a base in Strasbourg: Syracuse University, New York, and Centre College, Kentucky. There is also HEAR (Haute \u00e9cole des arts du Rhin) the celebrated art school, and the International Space University in the south of Strasbourg (Illkirch-Graffenstaden).\nThe European Center for Studies and Research in Ethics is a tertiary establishment for research and education in Ethics. This center is located at the premises of the old faculty of medicine in Strasbourg. The Center\u2019s name in French is CEERE (\"Centre europ\u00e9en d\u2019enseignement et de recherche en \u00e9thique\").\nPrimary and secondary education.\nInternational schools include:\nMultiple levels:\nFor elementary education:\nFor middle school/junior high school education:\nFor senior high school/sixth form college:\nLibraries.\nThe Biblioth\u00e8que nationale et universitaire (BNU) is, with its collection of more than 3,000,000 titles, the second-largest library in France after the . It was founded by the German administration after the complete destruction of the previous municipal library in 1871 and holds the unique status of being simultaneously a students' and a national library. The Strasbourg municipal library had been marked erroneously as \"City Hall\" in a French commercial map, which had been captured and used by the German artillery to lay their guns. A librarian from Munich later pointed out \"...that the destruction of the precious collection was not the fault of a German artillery officer, who used the French map, but of the slovenly and inaccurate scholarship of a Frenchman.\"\nThe municipal library Biblioth\u00e8que municipale de Strasbourg (BMS) administers a network of ten medium-sized libraries in different areas of the town. A six stories high \"Grande biblioth\u00e8que\", the \"M\u00e9diath\u00e8que Andr\u00e9 Malraux\", was inaugurated on 19 September 2008 and is considered the largest in Eastern France.\nIncunabula.\nAs one of the earliest centres of book-printing in Europe (see above: History), Strasbourg for a long time held a large number of incunabula \u2014 books printed before 1500 \u2014 in its library as one of its most precious heritages: no less than 7,000. After the total destruction of this institution in 1870, however, a new collection had to be reassembled from scratch. Today, Strasbourg's different public and institutional libraries again display a sizable total number of incunabula, distributed as follows: \"Biblioth\u00e8que nationale et universitaire\", ca. 2,120, \"M\u00e9diath\u00e8que de la ville et de la communaut\u00e9 urbaine de Strasbourg\", 349, \"Biblioth\u00e8que du Grand S\u00e9minaire\", 238, \"M\u00e9diath\u00e8que protestante\", 66, and \"Biblioth\u00e8que alsatique du Cr\u00e9dit Mutuel\", 5.\nTransport.\nTrain services and the \"R\u00e9seau express m\u00e9tropolitain europ\u00e9en\" operates from the \"Gare de Strasbourg\", the city's main station in the city centre, eastward to Offenburg and Karlsruhe in Germany, westward to Metz and Paris, and southward to Basel. Strasbourg's links with the rest of France have improved due to its recent connection to the TGV network, with the first phase of the TGV \"Est\" (Paris\u2013Strasbourg) in 2007, the TGV \"Rhin-Rh\u00f4ne\" (Strasbourg-Lyon) in 2012, and the second phase of the TGV Est in July 2016.\nStrasbourg also has its own airport, serving major domestic destinations as well as international destinations in Europe and northern Africa. The airport is linked to the \"Gare de Strasbourg\" by a frequent train service.\nCity transport in Strasbourg includes the Strasbourg tramway, which opened in 1994 and is operated by the regional transit company Compagnie des Transports Strasbourgeois (CTS), consisting of 6 lines with a total length of . The CTS also operates a comprehensive bus network throughout the city that is integrated with the trams. With more than of bicycle paths, biking in the city is convenient and the CTS operates a cheap bike-sharing scheme named \"V\u00e9lhop\". The CTS, and its predecessors, also operated a previous generation of tram system between 1878 and 1960, complemented by trolleybus routes between 1939 and 1962.\nBeing on the Ill and close to the Rhine, Strasbourg has always been an important centre of fluvial navigation, as is attested by archeological findings. In 1682 the \"Canal de la Bruche\" was added to the river navigations, initially to provide transport for sandstone from quarries in the Vosges for use in the fortification of the city. That canal has since closed, but the subsequent \"Canal du Rh\u00f4ne au Rhin\", \"Canal de la Marne au Rhin\" and \"Grand Canal d'Alsace\" are still in use, as is the important activity of the \"Port autonome de Strasbourg\". Water tourism inside the city proper attracts hundreds of thousands of tourists yearly.\nThe tram system that now criss-crosses the historic city centre complements walking and biking in it. The centre has been transformed into a pedestrian priority zone that enables and invites walking and biking by making these active modes of transport comfortable, safe and enjoyable. These attributes are accomplished by applying the principle of \"filtered permeability\" to the existing irregular network of streets. It means that the network adaptations favour active transport and, selectively, \"filter out\" the car by reducing the number of streets that run through the centre. While certain streets are discontinuous for cars, they connect to a network of pedestrian and bike paths which permeate the entire centre. In addition, these paths go through public squares and open spaces increasing the enjoyment of the trip. This logic of filtering a mode of transport is fully expressed in a comprehensive model for laying out neighbourhoods and districts \u2013 the fused grid.\nAt present the A35 autoroute, which parallels the Rhine between Karlsruhe and Basel, and the A4 autoroute, which links Paris with Strasbourg, penetrate close to the centre of the city. The \"Grand contournement ouest\" (GCO) project, programmed since 1999, planned to construct a highway connection between the junctions of the A4 and the A35 autoroutes in the north and of the A35 and A352 autoroutes in the south. This routes well to the west of the city in order to divest a significant portion of motorized traffic from the unit\u00e9 urbaine. The GCO project was opposed by environmentalists, who created a ZAD (or Zone to Defend). After much delay, the GCO was finally inaugurated on 11 December 2021 as the A355 autoroute.\nStrasbourg public transport statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting on public transport in Strasbourg on weekdays is 52 min. 7% of travellers on public transport travel for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transport is 9 min and 11% of passengers wait for more than 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually travel in a single trip on public transport is , whilst none travels for more than in a single direction.\nEuropean role.\nInstitutions.\nStrasbourg is the seat of over twenty international institutions, most famously of the Council of Europe and of the European Parliament, of which it is the official seat. Strasbourg is considered the legislative and democratic capital of the European Union, while Brussels is considered the executive and administrative capital and Luxembourg the judiciary and financial capital.\nStrasbourg is the seat of the following organisations, among others:\nEurodistrict.\nFrance and Germany have created a Eurodistrict straddling the Rhine, combining the Greater Strasbourg and the Ortenau district of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, with some common administration. It was established in 2005 and has been fully functional since 2010.\nSports.\nSporting teams from Strasbourg are the Racing Club de Strasbourg Alsace (football), SIG Strasbourg (basketball) and the \u00c9toile Noire (ice hockey). The women's tennis Internationaux de Strasbourg is one of the most important French tournaments of its kind outside Roland-Garros. In 1922, Strasbourg was the venue for the XVI Grand Prix de l'A.C.F. which saw Fiat battle Bugatti, Ballot, Rolland Pilain, and Britain's Aston Martin and Sunbeam.\nIn 2006 Strasbourg hosted the Grand Depart of the Tour de France.\nThe city is home to SN Strasbourg, a First division water polo team that plays its home games at the Piscine de la Kibitzenau.\nHonours.\nHonours associated with the city of Strasbourg:\nNotable people.\nIn chronological order, notable people born in Strasbourg include:\nIn chronological order, notable residents of Strasbourg include:\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nStrasbourg is twinned with:\nStrasbourg has cooperative agreements with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37408", "revid": "21479757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37408", "title": "Kingston, Jamaica", "text": "Capital and chief port of Jamaica\nKingston is the capital and largest city of Jamaica, located on the southeastern coast of the island. It faces a natural harbour protected by the Palisadoes, a long sand spit which connects the town of Port Royal and Norman Manley International Airport to the rest of the island. Kingston is the largest English-speaking city south of the United States in the Western Hemisphere.\nThe local government bodies of the parishes of Kingston and St. Andrew were amalgamated by the Kingston and St. Andrew Corporation Act of 1923, to form the Kingston and St. Andrew Corporation. Greater Kingston, or the \"Corporate Area\" refers to those areas under the KSAC; however, it does not solely refer to Kingston Parish, which only consists of the old downtown and Port Royal. Kingston Parish had a population of 89,057, and St. Andrew Parish had a population of 573,369 in 2011 Kingston is only bordered by Saint Andrew to the east, west and north. The geographical border for the parish of Kingston encompasses the following communities: Tivoli Gardens, Denham Town, Rae Town, Kingston Gardens, National Heroes Park, Bournemouth Gardens, Norman Gardens, Rennock Lodge, Springfield and Port Royal, along with portions of Rollington Town, Franklyn Town, and Allman Town.\nThe city proper is bounded by Six Miles to the west, Stony Hill to the north, Papine to the northeast, and Harbour View to the east, which are communities in urban and suburban Saint Andrew. Communities in rural St. Andrew such as Gordon Town, Mavis Bank, Lawrence Tavern, Mt. Airy, and Bull Bay would not be described as being in Kingston city.\nTwo districts make up the central area of Kingston: the historic Downtown and New Kingston. Both are served by Norman Manley International Airport and also by the smaller and primarily domestic Tinson Pen Aerodrome.\nHistory.\nKingston was founded on 22 July 1692, shortly after the 1692 earthquake that devastated Port Royal; the original section of the city which was situated at the bottom of the Liguanea Plains was laid out to house survivors of that earthquake.\nBefore the earthquake, Kingston's functions were purely agricultural. The earthquake survivors set up a camp on the sea front. Approximately two thousand people died due to mosquito-borne diseases. Initially, the people lived in a tented camp on Colonel Barry's \"Hog Crawle\". The town did not begin to grow until after the further destruction of Port Royal by fire in 1703. Surveyor John Goffe drew up a plan for the town based on a grid bounded by North, East, West, and Harbour Streets. The new grid system of the town was designed to facilitate commerce, particularly the system of main thoroughfares across, which allowed transportation between the port and plantations farther inland. By 1716, it had become the largest town and the centre of trade for Jamaica. The government sold land to people with the regulation that they purchase no more than the amount of the land that they owned in Port Royal, and only land on the sea front. Gradually, wealthy merchants began to move their residences from above their businesses to the farm lands north on the plains of Liguanea.\nThe first free school, Wolmers's, was founded in 1729 and there was a theatre, first on Harbour Street and then moved in 1774 to North Parade. Both are still in existence. In 1755 the governor, Sir Charles Knowles, had decided to transfer the government offices from Spanish Town to Kingston. It was thought by some to be an unsuitable location for the Assembly in proximity to the moral distractions of Kingston, and the next governor rescinded the Act. However, by 1780 the population of Kingston was 11,000, and the merchants began lobbying for the administrative capital to be transferred from Spanish Town, which was by then eclipsed by the commercial activity in Kingston.\nThe Church of St. Thomas, on King Street, the chief thoroughfare, was first built before 1699 but was rebuilt after the earthquake in 1907. By the end of the 18th century, the city contained more than 3,000 brick buildings. The harbour fostered trade. It was involved in several naval wars of the 18th century. Kingston took over the functions of Spanish Town (the capital at the time). These functions included agriculture, commercial, processing and a main transport hub to and from Kingston and other sections of the island.\nIn 1788, Kingston had a population of 25,000, which was about a tenth of the overall population of the island. One in every four people living in Kingston was white, but there was a large population of free people of color there too; two out of every five people living in Kingston were free. The remaining three-fifths of Kingston's population was made up of black slaves.\nThe government passed an act to transfer the government offices to Kingston from Spanish Town, which occurred in 1872. In 1882, there was a large fire in Kingston. In 1892, electricity first came to Jamaica, when it was supplied from a coal-burning steam-generating plant on Gold Street in Kingston.\nIn 1907, 800 people died in another earthquake known as the 1907 Kingston earthquake, destroying nearly all the historical buildings south of Parade in the city. That was when a height restriction of no more than was instituted on buildings in the city centre. These three-story-high buildings were built with reinforced concrete. Construction on King Street in the city was the first area to breach this building code.\nDuring the 1930s, island-wide riots led to the development of trade unions and political parties to represent workers.\nThe city became home to the Mona campus of the University of the West Indies. It was founded in 1948, with 24 medical students.\nIn the 1960s, the international attention of reggae music at that time coincided with the expansion and development of of the Kingston city centre waterfront area; by the 1980s, most of the old buildings were demolished by construction companies and the entire waterfront was re-developed with hotels, shops, offices, cultural centres, and cruise and cargo ship facilities.\nIn 1966, Kingston was the host city to the Commonwealth Games.\nIn the 1980 general elections, the democratic socialist People's National Party (PNP) government was voted out, and subsequent governments have been more market-oriented and focused on tourism and relations with the United States, which reflected the \"turbulent\" and \"volatile\" era, in which Cuba and the United States fought for cultural control over Jamaica.\nIn the 1990s, crime increased in the region and several riots were reported, including one in 1999 against a rise of fuel prices. In 1999, the Jamaican government ordered army troops to patrol the streets of Kingston in an attempt to curb the violent crime. In 2001, army troops and armoured vehicles used force to \"restore order\" in Kingston after \"three days of unrest leave at least 27 people dead\".\nIn 2010, the Kingston unrest, an armed conflict between Jamaica's military and police forces in Kingston and the Shower Posse drug cartel, attracted international attention. The violence, which largely took place over 24\u201325 May, killed at least 73 civilians and wounded at least 35 others. and four soldiers and police were also killed.\nDemographics.\nThe majority of the population of Kingston is of African descent. Large minority ethnic groups include East Indians and Chinese, who came to the country as indentured servants in the late 19th century. The Chinese occupy important roles in Jamaica's economy especially in the retail markets in Downtown Kingston and the wider metropolitan area. There is also a minority of Europeans, mostly descending from immigrants from Germany and Great Britain. Syrians and Lebanese form one of the most influential ethnic groups in not only Kingston, but the entire island. Though a minority ethnic group, the Lebanese were able to give Jamaica one of its prime ministers, Edward Philip George Seaga. Multi-racial Jamaicans continue to form the second largest racial group, and there is also a small Jewish population in the city.\nReligion.\nThere is a wide variety of Christian churches in the city, most of which are Protestant. The chief denominations are Church of God, Baptist, Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Seventh-day Adventist and Pentecostal.\nThere is a strong Roman Catholic community in Kingston. The Holy Trinity Cathedral is the seat of the metropolitan archbishop and was consecrated in 1911. There are several Catholic schools and institutions, including the Immaculate Conception High School and St. Francis Primary and Infant School. Holy Childhood High School was founded and is owned by the Franciscan Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary of our Lady of Perpetual Help (FMS).\nAfro-Christian syncretic religions such as the Rastafari movement also have a significant following.\nThe Shaare Shalom Synagogue serves Kingston's Jewish population. The city also has communities of Hindus, Buddhists, and Muslims. The Islamic Council of Jamaica and the Islamic Education and Dawah Centre are both located in Kingston. There are three units of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the city.\nEconomy.\nKingston plays a central role in Jamaica's economy. The vast majority of economic activity takes place within Kingston, and as most government ministries are located in the city, it is a key force in legislation in regards to Jamaica's finances. The high population density of the capital city means that the majority of monetary transactions occur in Kingston \u2013 stimulating much of Jamaica's local economy. The city is also home to the highest number of schools, hospitals and universities anywhere in Jamaica. Kingston is also the island's main transportation hub and its largest seaport.\nMany multinational conglomerates and financial institutions are headquartered in and around the Kingston Metropolitan Area. Air Jamaica was headquartered in Kingston. The idea of making Jamaica an International Financial Centre has also been proposed as a way to boost the city's financial sector and create more jobs, especially for professionals such as accountants and lawyers.\nThe city's major industries include tourism, apparel manufacturing, and shipping. Many international exports are traded through the city's seaport, with major exports including bauxite, sugar and coffee. The city is also a major tourist destination, and tourism is one of its largest sources of economic activity. The city has suffered economic troubles recently, however, along with the rest of the country of Jamaica. Plans to help the city's economy have made downtown Kingston the subject of numerous redevelopment plans. There have also been attempts to grow the manufacturing industry in the area and to attract call centres to the city.\nGeography.\nKingston is surrounded by the Blue Mountains, Red Hills, Long Mountain and the Kingston Harbour, which is the seventh largest natural harbour in the world. The city is on the Liguanea plain, an alluvial plain alongside the Hope River. Kingston experiences frequent earthquakes, including the 1907 earthquake.\nClimate.\nKingston has a tropical climate, specifically a tropical wet-and-dry climate (\"Aw/As\"), that borders on a hot semi-arid climate (\"BSh\"). characterised by a wet season from May to November, which coincides with the hurricane season, and a dry season from December to April. During the dry season, there is not much rainfall, however, cold and stationary fronts occur at this time, and often bring heavy showers, especially in March. Kingston is in the rain shadow of the Blue Mountains; therefore, little to none of the moisture carried by the Northeast Trade Winds falls over Kingston, causing Kingston to be very dry in comparison to Portland and Saint Mary on the windward side of the Blue Mountains. Kingston is on a coastal location, hence it comes under the influence of the sea, though dense urban development can negate this effect. In the 21st century, Kingston has experienced temperatures as high as and as low as . Between 1895 and 1990, the total average rainfall was recorded at , the highest monthly average rainfall recorded in October at , and the lowest monthly average rainfall recorded in March at . Fog, hail, thunder and tornadoes are all extremely rare.\nHousing.\nIn 1848 the Jamaican government expanded Kingston by constructing new homes in the west, north and east of the city. This housing became highly segregated in terms of race and class and by 1860 the majority of white elites lived on the outskirts of the city.\nAs Kingston's population grew, existing settlements became so densely occupied that marshes in the southwest were filled in to allow the development of new housing. By 1935, continued population growth and poverty resulted in the emergence of slums in the east and west of the city. Later these areas were demolished by the government and residents were rehoused in Denham Town. This development accommodated 3,000 people, leaving more than one sixth of displaced resident homeless. Consequently, overcrowding persisted throughout the city; further, cramped living conditions resulted in public health issues.\nSuburbanization also became significant and by the 1960s this residential area spread to the foothills of the Blue Mountains. Subsequently, the lack of space and continued consumerism meant this area then expanded to the east of the mountains.\nIn Kingston, 20% of the population now live in squatter settlements. Contrastingly, Kingston is also home to Red Hills, Norbrook, Cherry Gardens, Stony Hill, Jack's Hill, suburbs that hold some of the most expensive houses in all of Jamaica.\nParks.\nThe city of Kingston is home to a number of urban parks which are frequently transformed to accommodate various events and festivities on the Jamaican calendar. The most popular parks include: Emancipation Park, Hope Gardens, Devon House, National Heroes' Park, St William Grant Park and Mandela Park.\nEmancipation Park.\nThe Liguanea Club, a recreational and social club for the upper class in society, located on Knutsford Boulevard, owned over of land including the former Liguanea Park now the site of Emancipation Park. The club gave the land measuring seven acres as a gift to the Jamaican Government.\nSeveral government members argued that the land should be converted into a business district, while others felt a multi-functional entertainment complex should be built on the site. The large financial input needed for either venture, was not forthcoming. In 2002 Cabinet granted approval for the transfer of the land to the National Housing Trust on the condition that a park was built and maintained at that location. The land was transferred for one Jamaican dollar.\nThe park is well known for the 11\u00a0ft. (approximately 3m) high bronze sculpture done by Jamaican artist Laura Facey, situated at the park's main entrance. This prominent sculpture comprises two naked black male and female statues gazing to the skies \u2013 symbolic of their triumphant rise from the horrors of slavery. The statue was unveiled in July 2003, in time for the park's first anniversary which caused an out cry from the Jamaican populace who believed that the blatant nudity and generous bodily proportions of the figures were very inappropriate to depict the freedom of black people.\nHope Gardens.\nThe Royal Botanical Gardens at Hope, popularly called Hope Gardens serves as a national attraction. The Hope Gardens is a part of the of land making it the largest botanical garden in the English-speaking Caribbean. The land situated by the foothills of the Blue Mountains was originally owned by Major Richard Hope from whom it got its name. Two hundred acres of this land was obtained by the Government of Jamaica in 1880 and was originally established as a plant introduction and crop-testing facility for plants such as pineapple, cocoa, coffee and tobacco. The formal Botanical Gardens were laid out on approximately of this land with the assistance of personnel from the Kew Gardens in England.\nIn the 1950s, the Queen, after visiting the island and being pleased with the state of the gardens, gave permission for it to be called the Royal Botanical Gardens, Hope. The Gardens have many exotic species along with some endemic trees of Jamaica. Over the years, the ravages of hurricanes and other disasters have resulted in the loss of a significant number of species. However, there are still some prominent trees and popular sites to be viewed in the Gardens. At Hope Gardens, visitors can view a number of other features including the Coconut Museum, the Sunken Gardens, the Orchid House, the Lily Pond, the Maze and Palm Avenue.\nThe Hope Gardens has an adjoining zoo referred to as Hope Gardens Zoo. The gardens and zoo are undergoing redevelopment to improve the physical landscape and the animal inventory as a part of Bring Back The Hope campaign.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe St William Grant Park (Parade) in the heart of downtown Kingston is the starting point for three of Jamaica's four A roads, namely the A1 (Kingston to Lucea), the A3 (Kingston to Saint Ann's Bay) and the A4 (Kingston to Annotto Bay), while the city itself is provided with a dense network of trunk, main, secondary and minor roads. It also consists of the Highway 2000, Jamaica which runs through Portmore, Ocho Rios and Mandeville. A new section of Highway 2000, Jamaica (called \"T3\") was recently opened to the public. It has greatly reduced the travel time between Kingston and Montego Bay from 4 hours to a mere &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 hours.\nKingston is served well by a modern bus system, The Jamaica Urban Transit Company (JUTC), as well as mini buses and taxis, which operate throughout the city with major hubs at Parade, Cross Roads, and Half Way Tree.\nBuses.\nIn June 1898, the existing mule car service was phased out and a transition to electric trams, initially operated by the West India Electric Company and later by the Jamaica Public Service Company, was undertaken. This transition to the electric tram was completed on 31 March 1899. This service continued to operate, but the inflexibility of a tram service could not keep pace with a growing city, and the tram service ceased to operate on 7 August 1948.\nBetween 1948 and 1953, a motor bus service was operated by a company called Jamaica Utilities. The government revoked its franchise in 1953.\nFrom 1953 to 1983, the Jamaica Omnibus Service operated a service, which at its peak consisted of over 600 buses and served an area spanning Spanish Town, Border, Mt. James, Bull Bay and Port Royal. It was wound up by the government in 1983 after being nationalised in 1974.\nKingston is served well by a modern bus system, the Jamaica Urban Transit Company (JUTC), mini buses, and taxis, which operate throughout the city with major hubs at Parade, Cross Roads, Half Way Tree and elsewhere.\nRail.\nThe now disused Kingston railway station served the main line with branches from Spanish Town to Ewarton, , and .\nThe railway station opened in 1845 and closed in October 1992 when all passenger traffic on Jamaica's railways abruptly ceased.\nAir.\nKingston's international airport is the Norman Manley International Airport, while Tinson Pen Aerodrome in Kingston provides domestic services.\nSea.\nHistorically, the Kingston waterfront was Jamaica's main port with many finger piers at which freighters and passenger liners could dock. More recently, with the containerisation of freight, the port has moved to Newport West.\nEmergency services.\nJamaica's police force, the Jamaica Constabulary Force, is based on Old Hope Road near Liguanea. Smaller police stations, such as Hunt's Bay, Matilda's Corner and Half-Way-Tree, are dispersed across the Corporate Area. The Supreme Court of Jamaica is also located in Kingston. Other courts, such as the Half-Way-Tree Resident Magistrate's Court, Gun Court, Traffic Court and Family Court, make Kingston their home. The Jamaica Defence Force (JDF) has its headquarters at Up Park Camp near New Kingston and Cross Roads. The JDF also operates a major naval base at Port Royal.\nCrime rates are high in and around Kingston and Montego Bay, and include gang violence and shootings in inner city areas. The highest-crime areas include West Kingston, Grants Pen, August Town, Harbour View and Spanish Town.\nFire service.\nFire response in Kingston is provided by the Jamaica Fire Brigade, the national fire service. The service operates from fire stations spread throughout the Corporate Area. Fire stations are located at\nMedia.\nThe Gleaner Company, the \"Jamaica Observer\" and the \"Sunday Herald\", three of Jamaica's large newspaper companies, make their home in Kingston. Several television and radio stations including Television Jamaica (TVJ), CVM TV, RJR 94 FM, TBC Radio 88.5 FM, Hitz 92 FM, FAME 95 FM, LOVE TV, ZIP 103, Kool 97 FM and LOVE FM, are all based in Kingston.\nSports.\nCricket, including test matches, is played at Sabina Park.\nThe capital is home to five association football teams who play in Jamaica's National Premier League. The teams are Arnett Gardens, Boys' Town, Harbour View, Maverley Hughenden and Waterhouse. Olympic Sprinter Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce also was born and raised in the suburb of Waterhouse.\nTelecommunications.\nFixed voice and broadband.\nFixed voice and broadband services in Kingston are provided by either FLOW and Digicel (via their new Digicel Play service which is exclusive to the Kingston Metropolitan Area). FLOW uses a Hybrid Fibre and Coaxial network to provide IPTV, VoIP &amp; POTS and broadband capable of speeds up to 100\u00a0Mbit/s. FLOW also uses a Copper network to provide POTS and ADSL capable of speeds up to 12\u00a0Mbit/s. Digicel uses a GPON fibre-optic network, providing IPTV, VoIP and broadband speeds of up to 200\u00a0Mbit/s. Digicel's Fibre-optic network boasts capacity of up to 10\u00a0Gbit/s.\nMobile voice and broadband.\nMobile voice and broadband services in Kingston are dominated by incumbents, FLOW and Digicel. Both carriers provide GSM, EDGE, HSPA, HSPA+ and LTE connectivity in and around the city.\nFLOW offers HSPA+ of up to 21\u00a0Mbit/s on 850\u00a0MHz and 1900\u00a0MHz. FLOW also offers DC-HSDPA (commonly known as DC-HSPA+) allowing capable devices speeds of up to 42\u00a0Mbit/s on contiguous 1900\u00a0MHz spectrum.\nDigicel also offers 21\u00a0Mbit/s HSPA+ however, they also offer DC-HSDPA (commonly known as DC-HSPA+) allowing capable devices speeds of up to 42\u00a0Mbit/s on contiguous 850\u00a0MHz spectrum. Digicel was also first to market with LTE in Jamaica. Their network covers all of Kingston Parish and most of the populous areas in the Kingston Metropolitan Area, capable of speeds of up to 75\u00a0Mbit/s on 10\u00a0MHz of Band 17 spectrum.\nFLOW also offers LTE in Kingston. FLOW's LTE network is accessible on Band 4 or AWS spectrum. Due to the network delaying its rollout to acquire more spectrum, its network is theoretically faster than both Digicel and Caricel, to the tune of 150\u00a0Mbit/s (20\u00a0MHz of Bandwidth) with further plans to add low band spectrum, possibly increasing theoretical speeds up to 225\u00a0Mbit/s.\nKingston is also home to Caricel, Jamaica's newest telecoms operator, which deployed its LTE network first to the Kingston Metropolitan Area.\nIn addition, both carriers have their Jamaican head offices in the city (with the exception of Digicel, which has its company headquarters in Kingston rather than a regional office there as is the case with FLOW, which is based in Miami).\nInstitutions.\nKingston, as the capital, is the financial, cultural, economic and industrial centre of Jamaica. Many financial institutions are based in Kingston, and the city boasts the largest number of hospitals, schools, universities and cultural attractions of any urban area on the island. Notable Kingston landmarks include the University of the West Indies, Jamaica Defence Force Museum, and Bob Marley Museum. A United Nations agency, the International Seabed Authority is headquartered in Kingston.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nKingston is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37409", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37409", "title": "Ravenna", "text": "City in Emilia-Romagna, Italy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRavenna ( ; , ; ) is the capital city of the Province of Ravenna, in the Emilia-Romagna region of Northern Italy. It was the capital city of the Western Roman Empire during the 5th century until its collapse in 476, after which it served as the capital of the Ostrogothic Kingdom and then the Byzantine Exarchate of Ravenna. It has 156,444 inhabitants as of 2025.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Initially settled by the Umbri people, Ravenna came under Roman Republic control in 89 BC. Octavian built the military harbor of Classis at Ravenna, and the city remained an important seaport on the Adriatic until the early Middle Ages. The city prospered under imperial rule. In 401, Western Roman emperor Honorius moved his court from Mediolanum to Ravenna; it then served as capital of the empire for most of the 5th century.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Ravenna became the capital of Odoacer until he was defeated by the Ostrogoth king Theodoric. In 540, Belisarius conquered Ravenna for the Byzantine Empire, and the city became the capital of Byzantine Italy. After a brief Lombard control, Ravenna came under the authority of the Papacy and, save for minor interruptions, remained part of the Papal States until the mid-19th century when it was incorporated into the newly unified Kingdom of Italy.\nAlthough it is an inland city, Ravenna is connected to the Adriatic Sea by the Candiano Canal. It is known for its well-preserved late Roman and Byzantine architecture, with eight buildings comprising the UNESCO World Heritage Site \"Early Christian Monuments of Ravenna\". Because of the high concentration of mosaics, the city has been associated with workshops and schools teaching mosaics, and is often given titles like the \"capital of mosaics\".\nHistory.\nThe origin of the name \"Ravenna\" is unclear. Some have speculated that \"Ravenna\" is related to \"Rasenna\" (or \"Rasna\"), the term that the Etruscans used for themselves, but there is no agreement on this point.\nAncient era.\nThe origins of Ravenna are uncertain. The oldest archaeological evidence found dates the Umbri presence in Ravenna at least to the 5th century BC, where it was undisturbed until the 3rd century BC, when first contact with Roman civilization began. Its territory was settled also by the Senones, especially the southern countryside of the city (that was not part of the lagoon), the \"Ager Decimanus\". Ravenna consisted of houses built on piles on a series of small islands in a marshy lagoon \u2013 a situation similar to Venice several centuries later. The Romans ignored it during their conquest of the Po River Delta, but later accepted it into the Roman Republic as a federated town in 89 BC.\nIn 49 BC, Julius Caesar had gathered his forces at Ravenna before crossing the Rubicon. Later Octavian, after his battle against Mark Antony in 31 BC, founded the military harbor of Classis. This harbor, protected at first by its own walls, was an important station of the Roman Imperial Fleet. Nowadays the city is landlocked, but Ravenna remained an important seaport on the Adriatic until the early Middle Ages. During the Germanic campaigns, Thusnelda, widow of Arminius, and Marbod, King of the Marcomanni, were confined at Ravenna.\nRavenna greatly prospered under Roman rule. Emperor Trajan built a long aqueduct at the beginning of the 2nd century. During the Marcomannic Wars, Germanic settlers in Ravenna revolted and managed to seize possession of the city. For this reason, Marcus Aurelius decided not only against bringing more barbarians into Italy, but even banished those who had previously been brought there. In AD 401, Emperor Honorius transferred the capital of the Western Roman Empire from Mediolanum (current Milan) to Ravenna; it subsequently served as the capital of the empire for most of the 5th century and the last de facto western emperor Romulus Augustulus was deposed there in AD 476. At that time it was home to 50,000 people. The transfer was made partly for defensive purposes: Ravenna was surrounded by swamps and marshes, and was perceived to be easily defensible (although in fact the city fell to opposing forces numerous times in its history); it is also likely that the move to Ravenna was due to the city's port and good sea-borne connections to the Eastern Roman Empire. In 409, King Alaric I of the Visigoths simply bypassed Ravenna, and went on to sack Rome in 410 and to take Galla Placidia, daughter of Emperor Theodosius I, hostage.\nAfter many vicissitudes, Galla Placidia returned to Ravenna with her son, Emperor Valentinian III, due to the support of her nephew Theodosius II. Ravenna enjoyed a period of peace, during which time the Christian religion was favoured by the imperial court, and the city gained some of its most famous monuments, including the Orthodox Baptistry, the misnamed Mausoleum of Galla Placidia (she was not actually buried there), and San Giovanni Evangelista.\nOstrogothic Kingdom.\nThe late 5th century saw the dissolution of Roman authority in the west, and Romulus Augustulus was deposed in 476 by the general Odoacer. Odoacer ruled as King of Italy for 13 years, but in 489 the Eastern Emperor Zeno sent the Ostrogoth King Theodoric the Great to re-take the Italian peninsula. After losing the Battle of Verona, Odoacer retreated to Ravenna, where he withstood a siege of three years by Theodoric, until the taking of Rimini deprived Ravenna of supplies. Theodoric took Ravenna in 493, supposedly slew Odoacer with his own hands, and Ravenna became the capital of the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Italy. Theodoric, following his imperial predecessors, also built many splendid buildings in and around Ravenna, including his palace church Sant'Apollinare Nuovo, an Arian cathedral (now Santo Spirito) and Baptistery, and his own Mausoleum just outside the walls.\nBoth Odoacer and Theodoric and their followers were Arian Christians, but co-existed peacefully with the Latins, who were largely Catholic Orthodox. Ravenna's Orthodox bishops carried out notable building projects, of which the sole surviving one is the Cappella Arcivescovile. Theodoric allowed Roman citizens within his kingdom to be subject to Roman law and the Roman judicial system. The Goths, meanwhile, lived under their own laws and customs. In 519, when a mob had burned down the synagogues of Ravenna, Theodoric ordered the town to rebuild them at its own expense.\nTheodoric died in 526 and was succeeded by his young grandson Athalaric under the authority of his daughter Amalasunta, but by 535 both were dead and Theodoric's line was represented only by Amalasuntha's daughter Matasuntha. Various Ostrogothic military leaders took the Kingdom of Italy, but none were as successful as Theodoric had been. Meanwhile, the orthodox Christian Byzantine Emperor Justinian I opposed both Ostrogoth rule and the Arian variety of Christianity. In 535 his general Belisarius invaded Italy and in 540 conquered Ravenna. After the conquest of Italy was completed in 554, Ravenna became the seat of Byzantine government in Italy.\nFrom 540 to 600, Ravenna's bishops embarked upon a notable building program of churches in Ravenna and in and around the port city of Classe. Surviving monuments include the Basilica of San Vitale and the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe, as well as the partially surviving San Michele in Africisco.\nExarchate of Ravenna.\nFollowing the conquests of Belisarius for Eastern Roman Emperor Justinian I in the 6th century, Ravenna became the seat of the Byzantine governor of Italy, the Exarch, and was known as the Exarchate of Ravenna. It was at this time that the Ravenna Cosmography was written.\nUnder Byzantine rule, the archbishop of the Archdiocese of Ravenna was temporarily granted autocephaly from the Roman Church by the emperor, in 666, but this was soon revoked. Nevertheless, the archbishop of Ravenna held the second place in Italy after the pope, and played an important role in many theological controversies during this period.\nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nThe Lombards, under King Liutprand, occupied Ravenna in 712, but were forced to return it to the Byzantines. Shortly after Aistulf, the Lombard Duke of Friuli, was crowned King of the Lombards in 749, he pursued an aggressive policy of expansion into the Byzantine\u2019s Exarchate of Ravenna and the territory claimed by the Pope through the Patrimony of Saint Peter.\nIn 751, the Byzantines surrendered the Exarchate of Ravenna to Aistulf. Aistulf then proceeded farther south and threatened Rome claiming jurisdiction and demanding tribute and acknowledgement of his sovereignty. Pope Stephen II appealed to Aistulf but to no avail. In 753, Pope Stephen traveled to France to seek the help of Pepin, King of the Franks. Pepin responded favorably and ultimately conducted two campaigns to the Italian Peninsula to confront Aistulf with respect to territory that had been taken illegally.\nFinally in 756, Aistulf conceded defeat, and agreed to pay reparations and surrender the territory taken five years earlier. At that time, Pepin fulfilled a promise that he had made two years prior in France and granted the pope the right to large territories that included the former Exarchate of Ravenna and the Roman duchy. This act has become known as the Donation of Pepin and provided the legal basis for the creation of the Papal States.\nAfter Pepin\u2019s Donation and the establishment of the Papal States, Byzantine-era administrative structures collapsed during the 9th and 10th Centuries. Papal control was indirect, with local dukes and Lombard lords exercising de facto power. During the 11th and 12th Centuries, Ravenna became a contested city between the Holy Roman Empire and the Papacy, with imperial appointees often clashing with papal legates.\nThe beginning of the 13th Century was a period of great turmoil for the city of Ravenna. At that time, conflict between the Guelphs and Ghibellines was intensifying. In 1198, Ravenna led a league of Romagna cities and Marches against the Holy Roman Emperor, Otto IV. Pope Innocent III was able to capitalized on the anti-imperial sentiment in Romagna to strengthen papal influence over Ravenna and other cities in the region. \nIn 1218, Pietro Traversari came to power in Ravenna after defeating the Ubertini and Mainardi factions during the Guelph-Ghibelline conflict. The Traversari family ruled Ravenna for 22 years until 1240 when Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II besieged Ravenna and expelled the Traversari after the Traversari aligned themselves with the pro-papal Guelphs. \nFrederick\u2019s Imperial Vicar ruled Ravenna for eight years until 1248 when Pope Innocent IV took Ravenna, and the Traversari returned to power. In 1275, the Traversari were driven from the city by Guido Novello da Polenta. The Da Polenta family established a hereditary lordship and governed with increasing independence as a papal vassal.\nOne of the most illustrious residents of Ravenna at this time was the exiled Florentine poet Dante. The last of the Da Polenta, Ostasio III, was ousted by the Republic of Venice in February 1441, and the city was annexed to the Venetian territories by the Treaty of Cremona.\nRavenna was then ruled by Venice until 1509, when the region was invaded in the course of the War of the League of Cambrai. At the Battle of Agnadello on 14 May, the French largely destroyed the Venetian army. Thereafter, the members of the League of Cambrai occupied Venice's mainland territories. After the Venetian withdrawal, Ravenna was again ruled by legates of the Pope as part of the Papal States. The Papal States retained control of Ravenna as the war continued, however in 1511, the Pope created a new alliance with Spain and the Holy Roman Empire against France. In the conflict that ensued, France besieged Ravenna and then decisively defeated the League's relief forces at the Battle of Ravenna (1512). After that victory, the French sacked Ravenna and occupied the city for four months before withdrawing.\nIn 1527, notwithstanding their alliance with Pope Clement VII, the Venetians occupied Ravenna and the Romagna, which, however, they were compelled to restore in 1529.\nThe city was damaged in a tremendous flood in May 1636. Over the next 300 years, a network of canals diverted nearby rivers and drained nearby swamps, thus reducing the possibility of flooding and creating a large belt of agricultural land around the city.\nModern age.\nIn the 17th and 18th Centuries, Ravenna was part of the Papal States up until 1796, when it was annexed into the French puppet state of the Cisalpine Republic / Italian Republic, and then made part of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy in 1802. It was returned to the Papal States in 1814. Occupied by Piedmontese troops in 1859, Ravenna and the surrounding Romagna area became part of the new unified Kingdom of Italy in 1861.\nDuring World War II, the town suffered severe damage. Fifty-two Allied bombing raids during the course of the Second World War had taken their toll, destroying some of Ravenna's noteworthy, unequalled early Christian art. Bombs intended for the railway station and its sidings had pulverised the Basilica of San Giovanni Evangelista in August 1944. On 5 November 1944 troops of 4th Princess Louise Dragoon Guards, 5th Canadian Armoured Division and the British 27th Lancers entered and liberated Ravenna. A total of 937 Commonwealth soldiers who died in the winter of 1944\u201345 are buried in Ravenna War Cemetery, including 438 Canadians.\nMajor monuments.\nEight early Christian buildings of Ravenna are inscribed on the World Heritage List. These are:\nOther historic sites include:\nMusic.\nThe city annually hosts the Ravenna Festival. Opera performances are held at the Teatro Alighieri while concerts take place at the Palazzo Mauro de Andr\u00e9 as well as in the ancient Basilica of San Vitale and Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe. Chicago Symphony Orchestra music director Riccardo Muti, a longtime resident of the city, regularly participates in the festival, which invites orchestras and other performers from around the world.\nIn film.\nMichelangelo Antonioni filmed his 1964 movie \"Red Desert\" (\"Deserto Rosso\") within the industrialised areas of the Pialassa valley.\nTransport.\nRavenna has an important commercial and tourist port.\nRavenna railway station has direct Trenitalia service to Bologna, Ferrara, Lecce, Milan, Parma, Rimini, and Verona.\nRavenna Airport is located in Ravenna. The nearest commercial airports are those of Forl\u00ec, Rimini and Bologna.\nFreeways crossing Ravenna include: A14-bis from the hub of Bologna; on the north\u2013south axis of EU routes E45 (from Rome) and E55 (SS-309 \"Romea\" from Venice); and on the regional Ferrara-Rimini axis of SS-16 (partially called \"Adriatica\").\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRavenna is twinned with:\nSport.\nThe traditional football club of the city is Ravenna F.C. Currently it plays in the third tier of Italian football, Serie C.\nA.P.D. Ribelle 1927 is the football club of Castiglione di Ravenna, a town to the south of Ravenna.\nThe beaches of Ravenna hosted the 2011 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup, in September 2011.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37410", "revid": "51057733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37410", "title": "Dresden", "text": "Capital city of Saxony, Germany\nDresden (; ; Upper Saxon: \"Dr\u00e4sdn\"; , ) is the capital city of the German state of Saxony and its second most populous city after Leipzig. It is the 12th most populous city of Germany, the fourth largest by area (after Berlin, Hamburg, and Cologne), and the third-most populous city in the area of former East Germany, after Berlin and Leipzig. Dresden's urban area comprises the towns of Freital, Pirna, Radebeul, Meissen, Coswig, Radeberg, and Heidenau and has around 790,000 inhabitants. The Dresden metropolitan area has over 1.3 million inhabitants.\nDresden is the second largest city on the River Elbe after Hamburg. Most of the city's population lives in the Elbe Valley, but a large, albeit very sparsely populated, area of the city east of the Elbe lies in the West Lusatian Hill Country and Uplands (the westernmost part of the Sudetes) and thus in Lusatia. Many boroughs west of the Elbe lie in the Ore Mountain Foreland, as well as in the valleys of the rivers rising there and flowing through Dresden, the longest of which are the Wei\u00dferitz and the Lockwitzbach. The name of the city as well as the names of most of its boroughs and rivers are of Sorbian origin.\nDresden has a long history as the capital and royal residence for the Electors and Kings of Saxony, who for centuries furnished the city with cultural and artistic splendor, and was once by personal union the family seat of Polish monarchs. The city was known as the Jewel Box, because of its Baroque and Rococo city centre. The controversial American and British bombing of Dresden towards the end of World War II killed approximately 25,000 people, most of whom were civilians, and destroyed the entire city centre. After the war, restoration work has helped to reconstruct parts of the historic inner city.\nSince German reunification in 1990, Dresden has once again become a cultural, educational and political centre of Germany. The Dresden University of Technology (TU Dresden) is one of the 10 largest universities in Germany and part of the German Universities Excellence Initiative. The economy of Dresden and its agglomeration is one of the most dynamic in Germany and ranks first in Saxony. It is dominated by high-tech branches, often called \"Silicon Saxony\". According to the Hamburg Institute of International Economics (HWWI) and Berenberg Bank in 2019, Dresden had the seventh best prospects for the future of all cities in Germany.\nDresden is one of the most visited cities in Germany with 4.7 million overnight stays per year. Its most prominent building is the Frauenkirche located at the Neumarkt. Built in the 18th century, the church was destroyed during World War II. The remaining ruins were left for 50 years as a war memorial, before being rebuilt between 1994 and 2005. Other famous landmarks include the Zwinger, the Semperoper and Dresden Castle. Furthermore, the city is home to the Dresden State Art Collections, originating from the collections of the Saxon electors in the 16th century. Dresden's Striezelmarkt is one of the largest Christmas markets in Germany and is considered the first genuine Christmas market in the world. Nearby sights include the National Park of Saxon Switzerland, the Ore Mountains and the countryside around Elbe Valley, Moritzburg Castle and Meissen, home of Meissen porcelain.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTimeline of Dresden &lt;br&gt;\n Margravate of Meissen, 1206\u20131316&lt;br&gt;\n Margraviate of Brandenburg 1316\u20131319\n Margravate of Meissen, 1319\u20131423&lt;br&gt;\n Electorate of Saxony, 1423\u20131485&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Duchy of Saxony, 1485\u20131547&lt;br&gt;\n Electorate of Saxony, 1547\u20131806&lt;br&gt;\n Kingdom of Saxony, 1806\u20131848&lt;br&gt;\n German Empire, 1848\u20131849&lt;br&gt;\n Kingdom of Saxony, 1849\u20131918&lt;br&gt;\n North German Confederation (Kingdom of Saxony), 1867\u20131871&lt;br&gt;\n German Empire (Kingdom of Saxony), 1867\u20131918&lt;br&gt;\n Weimar Republic (Free State of Saxony), 1918\u20131933&lt;br&gt;\n Nazi Germany, 1933\u20131945\n Soviet occupation zone of Germany, 1945\u20131949&lt;br&gt;\n East Germany, 1949\u20131990&lt;br&gt;\n (Free State of Saxony), 1990\u2013present\nThe area had been settled in the Neolithic era by Linear Pottery culture tribes c. 7500 BC. Dresden's founding and early growth is associated with the eastward expansion of Germanic peoples, mining in the nearby Ore Mountains, and the establishment of the Margraviate of Meissen. Its name comes from Sorbian \"Dre\u017e\u010fany\" (meaning either \"woods\" or \"lowland forest-dweller\"). Dresden later evolved into the capital of Saxony. Beginning in the 17th century, it became one of Europe\u2019s leading centres of culture and the arts.\nEarly history.\nDresden developed as a German trading settlement on the south bank of the Elbe, established by the Margrave of Meissen Dietrich. The first documentary evidence of Dresden as a town dates to 1206. Dietrich chose Dresden as his interim residence in 1206, as documented in a record calling the place \"Civitas Dresdene\". In 1220, a stone bridge was constructed over the Elbe at the same location as today\u2019s Augustus Bridge. The bridge connected the town with a Sorbian settlement called \"Drezdany\" on the northern bank. It was known as \"Antiqua Dresdin\" by 1350, and later as Altendresden, both literally \"old Dresden\".\nDresden was given to after the death of Henry the Illustrious in 1288. It was taken by the Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1316 and was restored to the Wettin dynasty after the death of Valdemar the Great in 1319. In 1485, the Saxon Wettin brothers divided their lands under the Treaty of Leipzig, with Ernest retaining the Elector title and the western and northern territories, while Albert received the Meissen area and established Dresden as the capital of the Duchy of Saxony. Following the Schmalkaldic War, in 1547 Duke Moritz was granted the title of Elector and Dresden became the capital of the Electorate of Saxony.\nEarly modern age.\nThe Elector and ruler of Saxony Frederick Augustus I became King Augustus II the Strong of Poland in 1697. He gathered many of the best musicians, architects and painters from all over Europe to Dresden. His reign marked the beginning of Dresden's emergence as a leading European city for technology and art. During the reign of Kings Augustus II the Strong and Augustus III of Poland most of the city's baroque landmarks were built. These include the Zwinger Royal Palace, the Japanese Palace, the Taschenbergpalais, the Pillnitz Castle and the two landmark churches: the Catholic Hofkirche and the Lutheran Frauenkirche. In addition, significant art collections and museums were founded. Notable examples include the Dresden Porcelain Collection, the Collection of Prints, Drawings and Photographs, the Gr\u00fcnes Gew\u00f6lbe and the Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon. Strengthening ties with Poland, postal routes to Pozna\u0144, Toru\u0144 and Warsaw were established under Augustus II the Strong.\nIn 1726, there was a riot for two days after a Protestant clergyman was killed by a soldier who had recently converted from Catholicism. In 1745, the Treaty of Dresden between Prussia, Saxony, and Austria ended the Second Silesian War. Only a few years later, Dresden suffered heavy destruction in the Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763), following its capture by Prussian forces, its subsequent re-capture, and a failed Prussian siege in 1760. Friedrich Schiller completed his \"Ode to Joy\" (the literary base of the European anthem) in Dresden in 1785. In 1793, preparations for the Polish Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising started in the city by Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko in response to the Second Partition of Poland.\n19th century.\nIn 1806, Dresden became the capital of the Kingdom of Saxony established by Napoleon. During the Napoleonic Wars the French Emperor made it a base of operations, winning there the Battle of Dresden on 27 August 1813. As a result of the Congress of Vienna, the Kingdom of Saxony became part of the German Confederation in 1815. In 1838, the Dresden Coinage Convention took place in the city which attempted to bring some degree of standardisation to the currencies used in the (German Customs Union). Steamboat transport on the Elbe was established in 1837, followed in 1839 by the opening of Dresden\u2019s first railway, providing a direct connection to Leipzig.\nDresden was a centre of the German Revolutions in 1848\u20131849. The May Uprising saw rebel Saxon troops supported by students, democrats, miners, and workers declaring a provisional government at the Town Hall. During the street fighting the city\u2019s first opera house was destroyed. Prussian forces, aided by loyal Saxon troops, suppressed the revolt, leaving over 150 dead and many imprisoned. The uprising forced Frederick Augustus II of Saxony to flee from Dresden, but he soon after regained control over the city with the help of Prussia. In 1852, the population of Dresden grew to 100,000 inhabitants, making it one of the biggest cities within the German Confederation. Following the Polish uprisings of 1831, 1848 and 1863, many Poles fled to Dresden, including the artistic and political elite, such as composer Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, war hero J\u00f3zef Bem and writer Adam Mickiewicz. Mickiewicz wrote one of his greatest works, \"Dziady\", Part III, there.\nAs the capital of the Kingdom of Saxony, Dresden became part of the newly founded German Empire in 1871. In the following years, the city became a major centre of economy, including motor car production, food processing, banking and the manufacture of medical equipment. In the early 20th century, Dresden was particularly well known for its camera works and its cigarette factories. During World War I, the city did not suffer any war damage, but lost many of its inhabitants. Between 1918 and 1934, Dresden was the capital of the first Free State of Saxony as well as a cultural and economic centre of the Weimar Republic. The city was also a centre of European modern art until 1933.\nDuring the foundation of the German Empire in 1871, Albertstadt, a large military facility, was built. It had a capacity of up to 20,000 military personnel at the beginning of the First World War. The garrison saw only limited use between 1918 and 1934, but was then reactivated in preparation for the Second World War.\n20th century.\nIts usefulness was limited by attacks on 13\u201315 February and 17 April 1945, the former of which destroyed large areas of the city. However, the garrison itself was not specifically targeted. Soldiers had been deployed as late as March 1945 in the Albertstadt garrison.\nThe Albertstadt garrison became the headquarters of the Soviet 1st Guards Tank Army in the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany after the war. Apart from the German army officers' school (\"Offizierschule des Heeres\"), there have been no more military units in Dresden since the army merger during German reunification, and the withdrawal of Soviet forces in 1992. Nowadays, the Bundeswehr operates the Military History Museum of the Federal Republic of Germany in the former Albertstadt garrison.\nSecond World War.\nAfter the Nazi seizure of power, two book burnings were organised in the city in 1933, one by the SA on Wettiner Platz, the second one by German Student Union at the Bismarck Column on R\u00e4cknitzh\u00f6he.\nFrom 1933 to 1945, the Jewish community of Dresden was reduced from over 6,000 (7,100 people were persecuted as Jews) to 41, mostly as a result of emigration, but later also deportation and murder. One of the survivors was Victor Klemperer with his non-Jewish wife, who believed that the bombing saved their lives. The Semper Synagogue was destroyed in November 1938 on Kristallnacht.\nDuring the German invasion of Poland at the start of World War II, in September 1939, the Gestapo carried out mass arrests of local Polish activists. Other non-Jews were also targeted, and over 1,300 people were executed by the Nazis at the M\u00fcnchner Platz, a courthouse in Dresden, including labour leaders, undesirables, resistance fighters and anyone caught listening to foreign radio broadcasts. The bombing stopped prisoners who were busy digging a large hole into which an additional 4,000 prisoners were to be disposed of.\nDuring the war, Dresden was the location of several forced labour subcamps of the Stalag IV-A prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs, and seven subcamps of the Flossenb\u00fcrg concentration camp, in which some 3,600 men, women and children were imprisoned, mostly Polish, Jewish and Russian. In April 1945, most surviving prisoners were sent on death marches to various destinations in Saxony and German-occupied Czechoslovakia, whereas some women were probably murdered and some managed to escape.\nDresden in the 20th century was a major communications hub and manufacturing centre with 127 factories and major workshops and was designated by the German military as a defensive strongpoint, with which to hinder the Soviet advance. Being the capital of the German state of Saxony, Dresden not only had garrisons but a whole \"military borough\", the \"Albertstadt\". This military complex, named after Saxon King Albert, was not specifically targeted in the bombing of Dresden.\nDuring the final months of the Second World War, Dresden harboured some 600,000 refugees, with a total population of 1.2 million. Dresden was attacked seven times between 1944 and 1945, and was occupied by the Red Army after the German capitulation.\nFire bombing.\nThe bombing of Dresden by the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) between 13 and 15 February 1945 was controversial. On the night of 13\u201314 February 1945, 773 RAF Lancaster bombers dropped 1,181.6 tons of incendiary bombs and 1,477.7 tons of high explosive bombs, targeting the rail yards at the centre of the city. The inner city of Dresden was largely destroyed. Widely quoted Nazi propaganda reports claimed 200,000 deaths, but the German Dresden Historians' Commission, made up of 13 prominent German historians, in an official 2010 report published after five years of research concluded that casualties numbered between 22,500 and 25,000.\nThe destruction of Dresden allowed Hildebrand Gurlitt, a major Nazi Museum director and art dealer, to hide a large collection of artwork worth tens of millions of dollars that had been stolen during the Nazi era, as he claimed it had been destroyed along with his house which was located in Dresden.\nThe Allies described the operation as the legitimate bombing of a military and industrial target. Several researchers have argued that the February attacks were disproportionate. As a result of the bombings, mostly women and children died.\nAmerican author Kurt Vonnegut's novel \"Slaughterhouse Five\" is loosely based on his first-hand experience of the raid as a prisoner of war.\nIn remembrance of the victims, the anniversaries of the bombing of Dresden are marked with peace demonstrations, devotions and marches.\nPost-war.\nAfter the war, Dresden became part of the Soviet occupation zone in Germany. Following his military service the German press photographer and photojournalist Richard Peter returned to Dresden and began to document the ruined city. Among his best known works \"Blick auf Dresden vom Rathausturm\" (\"View of Dresden from the Rathaus Tower\"). It has become one of the best known photographs of a ruined post-war Germany following its appearance in 1949 in his book \"Dresden, eine Kamera klagt an\" (\"Dresden, a photographic accusation\", ).\nWhen a skeleton previously used as a model for drawing art classes was found in the ruins of the Dresden Art Academy, the photographer Edmund Kesting with the assistance of Peter posed it in a number of different locations to produce a series of haunting photographic images to give the impression that Death was wandering through the city in search of the dead. Kesting subsequently published them in the book \"Dresdner Totentanz\" (\"Dresden's Death Dance\").\nThe damage from Allied air raids was so extensive that a narrow-gauge light railway system was constructed after the war to remove the debris, though being makeshift there were frequent derailments. This seven-line railway system employed 5,000 staff and 40 locomotives, all of which bore women's names. The last train remained in service until 1958, though the last official debris clearance team was only disbanded in 1977.\nRather than repair them, German Democratic Republic (East Germany) authorities razed the ruins of many churches, royal buildings and palaces in the 1950s and 1960s, such as the Gothic Sophienkirche, the Alberttheater and the Wackerbarth-Palais as well as many historic residential buildings. The surroundings of the once lively resembled a wasteland before it was rebuilt in the socialist style at the beginning of the 1960s.\nHowever, the majority of historic landmarks were saved or reconstructed. Among them were the St\u00e4ndehaus (1946), the Augustusbr\u00fccke (1949), the Kreuzkirche (completed 1955), the Zwinger (completed 1963), the Catholic Court Church (completed 1965), the Semperoper (completed 1985), the Japanese Palace (completed 1987) and the two largest train stations. Some of this work dragged on for decades, often interrupted by the overall economic situation in the GDR. The ruins of the Frauenkirche were allowed to remain on the Neumarkt as a war memorial.\nWhile the Theater and Schlo\u00dfplatz were rebuilt in accordance with the historical model in 1990, the Neumarkt remained completely undeveloped. On the other hand, buildings of socialist classicism and spatial design and orientation according to socialist ideals (e.g. the Kulturpalast) were built at the Altmarkt.\nFrom 1955 to 1958, a large part of the art treasures looted by the Soviet Union was returned, which meant that from 1960 onwards many state art collections could be opened in reconstructed facilities or interim exhibitions. Important orchestras such as the Staatskapelle performed in alternative venues (for example in the Kulturpalast from 1969). Some cultural institutions were moved out of the city center (for example the state library in Albertstadt). The Outer Neustadt, which was almost undamaged during the war was threatened with demolition in the 1980s following years of neglect, but was preserved following public protests.\nTo house the homeless, large prefabricated housing estates were built on previously undeveloped land In Prohlis and Gorbitz. Damaged housing in the Johannstadt and other areas in the city center were demolished and replaced with large apartment blocks. The villa districts in Blasewitz, Striesen, Kleinzschachwitz, Loschwitz and on the Wei\u00dfen Hirsch were largely preserved.\nDresden became a major industrial centre of East Germany, with a great deal of research infrastructure. It was the centre of Bezirk Dresden (Dresden District) between 1952 and 1990. Many of the city's important historic buildings were reconstructed, including the Semper Opera House and the Zwinger Palace, although the city leaders chose to rebuild large areas of the city in a \"socialist modern\" style, partly for economic reasons, but also to break away from the city's past as the royal capital of Saxony and a stronghold of the German bourgeoisie.\nUntil the end of the Cold War, the 1st Guards Tank Army of the Soviet Army and the 7th Panzer Division of the National People's Army were stationed in and around Dresden. Following reunification in 1989, the Soviet / Russian troops were withdrawn from Germany in the early 1990s and the NVA dissolved in accordance with the provisions of the Two-Plus-Four Treaty of 1990.\nFrom 1985 to 1990, the future President of Russia, Vladimir Putin, was stationed in Dresden by the KGB, where he worked for Lazar Matveev, the senior KGB liaison officer there. On 3 October 1989 (the so-called \"battle of Dresden\"), a convoy of trains carrying East German refugees from Prague passed through Dresden on its way to the Federal Republic of Germany. Local activists and residents joined in the growing civil disobedience movement spreading across the German Democratic Republic, by staging demonstrations and demanding the removal of the communist government.\nPost-reunification.\nDresden has experienced dramatic changes since the reunification of Germany in the early 1990s. The city still bears many wounds from the bombing raids of 1945, but it has undergone significant reconstruction. Restoration of the Dresden Frauenkirche, a Lutheran church, began in 1994 and was completed in 2005, a year before Dresden's 800th anniversary; this was done with the help of privately raised funds. The gold cross on the top of the church was funded officially by \"the British people and the House of Windsor\". The urban renewal process, which includes the reconstruction of the area around the Neumarkt square on which the Frauenkirche is situated, was expected to take decades, but numerous large projects were under way in the first part of the 21st century.\nDresden remains a major cultural centre of historical memory, owing to the city's destruction in World War II. Each year on 13 February, the anniversary of the British and American fire-bombing raid that destroyed most of the city, tens of thousands of demonstrators gather to commemorate the event. Since reunification, the ceremony has taken on a more neutral and pacifist tone (after being used more politically during the Cold War). Beginning in 1999, right-wing Neo-Nazi white nationalist groups have organised demonstrations in Dresden that have been among the largest of their type in the post-war history of Germany. Each year around the anniversary of the city's destruction, people convene in the memory of those who died in the fire-bombing.\n21st century.\nIn 2002, torrential rains caused the Elbe to flood above its normal height, i.e., even higher than the old record height from 1845, damaging many landmarks (see 2002 European floods). The destruction from this \"millennium flood\" is no longer visible, due to the speed of reconstruction.\nThe United Nations' cultural organization UNESCO declared the Dresden Elbe Valley to be a World Heritage Site in 2004. After being placed on the list of endangered World Heritage Sites in 2006, the city lost the title in June 2009, due to the construction of the \"Waldschl\u00f6\u00dfchenbr\u00fccke\", making it only the second ever World Heritage Site to be removed from the register. UNESCO stated in 2006 that the bridge would destroy the cultural landscape. The city council's legal moves, meant to prevent the bridge from being built, failed.\nThe completion of the reconstructed Dresden Frauenkirche in 2005 marked the first step in rebuilding the Neumarkt area. The areas around the square were divided into eight \"quarters\", with each being rebuilt as a separate project. The majority of buildings were rebuilt either in their original form or at least with a fa\u00e7ade resembling the original.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nDresden lies on both banks of the Elbe, mostly in the Dresden Basin, with the further reaches of the eastern Ore Mountains to the south, the steep slope of the Lusatian granitic crust to the north, and the Elbe Sandstone Mountains to the east at an altitude of about . Triebenberg is the highest point in Dresden at .\nWith a pleasant location and a mild climate on the Elbe, as well as Baroque-style architecture and numerous museums and art collections, Dresden has been called \"Elbflorenz\" (Florence on the Elbe). The incorporation of neighbouring rural communities over the past 60 years has made Dresden the fourth largest urban district by area in Germany after Berlin, Hamburg and Cologne.\nThe nearest German cities are Chemnitz to the southwest, Leipzig to the northwest and Berlin to the north. Prague (Czech Republic) is about to the south and Wroc\u0142aw (Poland) to the east.\nNature.\nDresden is one of the greenest cities in all of Europe, with 62% of the city being green areas and forests. The Dresden Heath (\"Dresdner Heide\") to the north is a forest in size. There are four nature reserves. The additional Special Conservation Areas cover . The protected gardens, parkways, parks and old graveyards host 110 natural monuments in the city. The Dresden Elbe Valley is a former world heritage site which is focused on the conservation of the cultural landscape in Dresden. One important part of that landscape is the Elbe meadows, which cross the city in a 20 kilometre swath. Saxon Switzerland is located south-east of the city.\nClimate.\nLike most of eastern Germany, Dresden has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\"), with significant continental influences due to its inland location. The summers are warm, averaging 19.0\u00a0\u00b0C (66.2\u00a0\u00b0F) in July. The winters are slightly colder than the German average, with a January average temperature of . The driest months are February, March and April, with precipitation of around . The wettest months are July and August, with more than per month.\nThe microclimate in the Elbe valley differs from that on the slopes and in the higher areas, where the Dresden district Klotzsche, at 227 metres above sea level, hosts the Dresden weather station. The weather in Klotzsche is colder than in the inner city at 112 metres above sea level.\nFlood protection.\nBecause of its location on the banks of the Elbe, into which some water sources from the Ore Mountains flow, flood protection is important. Large areas are kept free of buildings to provide a flood plain. Two additional trenches, about 50 metres wide, have been built to keep the inner city free of water from the Elbe, by dissipating the water downstream through the inner city's gorge portion. Flood regulation systems like detention basins and water reservoirs are almost all outside the city area.\nThe Wei\u00dferitz, normally a rather small river, suddenly ran directly into the main station of Dresden during the 2002 European floods. This was largely because the river returned to its former route; it had been diverted so that a railway could run along the river bed.\nMany locations and areas need to be protected by walls and sheet pilings during floods. A number of districts become waterlogged if the Elbe overflows across some of its former floodplains.\nStructure of the city.\nDresden is a spacious city. Its boroughs differ in their structure and appearance. Many parts still contain an old village core, while some quarters are almost completely preserved as rural settings. Other characteristic kinds of urban areas are the historic outskirts of the city, and the former suburbs with scattered housing. During the German Democratic Republic, many apartment blocks were built. The original parts of the city are almost all in the boroughs of Altstadt (Old town) and Neustadt (New town). Growing outside the city walls, the historic outskirts were built in the 18th and 19th century. They were planned and constructed on the orders of the Saxon monarchs and many of them are named after Saxon sovereigns (e.g. Friedrichstadt and Albertstadt). Dresden has been divided into ten boroughs called \"Stadtbezirk\" and nine former municipalities (\"Ortschaften\") which have been incorporated since 1990.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Dresden grew to 100,000 inhabitants in 1852, making it one of the first German cities after Hamburg, Berlin and Breslau (Wroc\u0142aw) to reach that number. The population peaked at 649,252 in 1933, and dropped to 368,519 in 1945 because of World War II, during which large residential areas of the city were destroyed. After large incorporations and city restoration, the population grew to 522,532 again between 1946 and 1983.\nSince German reunification, demographic development has been very unsteady. The city has struggled with migration and suburbanisation. During the 1990s the population increased to 480,000 because of several incorporations, and decreased to 452,827 in 1998. Between 2000 and 2010, the population grew quickly by more than 45,000 inhabitants (about 9.5%) due to a stabilised economy and re-urbanisation. Along with Munich and Potsdam, Dresden is one of the ten fastest-growing cities in Germany.\nAs of 2019[ [update]] the population of the city of Dresden was 557,075, the population of the Dresden agglomeration was 790,400 as of 2018[ [update]], and as of 2019[ [update]] the population of the Dresden metropolitan area, which includes the neighbouring districts of Mei\u00dfen, S\u00e4chsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge, Bautzen and G\u00f6rlitz, was 1,343,305.\nAs of 2018 about 50.0% of the population was female. As of 2007[ [update]] the mean age of the population was 43 years, which is the lowest among the urban districts in Saxony. As of 2018[ [update]] there were 67,841 people with a migration background (12.1% of the population, increased from 7.2% in 2010), and about two-thirds of these, 44,665 or about 8.0% of all Dresden citizens were foreigners. This percentage increased from 4.1% in 2010.\nGovernance.\nDresden is the capital of Saxony. It has institutions of democratic local self-administration that are independent from the capital functions.\nDresden hosted some international summits in recent years, such as the Petersburg Dialogue between Russia and Germany, the European Union's Minister of the Interior conference and the G8 labour ministers conference.\nMayor.\nThe city council is the legislative branch of the city government. The council gives orders to the mayor () via resolutions and decrees, and thus also has some degree of executive power.\nThe first freely elected mayor after German reunification was Herbert Wagner of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), who served from 1990 to 2001. The mayor was originally chosen by the city council, but since 1994 has been directly elected. Ingolf Ro\u00dfberg of the Free Democratic Party (FDP) served from 2001 until 2008. He was succeeded by Helma Orosz (CDU). Dirk Hilbert was elected mayor in 2015 under the banner \"Independent Citizens for Dresden\". He was nominated by the FDP and Free Voters, and was endorsed by the CDU and AfD in the runoff. The most recent mayoral election was held on 12 June 2022, with a runoff held on 10 July, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:\nPublic institutions.\nAs the capital of Saxony, Dresden is home to the Saxon state parliament (\"Landtag\") and the ministries of the Saxon Government. The controlling Constitutional Court of Saxony is in Leipzig. The highest Saxon court in civil and criminal law, is the Higher Regional Court of Dresden.\nMost of the Saxon state authorities are located in Dresden. Dresden is home to the Regional Commission of the Dresden Regierungsbezirk, which is a controlling authority for the Saxon Government.\nLike many cities in Germany, Dresden is also home to a local court, has a trade corporation and a Chamber of Industry and Trade and many subsidiaries of federal agencies (such as the Federal Labour Office or the Federal Agency for Technical Relief). It hosts some divisions of the German Customs and Waterways and Shipping Office.\nDresden is home to a military subdistrict command, but no longer has large military units as it did in the past. Dresden is the traditional location for army officer schooling in Germany, today carried out in the Offizierschule des Heeres.\nLocal affairs.\nLocal affairs in Dresden often centre around the urban development of the city and its spaces. Architecture and the design of public places is a controversial subject. Discussions about the Waldschl\u00f6\u00dfchenbr\u00fccke, a bridge under construction across the Elbe, received international attention because of its position across the Dresden Elbe Valley World Heritage Site. The city held a public referendum in 2005 on whether to build the bridge, prior to UNESCO expressing doubts about the compatibility between bridge and heritage. Its construction caused loss of World Heritage site status in 2009.\nIn 2006, the city of Dresden sold its publicly subsidized housing organization, WOBA Dresden GmbH, to the US-based private investment company Fortress Investment Group. The city received 987.1 million euro and paid off its remaining loans, making it the first large city in Germany to become debt-free. Opponents of the sale were concerned about Dresden's loss of control over the subsidized housing market.\nDresden has been the center of groups and activities of far-right movements. Politicians and politics of Alternative for Germany (AfD) have a strong backing. Starting in October 2014, PEGIDA, a nationalistic political movement based in Dresden has been organizing weekly demonstrations against what it perceives as the Islamization of Europe at the height of the European migrant crisis. As the number of demonstrators increased to 15,000 in December 2014, so has the international media coverage of it. However, since 2015, the number of demonstrators has decreased significantly.\nIn 2019, the Dresden City Council passed a policy statement against \"anti-democratic, anti-pluralist, misanthropic and right-wing-extremist developments\". The motion was originally put forward by the satirical political party Die Partei. B\u00fcndnis 90/Die Gr\u00fcnen, Die Linke, SPD and Die Partei voted in favour of the statement. The CDU and AfD voted against it. Among other things, the statement calls on strengthening democracy, protecting human rights and raising spending on (political) education.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nDresden and Coventry became twins after World War II in an act of reconciliation, as both had suffered near-total destruction from massive aerial bombings. Similar symbolism occurred in 1988, when Dresden twinned with the Dutch city of Rotterdam. The Coventry Blitz and Rotterdam Blitz bombardments by the German Luftwaffe are also considered to be disproportional.\nDresden has had a triangular partnership with Saint Petersburg and Hamburg since 1987. Dresden is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly cities.\nDresden also has friendly relations with:\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nAlthough Dresden is often said to be a Baroque city, its architecture is influenced by more than one style. Other eras of importance are the Renaissance and Historicism, as well as the contemporary styles of Modernism and Postmodernism.\nDresden has some 13,000 listed cultural monuments and eight districts under general preservation orders.\nRoyal household.\nThe Dresden Castle was the seat of the royal household from 1485. The wings of the building have been renewed, built upon and restored many times. Due to this integration of styles, the castle is made up of elements of the Renaissance, Baroque and Classicist styles.\nThe Zwinger Palace is across the road from the castle. It was built on the old stronghold of the city and was converted to a centre for the royal art collections and a place to hold festivals. Its gate by the moat is surmounted by a golden crown.\nOther royal buildings and ensembles:\nSacred buildings.\nThe Hofkirche was the church of the royal household. Augustus the Strong, who desired to be King of Poland, converted to Catholicism, as Polish kings had to be Catholic. At that time Dresden was strictly Protestant. Augustus the Strong ordered the building of the Hofkirche, the Roman Catholic Cathedral, to establish a sign of Roman Catholic religious importance in Dresden. The church is the cathedral \"Sanctissimae Trinitatis\" since 1980. The crypt of the Wettin Dynasty is located within the church. King Augustus III of Poland is buried in the cathedral, as one of the very few Polish kings to be buried outside the Wawel Cathedral in Krak\u00f3w.\nIn contrast to the Hofkirche, the Lutheran Frauenkirche located at the Neumarkt was built almost contemporaneously by the citizens of Dresden. The city's historic Kreuzkirche was reconsecrated in 1388.\nThere are also other churches in Dresden, like the Russian Orthodox St. Simeon of the Wonderful Mountain Church in the S\u00fcdvorstadt district.\nHistoricism.\nHistoricist buildings made their presence felt on the cityscape until the 1920s.\nNotable examples of Renaissance Revival architecture in Dresden include the Albertinum located at Br\u00fchl's Terrace as well as the Saxon State Chancellery and the Saxon State Ministry of Finance located on the northern Elbe river banks. The Ehrlichsche Gestiftskirche, constructed in 1907, was a historicist church building that was demolished in August 1951.\nThe Villa Rosa was built in 1839 and was considered one of the most important villa buildings in Dresden, due to its Renaissance Revival architecture.\nYenidze is a former cigarette factory building built in the style of a mosque between 1907 and 1909.\nThe most recent historicist buildings in Dresden date from the short era of Stalinist architecture in the 1950s, e.g. at the Altmarkt.\nModernism.\nThe \"Garden City of Hellerau\", at that time a suburb of Dresden, was founded in 1909. It was Germany's first garden city. In 1911, Heinrich Tessenow built the Hellerau Festspielhaus (festival theatre). Until the outbreak of World War I, Hellerau was a centre for European modernism with international standing. In 1950, Hellerau was incorporated into the city of Dresden. Today, the Hellerau reform architecture is recognized as exemplary. In the 1990s, the garden city of Hellerau became a conservation area.\nThe German Hygiene Museum (built 1928\u20131930) is a signal example of modern architecture in Dresden in the interwar period. The building is designed in an impressively monumental style, but employs plain fa\u00e7ades and simple structures.\nImportant modernist buildings erected between 1945 and 1990 are the Centrum-Warenhaus (a large department store), representing the international Style, and the multi-purpose hall Kulturpalast.\nContemporary architecture.\nAfter 1990 and German reunification, new styles emerged. Important contemporary buildings include the New Synagogue, a postmodern building with few windows, the Transparent Factory, the Saxon State Parliament and the New Terrace, the UFA-Kristallpalast cinema designed by Coop Himmelb(l)au (one of the biggest deconstructivist buildings in Germany), and the Saxon State Library.\nDaniel Libeskind and Norman Foster both modified existing buildings. Foster roofed the main railway station with translucent Teflon-coated synthetics. Libeskind changed the whole structure of the Bundeswehr Military History Museum by placing a wedge through the historical arsenal building. According to Libeskind's studio, \"[t]he fa\u00e7ade's openness and transparency is intended to contrast with the opacity and rigidity of the existing building.\"\nBridges.\nImportant bridges crossing the Elbe river are the Blaues Wunder bridge and the Augustus Bridge.\nStatues.\nJean-Joseph Vinache's golden equestrian statue of August the Strong, the \"Goldener Reiter\" (Golden Cavalier), is on the Neust\u00e4dter Markt square. It shows August at the beginning of the Hauptstra\u00dfe (Main street) on his way to Warsaw, where he was King of Poland in personal union. Another statue is the memorial of Martin Luther in front of the Frauenkirche.\nParks and gardens.\nGro\u00dfer Garten is a Baroque garden in central Dresden. It includes the Dresden Zoo and the Dresden Botanical Garden.\nThe Dresden Heath is a large forest located in the northeast of Dresden and one of the city's most important recreation areas.\nThe park of Pillnitz Palace is famous for its botanical treasures, including a more than 230-year-old Japanese camellia and about 400 potted plants.\nCulture.\nCarl Maria von Weber and Richard Wagner had a number of their works performed for the first time in Dresden. Other artists, such as Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Otto Dix, Oskar Kokoschka, Richard Strauss, Gottfried Semper and Gret Palucca, were also active in the city. Dresden is also home to several art collections and musical ensembles.\nEntertainment.\nThe Saxon State Opera descends from the opera company of the former electors and Kings of Saxony. Their first opera house was the , opened in 1667. The Opernhaus am Zwinger presented opera from 1719 to 1756, when the Seven Years' War began. The later Semperoper was completely destroyed during the bombing of Dresden during the second world war. The opera's reconstruction was completed exactly 40 years later, on 13 February 1985. Its musical ensemble is the \"S\u00e4chsische Staatskapelle Dresden\", founded in 1548. The Dresden State Theatre runs a number of smaller theatres. The Dresden State Operetta is the only independent operetta in Germany. The \"Herkuleskeule\" (Hercules club) is an important site in German-speaking political cabaret.\nThere are several choirs in Dresden, the best-known of which is the Dresdner Kreuzchor (Choir of The Holy Cross). It is a boys' choir drawn from pupils of the Kreuzschule, and was founded in the 13th century. The \"Dresdner Kapellknaben\" are not related to the \"Staatskapelle\", but to the former \"Hofkapelle\", the Catholic cathedral, since 1980. The Dresden Philharmonic Orchestra is the orchestra of the city of Dresden.\nThroughout the summer, the outdoor concert series \"Zwingerkonzerte und Mehr\" is held in the \"Zwingerhof\". Performances include dance and music.\nThere are several small cinemas presenting cult films and low-budget or low-profile films chosen for their cultural value. Dresden also has a few multiplex cinemas, of which the Rundkino is one the known.\nDresden's Striezelmarkt is one of the largest Christmas markets in Germany. Founded as a one-day market in 1434, it is considered the first genuine Christmas market in the world.\nA big event each year in June is the Bunte Republik Neustadt, a culture festival lasting three days in the city district of Dresden-Neustadt. Bands play live concerts for free in the streets and there are refreshments and food.\nMuseums.\nDresden hosts the \"Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden\" (Dresden State Art Collections) which, according to the institution's own statements, place it among the most important museums presently in existence. The art collections consist of twelve museums, including the \"Gem\u00e4ldegalerie Alte Meister\" (Old Masters Gallery) and the \"Gr\u00fcnes Gew\u00f6lbe\" (Green Vault) and the \"Japanese Palace\" (Japanisches Palais). Also known are \"Galerie Neue Meister\" (New Masters Gallery), \"R\u00fcstkammer\" (Armoury) with the Turkish Chamber, and the \"Museum f\u00fcr V\u00f6lkerkunde Dresden\" (Museum of Ethnology).\nOther museums and collections owned by the Free State of Saxony in Dresden are:\nThe Dresden City Museum is run by the city of Dresden and focused on the city's history.\nThe Bundeswehr Military History Museum is placed in the former garrison in the Albertstadt.\nThe book museum of the Saxon State Library presents the Dresden Codex.\nThe Kraszewski Museum is a museum dedicated to the most prolific Polish writer J\u00f3zef Ignacy Kraszewski, who lived in Dresden from 1863 to 1883.\nTransport.\nBus.\nDVB is the municipal company in charge of transport in the city of Dresden. DVB provides a night service named ('goodnight lines'), which operates Monday-Sunday, although the frequency of the buses is greater on Friday, Saturday and before holidays when the routes run every 30 minutes between 22:45 and 04:45. Postplatz is the most important hub for night-time travel in Dresden. Most GuteNachtLinie routes meet here at the same time to allow people to switch routes.\nRoads.\nThe Bundesautobahn 4 (European route E40) crosses Dresden in the northwest from west to east. The Bundesautobahn 17 leaves the A4 in a south-eastern direction. In Dresden it begins to cross the Ore Mountains towards Prague. The Bundesautobahn 13 leaves from the three-point interchange \"Dresden-Nord\" and goes to Berlin. The A13 and the A17 are on the European route E55. In addition, several Bundesstra\u00dfen (federal highways) run through Dresden.\nRail.\nThere are two main inter-city transit hubs in the railway network in Dresden: Dresden Hauptbahnhof and Dresden-Neustadt railway station. The most important railway lines run to Berlin, Prague, Leipzig and Chemnitz. A commuter train system (Dresden S-Bahn) operates on three lines alongside the long-distance routes.\nAir.\nDresden Airport is the city's international airport, located at the north-western outskirts of the city. After German reunification the airport's infrastructure has been considerably improved. In 1998, a motorway access route was opened. In March 2001, a new terminal building was opened along with the underground S-Bahn station Dresden Flughafen, a multi-storey car park and a new aircraft handling ramp.\nDresden is also directly connected to Berlin Brandenburg Airport by the IC 17.\nTrams.\nDresden has a large tram network operated by Dresdner Verkehrsbetriebe, the municipal transport company. It operates twelve lines on a network. Many of the new low-floor vehicles are up to 45 metres long and produced by Bombardier Transportation in Bautzen. While about 30% of the system's lines are on reserved track (often sown with grass to reduce noise), many tracks still run on the streets, especially in the inner city.\nThe CarGoTram was a tram that supplied Volkswagen's Transparent Factory, crossing the city. The transparent factory is located not far from the city centre next to the city's largest park.\nThe districts of Loschwitz and Weisser Hirsch are connected by the Dresden Funicular Railway, which has been carrying passengers back and forth since 1895.\nEconomy.\nUntil enterprises like Dresdner Bank left Dresden in the communist era to avoid nationalisation, Dresden was one of the most important German cities, an important industrial centre of the German Democratic Republic. The period of the GDR until 1990 was characterized by low economic growth in comparison to western German cities. In 1990 Dresden had to struggle with the economic collapse of the Soviet Union and the other export markets in Eastern Europe. After reunification enterprises and production sites broke down almost completely as they entered the social market economy, facing competition from the Federal Republic of Germany. After 1990 a completely new legal system and currency system was introduced and infrastructure was largely rebuilt with funds from the Federal Republic of Germany. Dresden as a major urban centre has developed much faster and more consistently than most other regions in the former German Democratic Republic.\nBetween 1990 and 2010 the unemployment rate fluctuated between 13% and 15%, but has decreased significantly ever since. In December 2019 the unemployment rate was 5.3%, the fourth lowest among the 15 largest cities of Germany (after Munich, Stuttgart and Nuremberg). In 2017, the GDP per capita of Dresden was 39,134 euros, the highest in Saxony.\nThanks to the presence of public administration centres, a high density of semi-public research institutes and an extension of publicly funded high technology sectors, the proportion of highly qualified workers Dresden is again among the highest in Germany and by European criteria.\nIn 2019, Dresden had the seventh-best future prospects of all cities in Germany, after being ranked fourth in 2017. According to the 2019 study by Forschungsinstitut Prognos, Dresden is one of the most dynamic regions in Germany. It ranks at number 41 of all 401 German regions and second of all regions in former East Germany (only surpassed by Jena).\nEnterprises.\nThree major sectors dominate Dresden's economy:\nThe semiconductor sector as part of Silicon Saxony's semiconductor industry was built up in 1969. Major enterprises today include AMD's semiconductor fabrication spin-off GlobalFoundries, Infineon Technologies, ZMDI and Toppan Photomasks. Their factories attract many suppliers of material and cleanroom technology enterprises to Dresden.\nThe pharmaceutical sector developed at the end of the 19th century. The 'S\u00e4chsisches Serumwerk Dresden' (Saxon Serum Plant, Dresden), owned by GlaxoSmithKline, is a global leader in vaccine production. Another traditional pharmaceuticals producer is Arzneimittelwerke Dresden (Pharmaceutical Works, Dresden).\nA third traditional branch is that of mechanical and electrical engineering. Major employers are the Volkswagen Transparent Factory, Elbe Flugzeugwerke (Elbe Aircraft Works), Siemens and Linde-KCA-Dresden. The tourism industry enjoys high revenue and supports many employees. There are around one hundred bigger hotels in Dresden, many of which cater in the upscale range.\nMedia.\nThe media in Dresden include two major newspapers of regional record: the \"S\u00e4chsische Zeitung\" (\"Saxon Newspaper\", circulation around 228,000) and the \"Dresdner Neueste Nachrichten\" (\"Dresden's Latest News\", circulation around 50,000). Dresden has a broadcasting centre belonging to the Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk. The \"Dresdner Druck- und Verlagshaus\" (Dresden printing plant and publishing house) produces part of Spiegel's print run, amongst other newspapers and magazines.\nEducation and science.\nUniversities.\nDresden is home to a number of renowned universities, but among German cities it is a more recent location for academic education.\nOther universities include the \"Hochschule f\u00fcr Kirchenmusik\", a school specialising in church music, and the \"Evangelische Hochschule f\u00fcr Sozialarbeit\", an education institution for social work. The \"Dresden International University\" is a private postgraduate university, founded in 2003 in cooperation with the Dresden University of Technology.\nResearch institutes.\nDresden hosts many research institutes, some of which have gained an international standing. The domains of most importance are micro- and nanoelectronics, transport and infrastructure systems, material and photonic technology, and bio-engineering. The institutes are well connected among one other as well as with the academic education institutions.\nHelmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf is the largest complex of research facilities in Dresden, a short distance outside the urban areas. It focuses on nuclear medicine and physics. As part of the Helmholtz Association it is one of the German Big Science research centres.\nThe Max Planck Society focuses on fundamental research. There are three Max Planck Institutes (MPI) in Dresden: the MPI of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, the MPI for Chemical Physics of Solids, and the MPI for the Physics of Complex Systems.\nThe Fraunhofer Society hosts institutes of applied research that also offer mission-oriented research to enterprises. With eleven institutions or parts of institutes, Dresden is the largest location of the Fraunhofer Society worldwide. The Fraunhofer Society has become an important factor in location decisions and is seen as a useful part of the \"knowledge infrastructure\".\nThe Leibniz Community is a union of institutes with science covering fundamental research and applied research. In Dresden there are three Leibniz Institutes. The Leibniz Institute for Polymer Research and the Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research are both in the material and high-technology domain, while the Leibniz Institute for Ecological Urban and Regional Development is focused on more fundamental research into urban planning. The Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf was member of the Leibniz Community until the end of 2010.\nHigher secondary education.\nDresden has more than 20 gymnasia which prepare for a tertiary education, five of which are private. The \"S\u00e4chsisches Landesgymnasium f\u00fcr Musik\" with a focus on music is supported, as its name implies by the State of Saxony, rather than by the city. There are some \"Berufliche Gymnasien\" which combine vocational education and secondary education and an \"Abendgymnasium\" which prepares higher education of adults avocational.\nSport.\nDresden is home to Dynamo Dresden, which had a tradition in UEFA club competitions up to the early 1990s. Dynamo Dresden won eight titles in the DDR-Oberliga. Currently, the club is a member of the 2. Bundesliga after some seasons in the Bundesliga and 3. Liga.\nIn the early 20th century, the city was represented by Dresdner SC, who were one of Germany's most successful clubs in football. Their best performances came during World War II, when they were twice German champions, and twice Cup winners. Dresdner SC is a multisport club. While its football team plays in the sixth-tier Landesliga Sachsen, its volleyball section has a team in the women's Bundesliga. Dresden has a third football team SC Borea Dresden.\nESC Dresdner Eisl\u00f6wen is an ice hockey club playing in the second-tier ice hockey league DEL2.\nDresden Monarchs are an American football team in the German Football League.\nThe Dresden Titans are the city's top basketball team. Due to good performances, they have moved up several divisions and currently play in Germany's second division ProA. The Titans' home arena is the Margon Arena.\nSince 1890, horse races have taken place and the Dresdener Rennverein 1890 e.V. are active and one of the big sporting events in Dresden.\nMajor sporting facilities in Dresden are the Rudolf-Harbig-Stadion, the Heinz-Steyer-Stadion and the EnergieVerbund Arena for ice hockey.\nQuality of life.\nAccording to the 2017 Global Least &amp; Most Stressful Cities Ranking, Dresden was one of the least stressful cities in the world. It was ranked 15th out of 150 cities worldwide and above D\u00fcsseldorf, Leipzig, Dortmund, Cologne, Frankfurt, and Berlin.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37411", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37411", "title": "Alkaline earth metal", "text": "Group of chemical elements\nThe alkaline earth metals are six chemical elements in group 2 of the periodic table. They are beryllium (Be), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), barium (Ba), and radium (Ra). The elements have very similar properties: they are all shiny, silvery-white, somewhat reactive metals at standard temperature and pressure.\nTogether with helium, these elements have in common an outer s orbital which is full\u2014that is, this orbital contains its full complement of two electrons, which the alkaline earth metals readily lose to form cations with charge +2, and an oxidation state of +2. Helium is grouped with the noble gases and not with the alkaline earth metals, but it is theorized to have some similarities to beryllium when forced into bonding and has sometimes been suggested to belong to group 2.\nAll the discovered alkaline earth metals occur in nature, although radium occurs only through the decay chain of uranium and thorium and not as a primordial element. There have been experiments, all unsuccessful, to try to synthesize element 120, the next potential member of the group.\nCharacteristics.\nChemical.\nAs with other groups, the members of this family show patterns in their electronic configuration, especially the outermost shells, resulting in trends in chemical behavior:\nMost of the chemistry has been observed only for the first five members of the group. The chemistry of radium is not well-established due to its radioactivity; thus, the presentation of its properties here is limited.\nThe alkaline earth metals are all silver-colored and soft, and have relatively low densities, melting points, and boiling points. In chemical terms, all of the alkaline earth metals react with the halogens to form the alkaline earth metal halides, all of which are ionic crystalline compounds (except for beryllium chloride, beryllium bromide and beryllium iodide, which are covalent). All the alkaline earth metals except beryllium also react with water to form strongly alkaline hydroxides and, thus, should be handled with great care. The heavier alkaline earth metals react more vigorously than the lighter ones. The alkaline earth metals have the second-lowest first ionization energies in their respective periods of the periodic table because of their somewhat low effective nuclear charges and the ability to attain a full outer shell configuration by losing just two electrons. The second ionization energy of all of the alkaline metals is also somewhat low.\nBeryllium is an exception: It does not react with water or steam unless at very high temperatures, and its halides are covalent. If beryllium did form compounds with an ionization state of +2, it would polarize electron clouds that are near it very strongly and would cause extensive orbital overlap, since beryllium has a high charge density. All compounds that include beryllium have a covalent bond. Even the compound beryllium fluoride, which is the most ionic beryllium compound, has a low melting point and a low electrical conductivity when melted.\nAll the alkaline earth metals have two electrons in their valence shell, so the energetically preferred state of achieving a filled electron shell is to lose two electrons to form doubly charged positive ions.\nCompounds and reactions.\nThe alkaline earth metals all react with the halogens to form ionic halides, such as calcium chloride (CaCl2), as well as reacting with oxygen to form oxides such as strontium oxide (SrO). Calcium, strontium, and barium react with water to produce hydrogen gas and their respective hydroxides (magnesium also reacts, but much more slowly), and also undergo transmetalation reactions to exchange ligands.\n\nPhysical and atomic.\nNuclear stability.\nIsotopes of all six alkaline earth metals are present in the Earth's crust and the Solar System at varying concentrations, dependent upon the nuclides' half-lives and, hence, their nuclear stabilities. The first five have one, three, five, four, and six stable (or observationally stable) isotopes respectively, for a total of 19 stable nuclides, as listed here: beryllium-9; magnesium-24, -25, -26; calcium-40, -42, -43, -44, -46; strontium-84, -86, -87, -88; barium-132, -134, -135, -136, -137, -138. The four underlined isotopes in the list are predicted by radionuclide decay energetics to be only observationally stable and to decay with extremely long half-lives through double-beta decay, though no decays attributed definitively to these isotopes have yet been observed as of 2024. Radium has no stable nor primordial isotopes.\nIn addition to the stable species, calcium and barium each have one extremely long-lived and primordial radionuclide: calcium-48 and barium-130, with half-lives of and years, respectively. Both are far longer than the current age of the universe (4.7\u00d7 and 117\u00d7 billion times longer, respectively) and less than one part per ten billion has decayed since the formation of the Earth. The two isotopes are stable for practical purposes.\nApart from the 21 stable or nearly-stable isotopes, the six alkaline earth elements each possess a large number of known radioisotopes. None of the isotopes other than the aforementioned 21 are primordial: all have half-lives too short for even a single atom to have survived since the Solar System's formation, after the seeding of heavy nuclei by nearby supernovae and collisions between neutron stars, and any present are derived from ongoing natural processes. Beryllium-7, beryllium-10, and calcium-41 are trace, as well as cosmogenic, nuclides, formed by the impact of cosmic rays with atmospheric or crustal atoms. The longest half-lives among them are 1.387 million years for beryllium-10, 99.4 thousand years for calcium-41, 1599 years for radium-226 (radium's longest-lived isotope), 28.90 years for strontium-90, 10.51 years for barium-133, and 5.75 years for radium-228. All others have half-lives of less than half a year, most significantly shorter.\nCalcium-48 and barium-130, the two primordial and non-stable isotopes, decay only through double beta emission and have extremely long half-lives, by virtue of the extremely low probability of both beta decays occurring at the same time. All isotopes of radium are highly radioactive and are primarily generated through the decay of heavier radionuclides. The longest-lived of them is radium-226, a member of the decay chain of uranium-238. Strontium-90 and barium-140 are common fission products of uranium in nuclear reactors, accounting for 5.73% and 6.31% of uranium-235's fission products respectively when bombarded by thermal neutrons. The two isotopes have half-lives each of 28.90 years and 12.7 days. Strontium-90 is produced in appreciable quantities in operating nuclear reactors running on uranium-235 or plutonium-239 fuel, and a minuscule secular equilibrium concentration is also present due to rare spontaneous fission decays in naturally occurring uranium.\nCalcium-48 is the lightest nuclide known to undergo double beta decay. Naturally occurring calcium and barium are very weakly radioactive: calcium contains about 0.1874% calcium-48, and barium contains about 0.1062% barium-130. On average, one double-beta decay of calcium-48 will occur per second for every 90 tons of natural calcium, or 230 tons of limestone (calcium carbonate). Through the same decay mechanism, one decay of barium-130 will occur per second for every 16,000 tons of natural barium, or 27,000 tons of baryte (barium sulfate).\nThe longest-lived isotope of radium is radium-226 with a half-life of 1600 years; it, along with radium-223, -224, and -228, occurs naturally in the decay chains of primordial thorium and uranium. Beryllium-8 is notable by its absence as it splits in half virtually instantaneously into two alpha particles whenever it is formed. The triple alpha process in stars can only occur at energies high enough for beryllium-8 to fuse with a third alpha particle before it can decay, forming carbon-12. This thermonuclear rate-limiting bottleneck is the reason most main sequence stars spend billions of years fusing hydrogen within their cores, and only rarely manage to fuse carbon before collapsing into a stellar remnant, and even then merely for a timescale of ~1000 years. The radioisotopes of alkaline earth metals tend to be \"bone seekers\" as they behave chemically similar to calcium, an integral component of hydroxyapatite in compact bone, and gradually accumulate in the human skeleton. The incorporated radionuclides inflict significant damage to the bone marrow over time through the emission of ionizing radiation, primarily alpha particles. This property is made use of in a positive manner in the radiotherapy of certain bone cancers, since the radionuclides' chemical properties causes them to preferentially target cancerous growths in bone matter, leaving the rest of the body relatively unharmed.\nCompared to their neighbors in the periodic table, alkaline earth metals tend to have a larger number of stable isotopes as they all possess an even number of protons, owing to their status as group 2 elements. Their isotopes are generally more stable due to nucleon pairing. This stability is further enhanced if the isotope also has an even number of neutrons, as both kinds of nucleons can then participate in pairing and contribute to nuclei stability.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe alkaline earth metals are named after their oxides, the \"alkaline earths\", whose old-fashioned names were beryllia, magnesia, lime, strontia, and baria. These oxides are basic (alkaline) when combined with water. \"Earth\" was a term applied by early chemists to nonmetallic substances that are insoluble in water and resistant to heating\u2014properties shared by these oxides. The realization that these earths were not elements but compounds is attributed to the chemist Antoine Lavoisier. In his \"Trait\u00e9 \u00c9l\u00e9mentaire de Chimie\" (\"Elements of Chemistry\") of 1789 he called them salt-forming earth elements. Later, he suggested that the alkaline earths might be metal oxides, but admitted that this was mere conjecture. In 1808, acting on Lavoisier's idea, Humphry Davy became the first to obtain samples of the metals by electrolysis of their molten earths, thus supporting Lavoisier's hypothesis and causing the group to be named the \"alkaline earth metals\".\nDiscovery.\nThe calcium compounds calcite and lime have been known and used since prehistoric times. The same is true for the beryllium compounds beryl and emerald. The other compounds of the alkaline earth metals were discovered starting in the early 15th century. The magnesium compound magnesium sulfate was first discovered in 1618 by a farmer at Epsom in England. Strontium carbonate was discovered in minerals in the Scottish village of Strontian in 1790. The last element is the least abundant: radioactive radium, which was extracted from uraninite in 1898.\nAll elements except beryllium were isolated by electrolysis of molten compounds. Magnesium, calcium, and strontium were first produced by Humphry Davy in 1808, whereas beryllium was independently isolated by Friedrich W\u00f6hler and Antoine Bussy in 1828 by reacting beryllium compounds with potassium. In 1910, radium was isolated as a pure metal by Curie and Andr\u00e9-Louis Debierne also by electrolysis.\nBeryllium.\nBeryl, a mineral that contains beryllium, has been known since the time of the Ptolemaic Kingdom in Egypt. Although it was originally thought that beryl was an aluminum silicate, beryl was later found to contain a then-unknown element when, in 1797, Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin dissolved aluminum hydroxide from beryl in an alkali. In 1828, Friedrich W\u00f6hler and Antoine Bussy independently isolated this new element, beryllium, by the same method, which involved a reaction of beryllium chloride with metallic potassium; this reaction was not able to produce large ingots of beryllium. It was not until 1898, when Paul Lebeau performed an electrolysis of a mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride, that large pure samples of beryllium were produced.\nMagnesium.\nMagnesium was first produced by Humphry Davy in England in 1808 using electrolysis of a mixture of magnesia and mercuric oxide. Antoine Bussy prepared it in coherent form in 1831. Davy's first suggestion for a name was magnium, but the name magnesium is now used.\nCalcium.\nLime has been used as a material for building since 7000 to 14,000\u00a0BCE, and kilns used for lime have been dated to 2,500\u00a0BCE in Khafaja, Mesopotamia. Calcium as a material has been known since at least the first century, as the ancient Romans were known to have used calcium oxide by preparing it from lime. Calcium sulfate has been known to be able to set broken bones since the tenth century. Calcium itself, however, was not isolated until 1808, when Humphry Davy, in England, used electrolysis on a mixture of lime and mercuric oxide, after hearing that J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius had prepared a calcium amalgam from the electrolysis of lime in mercury.\nStrontium.\nIn 1790, physician Adair Crawford discovered ores with distinctive properties, which were named \"strontites\" in 1793 by Thomas Charles Hope, a chemistry professor at the University of Glasgow, who confirmed Crawford's discovery. Strontium was eventually isolated in 1808 by Humphry Davy by electrolysis of a mixture of strontium chloride and mercuric oxide. The discovery was announced by Davy on 30 June 1808 at a lecture to the Royal Society.\nBarium.\nBarite, a mineral containing barium, was first recognized as containing a new element in 1774 by Carl Scheele, although he was able to isolate only barium oxide. Barium oxide was isolated again two years later by Johan Gottlieb Gahn. Later in the 18th century, William Withering noticed a heavy mineral in the Cumberland lead mines, which are now known to contain barium. Barium itself was finally isolated in 1808 when Humphry Davy used electrolysis with molten salts, and Davy named the element \"barium\", after baryta. Later, Robert Bunsen and Augustus Matthiessen isolated pure barium by electrolysis of a mixture of barium chloride and ammonium chloride.\nRadium.\nWhile studying uraninite, on 21 December 1898, Marie and Pierre Curie discovered that, even after uranium had decayed, the material created was still radioactive. The material behaved somewhat similarly to barium compounds, although some properties, such as the color of the flame test and spectral lines, were much different. They announced the discovery of a new element on 26 December 1898 to the French Academy of Sciences. Radium was named in 1899 from the word \"radius\", meaning \"ray\", as radium emitted power in the form of rays.\nOccurrence.\nBeryllium occurs in the Earth's crust at a concentration of two to six parts per million (ppm), much of which is in soils, where it has a concentration of six ppm. Beryllium is one of the rarest elements in seawater, even rarer than elements such as scandium, with a concentration of 0.2 parts per trillion. However, in freshwater, beryllium is somewhat more common, with a concentration of 0.1 parts per billion.\nMagnesium and calcium are very common in the Earth's crust, being respectively the fifth and eighth most abundant elements. None of the alkaline earth metals are found in their elemental state. Common magnesium-containing minerals are carnallite, magnesite, and dolomite. Common calcium-containing minerals are chalk, limestone, gypsum, and anhydrite.\nStrontium is the 15th most abundant element in the Earth's crust. The principal minerals are celestite and strontianite. Barium is slightly less common, much of it in the mineral barite.\nRadium, being a decay product of uranium, is found in all uranium-bearing ores. Due to its relatively short half-life, radium from the Earth's early history has decayed, and present-day samples have all come from the much slower decay of uranium.\nProduction.\nProduction of the six alkaline earth metals can occur in many ways.\nBeryllium.\nMost beryllium is extracted from beryllium hydroxide. One production method is sintering, done by mixing beryl, sodium fluorosilicate, and soda at high temperatures to form sodium fluoroberyllate, aluminum oxide, and silicon dioxide. A solution of sodium fluoroberyllate and sodium hydroxide in water is then used to form beryllium hydroxide by precipitation. Alternatively, in the melt method, powdered beryl is heated to high temperature, cooled with water, then heated again slightly in sulfuric acid, eventually yielding beryllium hydroxide. The beryllium hydroxide from either method then produces beryllium fluoride and beryllium chloride through a somewhat long process. Electrolysis or heating of these compounds can then produce beryllium.\nStrontium.\nIn general, strontium carbonate is extracted from the mineral celestite through two methods: by leaching the celestite with sodium carbonate, or in a more complicated way involving coal.\nBarium.\nTo produce barium, barite (impure barium sulfate) is converted to barium sulfide by carbothermic reduction (such as with coke). The sulfide is water-soluble and easily reacted to form pure barium sulfate, used for commercial pigments, or other compounds, such as barium nitrate. These in turn are calcined into barium oxide, which eventually yields pure barium after reduction with aluminum. The most important supplier of barium is China, which produces more than 50% of world supply.\nMagnesium.\nMagnesium is usually produced from magnesite ore, as well as dolomite. When dolomite is crushed, roasted and mixed with seawater in large tanks, magnesium hydroxide settles to the bottom. Heating, mixing in coke, and reacting with chlorine, then produces molten magnesium chloride. This can be electrolyzed, releasing magnesium, which floats to the surface.\nApplications.\nBeryllium is used mainly in military applications, but non-military uses exist. In electronics, beryllium is used as a p-type dopant in some semiconductors, and beryllium oxide is used as a high-strength electrical insulator and heat conductor. Beryllium alloys are used for mechanical parts when stiffness, light weight, and dimensional stability are required over a wide temperature range. Beryllium-9 is used in small-scale neutron sources that use the reaction 9Be + 4He (\u03b1) \u2192 12C + 1n, the reaction used by James Chadwick when he discovered the neutron. Its low atomic weight and low neutron absorption cross-section would make beryllium suitable as a neutron moderator, but its high price and the readily available alternatives such as water, heavy water and nuclear graphite have limited this to niche applications. In the FLiBe eutectic used in molten salt reactors, beryllium's role as a moderator is more incidental than the desired property leading to its use.\nMagnesium has many uses. It offers advantages over other structural materials such as aluminum, but magnesium's usage is hindered by its flammability. Magnesium is often alloyed with aluminum, zinc and manganese to increase its strength and corrosion resistance. Magnesium has many other industrial applications, such as its role in the production of iron and steel, and in the Kroll process for production of titanium.\nCalcium is used as a reducing agent in the separation of other metals such as uranium from ore. It is a major component of many alloys, especially aluminum and copper alloys, and is also used to deoxidize alloys. Calcium has roles in the making of cheese, mortars, and cement.\nStrontium and barium have fewer applications than the lighter alkaline earth metals. Strontium carbonate is used in the manufacturing of red fireworks. Pure strontium is used in the study of neurotransmitter release in neurons. Radioactive strontium-90 finds some use in RTGs, which utilize its decay heat. Barium is used in vacuum tubes as a getter to remove gases. Barium sulfate has many uses in the petroleum industry, and other industries.\nRadium has many former applications based on its radioactivity, but its use is no longer common because of the adverse health effects and long half-life. Radium was frequently used in luminous paints, although this use was stopped after it sickened workers. The nuclear quackery that alleged health benefits of radium formerly led to its addition to drinking water, toothpaste, and many other products. Radium is no longer used even when its radioactive properties are desired because its long half-life makes safe disposal challenging. For example, in brachytherapy, shorter-lived alternatives such as iridium-192 are usually used instead.\nRepresentative reactions of alkaline earth metals.\nReaction with halogens\nCa + Cl2 \u2192 CaCl2\nAnhydrous calcium chloride is a hygroscopic substance that is used as a desiccant. Exposed to air, it will absorb water vapour from the air, forming a solution. This property is known as deliquescence.\nReaction with oxygen\nCa + 1/2O2 \u2192 CaO\nMg + 1/2O2 \u2192 MgO\nReaction with sulfur\nCa + 1/8S8 \u2192 CaS\nReaction with carbon\nWith carbon, they form acetylides \ndirectly. Beryllium forms carbide.\n2Be + C \u2192 Be2C\nCaO + 3C \u2192 CaC2 + CO (at 2500 \u00b0C in furnace)\nCaC2 + 2H2O \u2192 Ca(OH)2 + C2H2\nMg2C3 + 4H2O \u2192 2Mg(OH)2 + C3H4\nReaction with nitrogen\nOnly Be and Mg form nitrides directly.\n3Be + N2 \u2192 Be3N2\n3Mg + N2 \u2192 Mg3N2\nReaction with hydrogen\nAlkaline earth metals react with hydrogen to generate saline hydride that are unstable in water.\nCa + H2 \u2192 CaH2\nReaction with water\nCa, Sr, and Ba readily react with water to form hydroxide and hydrogen gas. Be and Mg are passivated by an impervious layer of oxide. However, amalgamated magnesium will react with water vapor.\nMg + H2O \u2192 MgO + H2\nReaction with acidic oxides\nAlkaline earth metals reduce the nonmetal from its oxide.\n2Mg + SiO2 \u2192 2MgO + Si\n2Mg + CO2 \u2192 2MgO + C (in solid carbon dioxide)\nReaction with acids\nMg + 2HCl \u2192 MgCl2 + H2\nBe + 2HCl \u2192 BeCl2 + H2\nReaction with bases\nBe exhibits amphoteric properties. It dissolves in concentrated sodium hydroxide.\nBe + NaOH + 2H2O \u2192 Na[Be(OH)3] + H2\nReaction with alkyl halides\nMagnesium reacts with alkyl halides via an insertion reaction to generate Grignard reagents.\nRX + Mg \u2192 RMgX (in anhydrous ether)\nIdentification of alkaline earth cations.\nThe flame test\nThe table below presents the colors observed when the flame of a Bunsen burner is exposed to salts of alkaline earth metals. Be and Mg do not impart colour to the flame due to their small size.\nIn solution\nMg2+\nDisodium phosphate is a very selective reagent for magnesium ions and, in the presence of ammonium salts and ammonia, forms a white precipitate of ammonium magnesium phosphate. \nMg2+ + NH3 + Na2HPO4 \u2192 (NH4)MgPO4 + 2Na+\nCa2+\nCa2+ forms a white precipitate with ammonium oxalate. Calcium oxalate is insoluble in water, but is soluble in mineral acids.\nCa2+ + (COO)2(NH4)2 \u2192 (COO)2Ca + NH4+\nSr2+\nStrontium ions precipitate with soluble sulfate salts.\nSr2+ + Na2SO4 \u2192 SrSO4 + 2Na+\nAll ions of alkaline earth metals form white precipitate with ammonium carbonate in the presence of ammonium chloride and ammonia.\nCompounds of alkaline earth metals.\nOxides\nThe alkaline earth metal oxides are formed from the thermal decomposition of the corresponding carbonates.\nCaCO3 \u2192 CaO + CO2 (at approx. 900\u00b0C)\nIn laboratory, they are obtained from hydroxides:\nMg(OH)2 \u2192 MgO + H2O\nor nitrates:\nCa(NO3)2 \u2192 CaO + 2NO2 + 1/2O2\nThe oxides exhibit basic character: they turn phenolphthalein red and litmus, blue. They react with water to form hydroxides in an exothermic reaction.\nCaO + H2O \u2192 Ca(OH)2 + Q\nCalcium oxide reacts with carbon to form acetylide.\nCaO + 3C \u2192 CaC2 + CO (at 2500\u00b0C)\nCaC2 + N2 \u2192 CaCN2 + C\nCaCN2 + H2SO4 \u2192 CaSO4 + H2N\u2014CN\nH2N\u2014CN + H2O \u2192 (H2N)2CO (urea)\nCaCN2 + 2H2O \u2192 CaCO3 + NH3\nHydroxides\nThey are generated from the corresponding oxides on reaction with water. They exhibit basic character: they turn phenolphthalein pink and litmus, blue. Beryllium hydroxide is an exception as it exhibits amphoteric character.\nBe(OH)2 + 2HCl \u2192 BeCl2 + 2 H2O\nBe(OH)2 + NaOH \u2192 Na[Be(OH)3]\nSalts\nCa and Mg are found in nature in many compounds such as dolomite, aragonite, magnesite (carbonate rocks). Calcium and magnesium ions are found in hard water. Hard water represents a multifold issue. It is of great interest to remove these ions, thus softening the water. This procedure can be done using reagents such as calcium hydroxide, sodium carbonate or sodium phosphate. A more common method is to use ion-exchange aluminosilicates or ion-exchange resins that trap Ca2+ and Mg2+ and liberate Na+ instead:\nNa2O\u00b7Al2O3\u00b76SiO2 + Ca2+ \u2192 CaO\u00b7Al2O3\u00b76SiO2 + 2Na+\nBiological role and precautions.\nMagnesium and calcium are ubiquitous and essential to all known living organisms. They are involved in more than one role, with, for example, magnesium or calcium ion pumps playing a role in some cellular processes, magnesium functioning as the active center in some enzymes, and calcium salts taking a structural role, most notably in bones.\nStrontium plays an important role in marine aquatic life, especially hard corals, which use strontium to build their exoskeletons. It and barium have some uses in medicine, for example \"barium meals\" in radiographic imaging, whilst strontium compounds are employed in some toothpastes. Excessive amounts of strontium-90 are toxic due to its radioactivity and strontium-90 mimics calcium (i.e. Behaves as a \"bone seeker\") where it bio-accumulates with a significant biological half life. While the bones themselves have higher radiation tolerance than other tissues, the rapidly dividing bone marrow does not and can thus be significantly harmed by Sr-90. The effect of ionizing radiation on bone marrow is also the reason why acute radiation syndrome can have anemia-like symptoms and why donation of red blood cells can increase survivability.\nBeryllium and radium, however, are toxic. Beryllium's low aqueous solubility means it is rarely available to biological systems; it has no known role in living organisms and, when encountered by them, is usually highly toxic. Radium has a low availability and is highly radioactive, making it toxic to life.\nExtensions.\nThe next alkaline earth metal after radium is thought to be element 120, although this may not be true due to relativistic effects. The synthesis of element 120 was first attempted in March 2007, when a team at the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions in Dubna bombarded plutonium-244 with iron-58 ions; however, no atoms were produced, leading to a limit of 400 fb for the cross-section at the energy studied. In April 2007, a team at the GSI attempted to create element 120 by bombarding uranium-238 with nickel-64, although no atoms were detected, leading to a limit of 1.6 pb for the reaction. Synthesis was again attempted at higher sensitivities, although no atoms were detected. Other reactions have been tried, although all have been met with failure.\nThe chemistry of element 120 is predicted to be closer to that of calcium or strontium instead of barium or radium. This noticeably contrasts with periodic trends, which would predict element 120 to be more reactive than barium and radium. This lowered reactivity is due to the expected energies of element 120's valence electrons, increasing element 120's ionization energy and decreasing the metallic and ionic radii.\nThe next alkaline earth metal after element 120 has not been definitely predicted. Although a simple extrapolation using the Aufbau principle would suggest that element 170 is a congener of 120, relativistic effects may render such an extrapolation invalid. The next element with properties similar to the alkaline earth metals has been predicted to be element 166, though due to overlapping orbitals and lower energy gap below the 9s subshell, element 166 may instead be placed in group 12, below copernicium.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37412", "revid": "49969429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37412", "title": "Gold standard", "text": "Monetary system based on the value of gold\nA gold standard is a monetary system in which the standard economic unit of account is based on a fixed quantity of gold. The gold standard was the basis for the international monetary system from the 1870s to the early 1920s, and from the late 1920s to 1932 as well as from 1944 until 1971 when the United States unilaterally terminated convertibility of the US dollar to gold, effectively ending the Bretton Woods system. Many states nonetheless hold substantial gold reserves.\nHistorically, the silver standard and bimetallism have been more common than the gold standard. The shift to an international monetary system based on a gold standard reflected accident, network externalities, and path dependence. Great Britain accidentally adopted a \"de facto\" gold standard in 1717 when Isaac Newton, then-master of the Royal Mint, set the exchange rate of silver to gold too low, thus causing silver coins to go out of circulation. As Great Britain became the world's leading financial and commercial power in the 19th century, other states increasingly adopted Britain's monetary system.\nThe gold standard was largely abandoned during the Great Depression before being reinstated in a limited form as part of the post-World War\u00a0II Bretton Woods system. The gold standard was abandoned due to its propensity for volatility, as well as the constraints it imposed on governments: by retaining a fixed exchange rate, governments were hamstrung in engaging in expansionary policies to, for example, reduce unemployment during economic recessions.\nAccording to a 2012 survey of 39 economists, the vast majority (92 percent) agreed that a return to the gold standard would not improve price-stability and employment outcomes, and two-thirds of economic historians surveyed in the mid-1990s rejected the idea that the gold standard \"was effective in stabilizing prices and moderating business-cycle fluctuations during the nineteenth century.\" The consensus view among economists is that the gold standard helped prolong and deepen the Great Depression. Historically, banking crises were more common during periods under the gold standard, while currency crises were less common. According to economist Michael D. Bordo, the gold standard has three benefits that made its use popular during certain historical periods: \"its record as a stable nominal anchor; its automaticity; and its role as a credible commitment mechanism.\" The gold standard is supported by many followers of the Austrian School, free-market libertarians, and some supply-siders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImplementation.\nThe United Kingdom slipped into a gold specie standard in 1717 by over-valuing gold at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;15+1\u20445 times its weight in silver. It was unique among nations to use gold in conjunction with clipped, underweight silver shillings, addressed only before the end of the 18th century by the acceptance of gold proxies like token silver coins and banknotes.\nFrom the more widespread acceptance of paper money in the 19th century emerged the gold bullion standard, a system where gold coins do not circulate, but authorities like central banks agree to exchange circulating currency for gold bullion at a fixed price. First emerging in the late 18th century to regulate exchange between London and Edinburgh, Keynes (1913) noted how such a standard became the predominant means of implementing the gold standard internationally in the 1870s.\nRestricting the free circulation of gold under the Classical Gold Standard period from the 1870s to 1914 was also needed in countries which decided to implement the gold standard while guaranteeing the exchangeability of huge amounts of legacy silver coins into gold at the fixed rate (rather than valuing publicly held silver at its depreciated value). The term limping standard is often used in countries maintaining significant amounts of silver coin at par with gold, thus an additional element of uncertainty with the currency's value versus gold. The most common silver coins kept at limping standard parity included French 5-franc coins, German 3-mark thalers, Dutch guilders, Indian rupees, and U.S. Morgan dollars.\nLastly, countries may implement a gold exchange standard, where the government guarantees a fixed exchange rate, not to a specified amount of gold, but rather to the currency of another country that is under a gold standard. This became the predominant international standard under the Bretton Woods Agreement from 1945 to 1971 by the fixing of world currencies to the U.S. dollar, the only currency after World War\u00a0II to be on the gold bullion standard.\nHistory before 1873.\nSilver and bimetallic standards until the 19th century.\nThe use of gold as money began around 600 BCE in Asia Minor and has been widely accepted ever since, together with various other commodities used as money, with those that lose the least value over time becoming the accepted form. In the early and high Middle Ages, the Byzantine gold solidus or \"bezant\" was used widely throughout Europe and the Mediterranean, but its use waned with the decline of the Byzantine Empire's economic influence.\nHowever, economic systems using gold as the sole currency and unit of account never emerged before the 18th century. For millennia it was silver, not gold, which was the real basis of the domestic economies: the foundation for most money-of-account systems, for payment of wages and salaries, and for most local retail trade. Gold functioning as currency and unit of account for daily transactions was not possible due to various hindrances which were only solved by tools that emerged in the 19th century, among them:\nThe earliest European currency standards were therefore based on the silver standard, from the denarius of the Roman Empire to the penny (denier) introduced by Charlemagne throughout Western Europe, to the Spanish dollar and the German Reichsthaler and Conventionsthaler which survived well into the 19th century. Gold functioned as a medium for international trade and high-value transactions, but it generally fluctuated in price versus everyday silver money.\nA bimetallic standard emerged under a silver standard in the process of giving popular gold coins like ducats a fixed value in terms of silver. In light of fluctuating gold\u2013silver ratios in other countries, bimetallic standards were rather unstable and \"de facto\" transformed into a \"parallel bimetallic standard\" (where gold circulates at a floating exchange rate to silver) or reverted to a mono-metallic standard. France was the most important country which maintained a bimetallic standard during most of the 19th century.\nGold standard origin in Britain.\nThe English pound sterling introduced c.\u2009800 CE was initially a silver standard unit worth 20 shillings or 240 silver pennies. The latter initially contained 1.35\u00a0g fine silver, reduced by 1601 to 0.464\u00a0g (hence giving way to the shilling [12 pence] of 5.57\u00a0g fine silver). Hence the pound sterling was originally 324\u00a0g fine silver reduced to 111.36\u00a0g by 1601.\nThe problem of clipped, underweight silver pennies and shillings was a persistent, unresolved issue from the late 17th century to the early 19th century. In 1717 the value of the gold guinea (of 7.6885\u00a0g fine gold) was fixed at 21 shillings, resulting in a gold\u2013silver ratio of 15.2, higher than prevailing ratios in Continental Europe. Great Britain was therefore \"de jure\" under a bimetallic standard with gold serving as the cheaper and more reliable currency compared to clipped silver (full-weight silver coins did not circulate and went to Europe where 21 shillings fetched over a guinea in gold). Several factors helped extend the British gold standard into the 19th century, namely:\nA proclamation from Queen Anne in 1704 introduced the British West Indies to the gold standard; it did not result in the wide use of gold currency and the gold standard, given Britain's mercantilist policy of hoarding gold and silver from its colonies for use at home. Prices were quoted \"de jure\" in gold pounds sterling but were rarely paid in gold; the colonists' \"de facto\" daily medium of exchange and unit of account was predominantly the Spanish silver dollar. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFollowing the Napoleonic Wars, Britain legally moved from the bimetallic to the gold standard in the 19th century in several steps:\nFrom the second half of the 19th century Britain introduced its gold standard to Australia, New Zealand, and the British West Indies in the form of circulating gold sovereigns as well as banknotes that were convertible at par into sovereigns or Bank of England banknotes. Canada introduced a gold dollar in 1867 at par with the U.S. gold dollar and with a fixed exchange rate to the gold sovereign.\nEffects of the 19th century gold rush.\nUp until 1850 only Britain and a few of its colonies were on the gold standard, with the majority of other countries being on the silver standard. France and the United States were two of the more notable countries on the bimetallic standard. France's actions in maintaining the French franc at either 4.5\u00a0g fine silver or 0.29032\u00a0g fine gold stabilized world gold\u2013silver price ratios close to the French ratio of 15.5 in the first three quarters of the 19th century by offering to mint the cheaper metal in unlimited quantities \u2013 gold 20-franc coins whenever the ratio is below 15.5, and silver 5-franc coins whenever the ratio is above 15.5. The United States dollar was also bimetallic \"de jure\" until 1900, worth either 24.0566\u00a0g fine silver, or 1.60377\u00a0g fine gold (ratio 15.0); the latter revised to 1.50463\u00a0g fine gold (ratio 15.99) from 1837 to 1934. The silver dollar was generally the cheaper currency before 1837, while the gold dollar was cheaper between 1837 and 1873.\nThe nearly coincidental California gold rush of 1849 and the Australian gold rushes of 1851 significantly increased world gold supplies and the minting of gold francs and dollars as the gold\u2013silver ratio went below 15.5, pushing France and the United States into the gold standard with Great Britain during the 1850s. The benefits of the gold standard were first felt by this larger bloc of countries, with Britain and France being the world's leading financial and industrial powers of the 19th century while the United States was an emerging power.\nBy the time the gold\u2013silver ratio reverted to 15.5 in the 1860s, this bloc of gold-utilizing countries grew further and provided momentum to an international gold standard before the end of the 19th century:\nThe international classical gold standard, 1873\u20131914.\nRollout in Eurasia and the United States.\nThe international classical gold standard commenced in 1873 after the German Empire decided to transition from the silver North German thaler and South German gulden to the German gold mark, reflecting the sentiment of the first international monetary conference in 1867, and utilizing the 5\u00a0billion gold francs (worth 4.05\u00a0billion marks or 1,451 metric tons) in indemnity demanded from France at the end of the Franco-Prussian War. This transition done by a large, centrally located European economy also triggered a switch to gold by several European countries in the 1870s and led as well to the suspension of the unlimited minting of silver 5-franc coins in the Latin Monetary Union in 1873.\nThe following countries switched from silver or bimetallic currencies to gold in the following years (Britain is included for completeness):\nThe gold standard became the basis for the international monetary system after 1873. According to economic historian Barry Eichengreen, \"only then did countries settle on gold as the basis for their money supplies. Only then were pegged exchange rates based on the gold standard firmly established.\" Adopting and maintaining a singular monetary arrangement encouraged international trade and investment by stabilizing international price relationships and facilitating foreign borrowing. The gold standard was not firmly established in non-industrial countries.\nCentral banks and the gold exchange standard.\nAs feared by the various international monetary conferences, the switch to gold, combined with record U.S. silver output from the Comstock Lode, plunged the price of silver after 1873 with the gold\u2013silver ratio climbing to historic highs of 18 by 1880. Most of continental Europe made the conscious decision to move to the gold standard while leaving the mass of legacy (and erstwhile depreciated) silver coins remaining unlimited legal tender and convertible at face value for new gold currency. The term limping standard was used to describe currencies whose nations' commitment to the gold standard was put into doubt by the huge mass of silver coins still tendered for payment, the most numerous of which were French 5-franc coins, German 3-mark Vereinsthalers, Dutch guilders and American Morgan dollars.\nBritain's original gold specie standard with gold in circulation was not feasible anymore with the rest of Continental Europe also switching to gold. The problem of scarce gold and legacy silver coins was only resolved by national central banks taking over the replacement of silver with national bank notes and token coins, centralizing the nation's supply of scarce gold, providing for reserve assets to guarantee convertibility of legacy silver coins, and allowing the conversion of banknotes into gold bullion or other gold-standard currencies solely for external purchases. This system is known as either a gold bullion standard whenever gold bars are offered, or a gold exchange standard whenever other gold-convertible currencies are offered.\nJohn Maynard Keynes referred to both standards above as simply the gold exchange standard in his 1913 book \"Indian Currency and Finance\". He described this as the predominant form of the international gold standard before the First World War, that a gold standard was generally impossible to implement before the 19th century due to the absence of recently developed tools (like central banking institutions, banknotes, and token currencies), and that a gold exchange standard was even superior to Britain's gold specie standard with gold in circulation. As discussed by Keynes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Gold-Exchange Standard arises out of the discovery that, so long as gold is available for payments of international indebtedness at an approximately constant rate in terms of the national currency, it is a matter of comparative indifference whether it actually forms the national currency\u00a0... The Gold-Exchange Standard may be said to exist when gold does not circulate in a country to an appreciable extent, when the local currency is not necessarily redeemable in gold, but when the Government or Central Bank makes arrangements for the provision of foreign remittances in gold at a fixed maximum rate in terms of the local currency, the reserves necessary to provide these remittances being kept to a considerable extent abroad.\nIts theoretical advantages were first set forth by Ricardo (i.e. David Ricardo, 1824) at the time of the Bullionist Controversy. He laid it down that a currency is in its most perfect state when it consists of a cheap material, but having an equal value with the gold it professes to represent; and he suggested that convertibility for the purposes of the foreign exchanges should be ensured by the tendering on demand of gold bars (not coin) in exchange for notes, so that gold might be available for purposes of export only, and would be prevented from entering into the internal circulation of the country.\nThe first crude attempt in recent times at establishing a standard of this type was made by Holland. The free coinage of silver was suspended in 1877. But the currency continued to consist mainly of silver and paper. It has been maintained since that date at a constant value in terms of gold by the Bank's regularly providing gold when it is required for export and by its using its authority at the same time for restricting so far as possible the use of gold at home. To make this policy possible, the Bank of Holland has kept a reserve, of a moderate and economical amount, partly in gold, partly in foreign bills.\nSince the Indian system (gold exchange standard implemented in 1893) has been perfected and its provisions generally known, it has been widely imitated both in Asia and elsewhere\u00a0... Something similar has existed in Java under Dutch influences for many years\u00a0... The Gold-Exchange Standard is the only possible means of bringing China onto a gold basis\u00a0...\nThe classical gold standard of the late 19th century was therefore not merely a superficial switch from circulating silver to circulating gold. The bulk of silver currency was actually replaced by banknotes and token currency whose gold value was guaranteed by gold bullion and other reserve assets held inside central banks. In turn, the gold exchange standard was just one step away from modern fiat currency with banknotes issued by central banks, and whose value is secured by the bank's reserve assets, but whose exchange value is determined by the central bank's monetary policy objectives on its purchasing power in lieu of a fixed equivalence to gold.\nRollout to South and East Asia and Mexico.\nThe final chapter of the classical gold standard ending in 1914 saw the gold exchange standard extended to many Asian countries by fixing the value of local currencies to gold or to the gold standard currency of a Western colonial power. The Netherlands East Indies guilder was the first Asian currency pegged to gold in 1875 via a gold exchange standard which maintained its parity with the gold Dutch guilder.\nVarious international monetary conferences were called up until 1892, with various countries actually pledging to maintain the limping standard of freely circulating legacy silver coins in order to prevent the further deterioration of the gold\u2013silver ratio which reached 20 in the 1880s. After 1890 however, silver's price decline could not be prevented further and the gold\u2013silver ratio rose sharply above 30.\nIn 1893 the Indian rupee of 10.69\u00a0g fine silver was fixed at 16 British pence (or \u00a31 = 15 rupees; gold\u2013silver ratio 21.9), with legacy silver rupees remaining legal tender. In 1906 the Straits dollar of 24.26\u00a0g silver was fixed at 28 pence (or \u00a31 = 8&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20447 dollars; ratio 28.4).\nNearly similar gold standards were implemented in Japan in 1897, in the Philippines in 1903, and in Mexico in 1905 when the previous yen or peso of 24.26\u00a0g silver was redefined to approximately 0.75\u00a0g gold or half a U.S. dollar (ratio 32.3). Japan gained the needed gold reserves after the Sino-Japanese War of 1894\u20131895. For Japan, moving to gold was considered vital for gaining access to Western capital markets.\n\"Rules of the Game\".\nIn the 1920s John Maynard Keynes retrospectively developed the phrase \"rules of the game\" to describe how central banks would ideally implement a gold standard during the prewar classical era, assuming international trade flows followed the ideal price\u2013specie flow mechanism. Violations of the \"rules\" actually observed during the classical gold standard era from 1873 to 1914, however, reveal how much more powerful national central banks actually are in influencing price levels and specie flows, compared to the \"self-correcting\" flows predicted by the price-specie flow mechanism.\nKeynes premised the \"rules of the game\" on best practices of central banks to implement the pre-1914 international gold standard, namely:\nCentral banks were also expected to maintain the gold standard on the ideal assumption of international trade operating under the price\u2013specie flow mechanism proposed by economist David Hume wherein:\nIn practice, however, specie flows during the classical gold standard era failed to exhibit the self-corrective behavior described above. Gold finding its way back from surplus to deficit countries to exploit price differences was a painfully slow process, and central banks found it far more effective to raise or lower domestic price levels by lowering or raising domestic interest rates. High price level countries may raise interest rates to lower domestic demand and prices, but it may also trigger gold inflows from investors \u2013 contradicting the premise that gold will flow out of countries with high price levels. Developed economies deciding to buy or sell domestic assets to international investors also turned out to be more effective in influencing gold flows than the self-correcting mechanism predicted by Hume.\nAnother set of violations to the \"rules of the game\" involved central banks not intervening in a timely manner even as exchange rates went outside the \"gold points\" (in the example above, cases existed of the pound climbing above 25.42 francs or falling below 25.02 francs). Central banks were found to pursue other objectives other than fixed exchange rates to gold (like e.g., lower domestic prices, or stopping huge gold outflows), though such behavior is limited by public credibility on their adherence to the gold standard. Keynes described such violations occurring before 1913 by French banks limiting gold payouts to 200 francs per head and charging a 1% premium, and by the German Reichsbank partially suspending free payment in gold, though \"covertly and with shame\".\nSome countries had limited success in implementing the gold standard even while disregarding such \"rules of the game\" in its pursuit of other monetary policy objectives. Inside the Latin Monetary Union, the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta traded outside typical gold-standard levels of 25.02\u201325.42F/\u00a3 for extended periods of time:\nIn the United States.\nInception.\nIn the 1780s, Thomas Jefferson, Robert Morris and Alexander Hamilton recommended to Congress that a decimal currency system be adopted by the United States. The initial recommendation in 1785 was a silver standard based on the Spanish milled dollar (finalized at 371.25 grains or 24.0566\u00a0g fine silver), but in the final version of the Coinage Act of 1792 Hamilton's recommendation to include a $10 gold eagle was also approved, containing 247.5 grains (16.0377 g) fine gold. Hamilton therefore put the U.S. dollar on a bimetallic standard with a gold\u2013silver ratio of 15.0.\nAmerican-issued dollars and cents remained less common in circulation than Spanish dollars and reales (1/8th dollar) for the next six decades until foreign currency was demonetized in 1857. $10 gold eagles were exported to Europe where it could fetch over ten Spanish dollars due to their higher gold ratio of 15.5. American silver dollars also compared favorably with Spanish dollars and were easily used for overseas purchases. In 1806 President Jefferson suspended the minting of exportable gold coins and silver dollars in order to divert the United States Mint's limited resources into fractional coins which stayed in circulation.\nPre-Civil War.\nThe United States also embarked on establishing a national bank with the First Bank of the United States in 1791 and the Second Bank of the United States in 1816. In 1836, President Andrew Jackson failed to extend the Second Bank's charter, reflecting his sentiments against banking institutions as well as his preference for the use of gold coins for large payments rather than privately issued banknotes. The return of gold could only be possible by reducing the dollar's gold equivalence, and in the Coinage Act of 1834 the gold\u2013silver ratio was increased to 16.0 (ratio finalized in 1837 to 15.99 when the fine gold content of the $10 eagle was set at 232.2 grains or 15.0463 g).\nGold discoveries in California in 1848 and later in Australia lowered the gold price relative to silver; this drove silver money from circulation because it was worth more in the market than as money. Passage of the Independent Treasury Act of 1848 placed the U.S. on a strict hard-money standard. Doing business with the American government required gold or silver coins.\nGovernment accounts were legally separated from the banking system. However, the mint ratio (the fixed exchange rate between gold and silver at the mint) continued to overvalue gold. In 1853, silver coins 50 cents and below were reduced in silver content and cannot be requested for minting by the general public (only the U.S. government can request for it). In 1857 the legal tender status of Spanish dollars and other foreign coinage was repealed. In 1857 the final crisis of the free banking era began as American banks suspended payment in silver, with ripples through the developing international financial system.\nPost-Civil War.\nDue to the inflationary finance measures undertaken to help pay for the U.S. Civil War, the government found it difficult to pay its obligations in gold or silver and suspended payments of obligations not legally specified in specie (gold bonds); this led banks to suspend the conversion of bank liabilities (bank notes and deposits) into specie. In 1862 paper money was made legal tender. It was a fiat money (not convertible on demand at a fixed rate into specie). These notes came to be called \"greenbacks\".\nAfter the Civil War, Congress wanted to re-establish the metallic standard at pre-war rates. The market price of gold in greenbacks was above the pre-war fixed price ($20.67 per ounce of gold) requiring deflation to achieve the pre-war price. This was accomplished by growing the stock of money less rapidly than real output. By 1879 the market price of the greenback matched the mint price of gold, and according to Barry Eichengreen, the United States was effectively on the gold standard that year.\nThe Coinage Act of 1873 (also known as the Crime of '73) suspended the minting of the standard silver dollar (of 412.5 grains, 90% fine), the only fully legal tender coin that individuals could convert silver bullion into in unlimited (or Free silver) quantities, and right at the onset of the silver rush from the Comstock Lode in the 1870s. Political agitation over the inability of silver miners to monetize their produce resulted in the Bland\u2013Allison Act of 1878 and Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 which made compulsory the minting of significant quantities of the silver Morgan dollar.\nWith the resumption of convertibility on June 30, 1879, the government again paid its debts in gold, accepted greenbacks for customs and redeemed greenbacks on demand in gold. While greenbacks made suitable substitutes for gold coins, American implementation of the gold standard was hobbled by the continued over-issuance of silver dollars and silver certificates emanating from political pressures. Lack of public confidence in the ubiquitous silver currency resulted in a run on U.S. gold reserves during the Panic of 1893.\nDuring the latter part of the nineteenth century the use of silver and a return to the bimetallic standard were recurrent political issues, raised especially by William Jennings Bryan, the People's Party and the Free Silver movement. In 1900 the gold dollar was declared the standard unit of account and a gold reserve for government issued paper notes was established. Greenbacks, silver certificates, and silver dollars continued to be legal tender, all redeemable in gold.\nFluctuations in the U.S. gold stock, 1862\u20131877.\nThe U.S. had a gold stock of in 1862. Stocks rose to in 1866, declined in 1875 to and rose to in 1878. Net exports did not mirror that pattern. In the decade before the Civil War net exports were roughly constant; postwar they varied erratically around pre-war levels but fell significantly in 1877 and became negative in 1878 and 1879. The net import of gold meant that the foreign demand for American currency to purchase goods, services, and investments exceeded the corresponding American demands for foreign currencies. In the final years of the greenback period (1862\u20131879), gold production increased while gold exports decreased. The decrease in gold exports was considered by some to be a result of changing monetary conditions. The demands for gold during this period were as a speculative vehicle, and for its primary use in the foreign exchange markets financing international trade. The major effect of the increase in gold demand by the public and Treasury was to reduce exports of gold and increase the Greenback price of gold relative to purchasing power.\nAbandonment of the gold standard.\nImpact of World War\u00a0I.\nGovernments with insufficient tax revenue suspended convertibility repeatedly in the 19th century. The real test, however, came in the form of World War\u00a0I, a test which \"it failed utterly\" according to economist Richard Lipsey. The gold specie standard came to an end in the United Kingdom and the rest of the British Empire with the outbreak of World War\u00a0I.\nBy the end of 1913, the classical gold standard was at its peak, but World War\u00a0I caused many countries to suspend or abandon it. According to Lawrence Officer the main cause of the gold standard's failure to resume its previous position after World War\u00a0I was \"the Bank of England's precarious liquidity position and the gold-exchange standard\". A run on sterling caused Britain to impose exchange controls that fatally weakened the standard; convertibility was not legally suspended, but gold prices no longer played the role that they did before. In financing the war and abandoning gold, many of the belligerents suffered drastic inflations. Price levels doubled in the U.S. and Britain, tripled in France and quadrupled in Italy. Exchange rates changed less, even though European inflation rates were more severe than America's. This meant that the costs of American goods decreased relative to those in Europe. Between August 1914 and spring of 1915, the dollar value of U.S. exports tripled, and its trade surplus exceeded $1\u00a0billion for the first time.\nUltimately, the system could not deal quickly enough with the large deficits and surpluses; this was previously attributed to downward wage rigidity brought about by the advent of unionized labor but is now considered as an inherent fault of the system that arose under the pressures of war and rapid technological change. In any case, prices had not reached equilibrium by the time of the Great Depression, which served to kill off the system completely.\nFor example, Germany had gone off the gold standard in 1914 and could not effectively return to it because war reparations had cost it much of its gold reserves. During the occupation of the Ruhr the German central bank (Reichsbank) issued enormous sums of non-convertible marks to support workers who were on strike against the French occupation and to buy foreign currency for reparations; this led to the German hyperinflation of the early 1920s and the impoverishment of the German middle class.\nThe U.S. did not suspend the gold standard during the war. The new Federal Reserve intervened in currency markets and sold bonds to \"sterilize\" some of the gold imports that would have otherwise increased the stock of money. By 1927 many countries had returned to the gold standard. As a result of the World War the United States, which had been a net debtor country, had become a net creditor by 1919.\nInterwar period.\nThe gold specie standard ended in the United Kingdom and the rest of the British Empire at the outbreak of World War\u00a0I, when Treasury notes replaced the circulation of gold sovereigns and gold half sovereigns. Legally, the gold specie standard was not abolished. The end of the gold standard was implemented by the Bank of England through appeals to patriotism urging citizens not to redeem paper money for gold specie. It was only in 1925, when Britain returned to the gold standard in conjunction with Australia and South Africa, that the gold specie standard was officially ended.\nThe British &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Gold Standard Act 1925 introduced the gold bullion standard and simultaneously repealed the gold specie standard. The new standard ended the circulation of gold specie coins. Instead, the law compelled the authorities to sell gold bullion on demand at a fixed price, but \"only in the form of bars containing approximately four hundred ounces troy [12\u00a0kg] of fine gold\". John Maynard Keynes, citing deflationary dangers, argued against resumption of the gold standard. By fixing the price at a level which restored the pre-war exchange rate of US$4.86 per pound sterling, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, is argued to have made an error that led to depression, unemployment and the 1926 general strike. The decision was described by Andrew Turnbull as a \"historic mistake\".\nThe pound left the gold standard in 1931 and a number of currencies of countries that historically had performed a large amount of their trade in sterling were pegged to sterling instead of to gold. The Bank of England took the decision to leave the gold standard abruptly and unilaterally.\nGreat Depression.\nMany other countries followed Britain in returning to the gold standard, leading to a period of relative stability but also deflation. This state of affairs lasted until the Great Depression (1929\u20131939) forced countries off the gold standard. Primary-producing countries were first to abandon the gold standard. In the summer of 1931, a Central European banking crisis led Germany and Austria to suspend gold convertibility and impose exchange controls. A May 1931 run on Austria's largest commercial bank had caused it to fail. The run spread to Germany, where the central bank also collapsed. International financial assistance was too late and in July 1931 Germany adopted exchange controls, followed by Austria in October. The Austrian and German experiences, as well as British budgetary and political difficulties, were among the factors that destroyed confidence in sterling, which occurred in mid-July 1931. Runs ensued and the Bank of England lost much of its reserves.\nOn September 19, 1931, speculative attacks on the pound led the Bank of England to abandon the gold standard, ostensibly \"temporarily\". However, the ostensibly temporary departure from the gold standard had unexpectedly positive effects on the economy, leading to greater acceptance of departing from the gold standard. Loans from American and French central banks of \u00a350\u00a0million were insufficient and exhausted in a matter of weeks, due to large gold outflows across the Atlantic. The British benefited from this departure. They could now use monetary policy to stimulate the economy. Australia and New Zealand had already left the standard and Canada quickly followed suit.\nThe interwar partially backed gold standard was inherently unstable because of the conflict between the expansion of liabilities to foreign central banks and the resulting deterioration in the Bank of England's reserve ratio. France was then attempting to make Paris a world class financial center, and it received large gold flows as well.\nUpon taking office in March 1933, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt departed from the gold standard.\nBy the end of 1932, the gold standard had been abandoned as a global monetary system. Czechoslovakia, Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Switzerland abandoned the gold standard in the mid-1930s. According to Barry Eichengreen, there were three primary reasons for the collapse of the gold standard:\nAccording to Douglas Irwin, the gold standard contributed to policymakers' turning to extreme protectionism in the 1930s. Policymakers were reluctant to abandon the gold standard, which would have allowed their currencies to depreciate. This instead led policymakers to impose higher tariffs and other protectionist measures.\nThe Gold Standard and the Great Depression.\nThe Great Depression was an economic depression that started in 1929 and lasted for about a decade. Economists such as Barry Eichengreen, Peter Temin, and Ben Bernanke lay at least part of the blame on the gold standard of the 1920s. The gold standard theory of the Depression has been described as the \"consensus view\" among economists. This view is based on two arguments: \"(1) Under the gold standard, deflationary shocks were transmitted between countries and, (2) for most countries, continued adherence to gold prevented monetary authorities from offsetting banking panics and blocked their recoveries.\" However, a 2002 paper argues that the second argument would only apply \"to small open economies with limited gold reserves. This was not the case for the United States, the largest country in the world, holding massive gold reserves. The United States was not constrained from using expansionary policy to offset banking panics, deflation, and declining economic activity.\" According to Edward C. Simmons, in the United States, adherence to the gold standard prevented the Federal Reserve from expanding the money supply to stimulate the economy, fund insolvent banks and fund government deficits that could \"prime the pump\" for an expansion. Once off the gold standard, it became free to engage in such money creation. The gold standard limited the flexibility of the central banks' monetary policy by limiting their ability to expand the money supply. In the US, the central bank was required by the Federal Reserve Act (1913) to have gold backing 40% of its demand notes. A 2024 study in the \"American Economic Review\" found that for a sample of 27 countries, leaving the gold standard helped states to recover from the Great Depression.\nHigher interest rates intensified the deflationary pressure on the dollar and reduced investment in U.S. banks. Commercial banks converted Federal Reserve Notes to gold in 1931, reducing its gold reserves and forcing a corresponding reduction in the amount of currency in circulation. This speculative attack created a panic in the U.S. banking system. Fearing imminent devaluation many depositors withdrew funds from U.S. banks. As bank runs grew, a reverse multiplier effect caused a contraction in the money supply. Additionally the New York Fed had loaned over $ in gold (over 240 tons) to European Central Banks. This transfer contracted the U.S. money supply. The foreign loans became questionable once Britain, Germany, Austria and other European countries went off the gold standard in 1931 and weakened confidence in the dollar.\nThe forced contraction of the money supply resulted in deflation. Even as nominal interest rates dropped, deflation-adjusted real interest rates remained high, rewarding those who held onto money instead of spending it, further slowing the economy. Recovery in the United States was slower than in Britain, in part due to Congressional reluctance to abandon the gold standard and float the U.S. currency as Britain had done.\nIn the early 1930s, the Federal Reserve defended the dollar by raising interest rates, trying to increase the demand for dollars. This helped attract international investors who bought foreign assets with gold.\nCongress passed the Gold Reserve Act on 30 January 1934; the measure nationalized all gold by ordering Federal Reserve banks to turn over their supply to the U.S. Treasury. In return, the banks received gold certificates to be used as reserves against deposits and Federal Reserve notes. The act also authorized the president to devalue the gold dollar. Under this authority, the president, on 31 January 1934, changed the value of the dollar from $ to the troy ounce to $ to the troy ounce, a devaluation of over 40%.\nOther causal factors, or factors in the prolongation of the Great Depression include trade wars and the reduction in international trade caused by barriers such as Smoot\u2013Hawley Tariff in the U.S. and the Imperial Preference policies of Great Britain, the failure of central banks to act responsibly, government policies designed to prevent wages from falling, such as the Davis\u2013Bacon Act of 1931, during the deflationary period resulting in production costs dropping slower than sales prices, thereby injuring business profits and increases in taxes to reduce budget deficits and to support new programs such as Social Security. The U.S. top marginal income tax rate went from 25% to 63% in 1932 and to 79% in 1936, while the bottom rate increased over tenfold, from .375% in 1929 to 4% in 1932. The concurrent massive drought resulted in the U.S. Dust Bowl.\nThe Austrian School argued that the Great Depression was the result of a credit bust. Alan Greenspan wrote that the bank failures of the 1930s were sparked by Great Britain dropping the gold standard in 1931. This act \"tore asunder\" any remaining confidence in the banking system. Financial historian Niall Ferguson wrote that what made the Great Depression truly 'great' was the European banking crisis of 1931. According to Federal Reserve Chairman Marriner Eccles, the root cause was the concentration of wealth resulting in a stagnating or decreasing standard of living for the poor and middle class. These classes went into debt, producing the credit explosion of the 1920s. Eventually, the debt load grew too heavy, resulting in the massive defaults and financial panics of the 1930s.\nSee also: Financial crisis of 1914, World War I reparations, Herbert Hoover gold mining engineer, and Roy A. Young\nTrying to return to the Gold Standard.\nDuring World War I many countries suspended their gold standard in varying ways. There was high inflation from WWI, and in the 1920s in the Weimar Republic, Austria, and throughout Europe. In the late 1920s there was a scramble to deflate prices to get the gold standard's conversion rates back on track to pre-WWI levels, by causing deflation and high unemployment through tight monetary policy. In 1933 FDR signed Executive Order 6102 and in 1934 signed the Gold Reserve Act.\nBretton Woods.\nUnder the Bretton Woods international monetary agreement of 1944, the gold standard was kept without domestic convertibility. The role of gold was severely constrained, as other countries' currencies were fixed in terms of the dollar. Many countries kept reserves in gold and settled accounts in gold. Still, they preferred to settle balances with other currencies, with the US dollar becoming the favorite. The International Monetary Fund was established to help with the exchange process and assist nations in maintaining fixed rates. Within Bretton Woods adjustment was cushioned through credits that helped countries avoid deflation. Under the old standard, a country with an overvalued currency would lose gold and experience deflation until the currency was again valued correctly. Most countries defined their currencies in terms of dollars, but some countries imposed trading restrictions to protect reserves and exchange rates. Therefore, most countries' currencies were still basically inconvertible. In the late 1950s, the exchange restrictions were dropped and gold became an important element in international financial settlements.\nAfter the Second World War, a system similar to a gold standard and sometimes described as a \"gold exchange standard\" was established by the Bretton Woods Agreements. Under this system, many countries fixed their exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar and central banks could exchange dollar holdings into gold at the official exchange rate of $ per ounce; this option was not available to firms or individuals. All currencies pegged to the dollar thereby had a fixed value in terms of gold. Since private parties could not exchange gold at the official rate, market prices fluctuated. Large jumps in the market price 1960 lead to the creation of the London Gold Pool.\nStarting in the 1959\u20131969 administration of President Charles de Gaulle and continuing until 1970, France reduced its dollar reserves, exchanging them for gold at the official exchange rate, reducing U.S. economic influence. This, along with the fiscal strain of federal expenditures for the Vietnam War and persistent balance of payments deficits, led U.S. President Richard Nixon to end international convertibility of the U.S. dollar to gold on August 15, 1971 (the \"Nixon Shock\").\nThis was meant to be a temporary measure, with the gold price of the dollar and the official rate of exchanges remaining constant. Revaluing currencies was the main purpose of this plan. No official revaluation or redemption occurred. The dollar subsequently floated. In December 1971, the \"Smithsonian Agreement\" was reached. In this agreement, the dollar was devalued from $ per troy ounce of gold to $. Other countries' currencies appreciated. However, gold convertibility did not resume. In October 1973, the price was raised to $. Once again, the devaluation was insufficient. Within two weeks of the second devaluation the dollar was left to float. The $ par value was made official in September 1973, long after it had been abandoned in practice. In October 1976, the government officially changed the definition of the dollar; references to gold were removed from statutes. From this point, the international monetary system was made of pure fiat money. However, gold has persisted as a significant reserve asset since the collapse of the classical gold standard.\nModern gold production.\nAn estimated total of 174,100 tonnes of gold have been mined in human history, according to GFMS as of 2012. This is roughly equivalent to 5.6 billion troy ounces or, in terms of volume, about , or a cube on a side. There are varying estimates of the total volume of gold mined. One reason for the variance is that gold has been mined for thousands of years. Another reason is that some nations are not particularly open about how much gold is being mined. In addition, it is difficult to account for the gold output in illegal mining activities.\nWorld production for 2011 was circa 2,700 tonnes. Since the 1950s, annual gold output growth has approximately kept pace with world population growth (i.e. a doubling in this period) although it has lagged behind world economic growth (an approximately eightfold increase since the 1950s, and fourfold since 1980.\nReintroduction.\nIn 2024, Zimbabwe became the first country in the 21st century to use a gold standard for its currency, in order to tackle inflation and create confidence within the economy. The Zimbabwe Gold (ZiG) is backed by US$400 million and 2,522\u00a0kg of gold, thus giving a total of US$575 million worth of hard assets. This development came after the Zimdollar crashed based on official rate from US$1:ZWL2.50 at introduction to US$1:ZWL30,672.42 on 5 April 2024, whilst parallel market was trading at US$1:ZWL42,500 at the time of removal.\nTheory.\nCommodity money is inconvenient to store and transport in large amounts. Furthermore, it does not allow a government to manipulate the flow of commerce with the same ease that a fiat currency does. As such, commodity money gave way to representative money and gold and other specie were retained as its backing.\nGold was a preferred form of money due to its rarity, durability, divisibility, fungibility and ease of identification, often in conjunction with silver. Silver was typically the main circulating medium, with gold as the monetary reserve. Commodity money was anonymous, as identifying marks can be removed. Commodity money retains its value despite what may happen to the monetary authority. After the fall of South Vietnam, many refugees carried their wealth to the West in gold after the national currency became worthless.\nUnder commodity standards currency itself has no intrinsic value but is accepted by traders because it can be redeemed any time for the equivalent specie. A U.S. silver certificate, for example, could be redeemed for an actual piece of silver.\nRepresentative money and the gold standard protect citizens from hyperinflation and other abuses of monetary policy, as were seen in some countries during the Great Depression. Commodity money conversely led to deflation.\nCountries that left the gold standard earlier than other countries recovered from the Great Depression sooner. For example, Great Britain and the Scandinavian countries, which left the gold standard in 1931, recovered much earlier than France and Belgium, which remained on gold much longer. Countries such as China, which had a silver standard, almost entirely avoided the depression (due to the fact it was then barely integrated into the global economy). The connection between leaving the gold standard and the severity and duration of the depression was consistent for dozens of countries, including developing countries. This may explain why the experience and length of the depression differed between national economies.\nVariations.\nA \"full or 100%-reserve\" gold standard exists when the monetary authority holds sufficient gold to convert all the circulating representative money into gold at the promised exchange rate. It is sometimes referred to as the gold specie standard to more easily distinguish it. Opponents of a full standard consider it difficult to implement, saying that the quantity of gold in the world is too small to sustain worldwide economic activity at or near current gold prices; implementation would entail a many-fold increase in the price of gold. Gold standard proponents have said, \"Once a money is established, any stock of money becomes compatible with any amount of employment and real income.\" While prices would necessarily adjust to the supply of gold, the process may involve considerable economic disruption, as was experienced during earlier attempts to maintain gold standards.\nIn an \"international gold-standard system\" (which is necessarily based on an internal gold standard in the countries concerned), gold or a currency that is convertible into gold at a fixed price is used to make international payments. Under such a system, when exchange rates rise above or fall below the fixed mint rate by more than the cost of shipping gold, inflows or outflows occur until rates return to the official level. International gold standards often limit which entities have the right to redeem currency for gold.\nImpact.\nA poll of 39 prominent U.S. economists conducted by the IGM Economic Experts Panel in 2012 found that none of them believed that returning to the gold standard would improve price-stability and employment outcomes. The specific statement with which the economists were asked to agree or disagree was: \"If the U.S. replaced its discretionary monetary policy regime with a gold standard, defining a 'dollar' as a specific number of ounces of gold, the price-stability and employment outcomes would be better for the average American.\" 40% of the economists disagreed, and 53% strongly disagreed with the statement; the rest did not respond to the question. The panel of polled economists included past Nobel Prize winners, former economic advisers to both Republican and Democratic presidents, and senior faculty from Harvard, Chicago, Stanford, MIT, and other well-known research universities. A 1995 study reported on survey results among economic historians showing that two-thirds of economic historians disagreed that the gold standard \"was effective in stabilizing prices and moderating business-cycle fluctuations during the nineteenth century.\"\nAdvantages.\nAccording to economist Michael D. Bordo, the gold standard has three benefits: \"its record as a stable nominal anchor; its automaticity; and its role as a credible commitment mechanism\":\nAdvocates.\nA return to the gold standard was considered by the U.S. Gold Commission in 1982 but found only minority support. In 2001 Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad proposed a new currency that would be used initially for international trade among Muslim nations, using a modern Islamic gold dinar, defined as 4.25\u00a0grams of pure (24-carat) gold. Mahathir claimed it would be a stable unit of account and a political symbol of unity between Islamic nations. This would purportedly reduce dependence on the U.S. dollar and establish a non-debt-backed currency in accord with Sharia law that prohibited the charging of interest. However, this proposal has not been taken up, and the global monetary system continues to rely on the U.S. dollar as the main trading and reserve currency.\nFormer U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan acknowledged he was one of \"a small minority\" within the central bank that had some positive view on the gold standard. In a 1966 essay he contributed to a book by Ayn Rand, titled \"Gold and Economic Freedom\", Greenspan argued the case for returning to a 'pure' gold standard; in that essay he described supporters of fiat currencies as \"welfare statists\" intending to use monetary policy to finance deficit spending. More recently he claimed that by focusing on targeting inflation \"central bankers have behaved as though we were on the gold standard\", rendering a return to the standard unnecessary. Similarly, economists like Robert Barro argued that whilst some form of \"monetary constitution\" is essential for stable, depoliticized monetary policy, the form this constitution takes \u2013 for example, a gold standard, some other commodity-based standard, or a fiat currency with fixed rules for determining the quantity of money \u2013 is considerably less important.\nThe gold standard is supported by many followers of the Austrian School of economics, free-market libertarians, and some supply-siders.\nU.S. politics.\nFormer congressman Ron Paul is a long-term, high-profile advocate of a gold standard, but has also expressed support for using a standard based on a basket of commodities that better reflects the state of the economy.\nIn 2011 the Utah legislature passed a bill to accept federally issued gold and silver coins as legal tender to pay taxes. As federally issued currency, the coins were already legal tender for taxes, although the market price of their metal content currently exceeds their monetary value. As of 2011 similar legislation was under consideration in other U.S. states. The bill was initiated by newly elected Republican Party legislators associated with the Tea Party movement and was driven by anxiety over the policies of President Barack Obama.\nIn 2013, the Arizona Legislature passed SB 1439, which would have made gold and silver coin a legal tender in payment of debt, but the bill was vetoed by the Governor.\nIn 2015, some Republican candidates for the 2016 presidential election advocated for a gold standard, based on concern that the Federal Reserve's attempts to increase economic growth may create inflation. Economic historians did not agree with the candidates' assertions that the gold standard would benefit the U.S. economy.\nIn 2025, Florida passed a law making gold and silver legal tender within the state to, as Governor Ron DeSantis put it, give people \"financial freedom\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37413", "revid": "51038298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37413", "title": "Astrid Lindgren", "text": "Swedish children's writer (1907\u20132002)\nAstrid Anna Emilia Lindgren (; n\u00e9e\u00a0Ericsson; 14 November 1907 \u2013 28 January 2002) was a Swedish writer of fiction and screenplays. She is best known for several children's book series, featuring Pippi Longstocking, Emil of L\u00f6nneberga, Karlsson-on-the-Roof, and The Six Bullerby Children (\"Children of Noisy Village\" in the US), and for the children's fantasy novels \"Mio, My Son\"; \"Ronia the Robber's Daughter\"; and \"The Brothers Lionheart\". Lindgren worked on the Children's Literature Editorial Board at the Rab\u00e9n &amp; Sj\u00f6gren publishing house in Stockholm and wrote more than 30 books for children. In 2017, she was calculated to be the world's 18th most translated author. Lindgren had by 2010 sold roughly 167 million books worldwide. In 1994, she was awarded the Right Livelihood Award for \"her unique authorship dedicated to the rights of children and respect for their individuality\". Her campaigning for animal welfare led to a new law, \"Lex Lindgren\", in time for her 80th birthday.\nBiography.\nAstrid Lindgren was born on 14 November 1907. She grew up in N\u00e4s, near Vimmerby, Sm\u00e5land, Sweden. She was the daughter of Samuel August Ericsson and Johanna (Hanna) Sofia Jonsson. Lindgren had an older brother and two younger sisters; the brother Gunnar became a member of the Swedish parliament.\nUpon finishing school, Lindgren took a job with the local newspaper, \"Vimmerby Tidning\", in Vimmerby. She had a relationship with the chief editor and became pregnant, causing a local scandal. She moved to the capital city of Stockholm and learnt the skills of a secretary. While there in 1926 she gave birth to her only son, Lars, who was fostered for four years and then returned to her. He died in 1986.\nStarting in 1928, Lindgren worked as a secretary at Sweden's Royal Automobile Club (). In 1931, she married her boss, Sture Lindgren (1898\u20131952). In 1934, Lindgren gave birth to her second child, Karin.\nLindgren died in her home in central Stockholm on 28 January 2002 at the age of 94. Her funeral took place in Storkyrkan in Gamla stan. Among those attending were King Carl XVI Gustaf with Queen Silvia and others of the royal family, and Prime Minister G\u00f6ran Persson. The ceremony was described in \"Dagens Nyheter\" as \"the closest you can get to a state funeral.\"\nCareer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;As the children were sitting there eating pears, a girl came walking along the road from town. When she saw the children she stopped and asked, \"Have you seen my papa go by?\"\n\"M-m-m,\" said Pippi. \"How did he look? Did he have blue eyes?\"\n\"Yes,\" said the girl.\n\"Medium large, not too tall and not too short?\"\n\"Yes,\" said the girl.\n\"Black hat and black shoes?\"\n\"Yes, exactly,\" said the girl eagerly.\n\"No, that one we haven't seen,\" said Pippi decidedly.&lt;/poem&gt;\n Astrid Lindgren, \"Pippi Longstocking\" (\"Pippi L\u00e5ngstrump\", 1945)\nLindgren worked as a journalist and secretary before becoming a full-time author. She served as a secretary for the 1933 Swedish Summer Grand Prix. In the early 1940s, she worked as a secretary for criminalist Harry S\u00f6derman; the \"Norsk biografisk leksikon\" cites this experience as an inspiration for her fictional detective Bill Bergson.\nIn 1944, Lindgren won second prize in a competition held by the book publishing company Rab\u00e9n &amp; Sj\u00f6gren, with the novel (\"The Confidences of Britt-Marie\"). In 1945 she won first prize in the same competition with the chapter book (\"Pippi Longstocking\"), which had been rejected by the book publishing company Bonniers. (Rab\u00e9n &amp; Sj\u00f6gren published it with illustrations by Ingrid Vang Nyman, the latter's debut in Sweden.) Since then it has become one of the most beloved children's books in the world and has been translated into at least 100 languages. While Lindgren almost immediately became a much-appreciated writer, the irreverent attitude towards adult authority that distinguishes many of her characters has occasionally drawn the ire of conservatives.\nShe travelled to America and wrote what became the 1950 book \"Kati in America\" as a series of short pieces for the Swedish women's magazine \"Damernas V\u00e4rld\". In 1956, the inaugural year of the Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis, the German-language edition of (\"Mio, My Son\") won the Children's Book Award.\nIn 1958, Lindgren received the second Hans Christian Andersen Medal for \"Rasmus p\u00e5 luffen\" (\"Rasmus and the Vagabond\"), a 1956 novel developed from her screenplay and filmed in 1955. The biennial International Board on Books for Young People, now considered the highest lifetime recognition available to creators of children's books, soon came to be called the Little Nobel Prize. In her career, she wrote more than 30 books for children. In 2017, she was calculated to be the world's 18th most translated author. By 2010, she had sold roughly 167 million books worldwide.\nPolitics.\nIn 1976, a scandal arose in Sweden when it was publicised that Lindgren's marginal tax rate had risen to 102 per cent. This was to be known as the \"Pomperipossa effect\", from a story she published in \"Expressen\" on 3 March 1976, titled \"Pomperipossa in Monismania\", attacking the government and its taxation policies. It was a satirical allegory in response to the marginal tax rate Lindgren had incurred in 1976, which required self-employed individuals to pay both regular income tax and employers' deductions. In a stormy tax debate, she attracted criticism from Social Democrats and others. She responded by raising the issue of the lack of women involved in the Social Democrats' campaign. In that year's general election, the Social Democratic government was voted out for the first time in 44 years, and the Lindgren tax debate was one of several controversies that may have contributed to that result. Another controversy involved Ingmar Bergman's farewell letter to Sweden after charges had been made against him of tax evasion. Lindgren nevertheless remained a Social Democrat for the rest of her life.\nIn 1978, when she received the \"Peace Prize of the German Book Trade\", Lindgren spoke against corporal punishment of children in a speech entitled \"Never Violence!\" After that, she teamed up with scientists, journalists and politicians to promote non-violent upbringing. In 1979, a law was introduced in Sweden prohibiting violence against children in response to her demands.\nFrom 1985 to 1989, Lindgren, with veterinarian Kristina Forslund, wrote articles concerning animal protection and mass production in the Swedish newspapers \"Expressen\" and \"Dagens Nyheter\". They wanted to launch an awareness campaign to promote better animal treatment in factory farming. Eventually, their activities led to a new law, dubbed the \"Lex Lindgren\", which was presented to Lindgren on her 80th birthday. At that time it was the strictest law concerning animal welfare in the world. However, Lindgren and Forslund were unsatisfied with it. Not enough had been done and only minor changes occurred. The articles Forslund and Lindgren wrote were later published in the book \"Min ko vill ha roligt\" (My cow wants to have fun).\nLindgren was well known both for her support for children's and animal rights and for her opposition to corporal punishment and the EU. In 1994, she received the Right Livelihood Award, \"For her commitment to justice, non-violence and understanding of minorities as well as her love and caring for nature.\" She was a member of the freedom of speech-promoting, anti-imperialist organization Folket i Bild/Kulturfront.\nHonours and memorials.\nIn 1967, the publisher Rab\u00e9n &amp; Sj\u00f6gren established an annual literary prize, the Astrid Lindgren Prize, to mark her 60th birthday. The prize\u201440,000 Swedish kronor\u2014is awarded to a Swedish-language children's writer every year on Lindgren's birthday in November. In 1995, she was awarded the Illis quorum gold medal by the Swedish government. On her 90th birthday, she was pronounced International Swede of the Year 1997.\nIn its entry on Scandinavian fantasy, \"The Encyclopedia of Fantasy\" named Lindgren the foremost Swedish contributor to modern children's fantasy. Its entry on Lindgren stated that \"Her niche in children's fantasy remains both secure and exalted. Her stories and images can never be forgotten.\"\nFollowing Lindgren's death, the government of Sweden instituted the Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award in her memory. The award is the world's largest monetary award for children's and youth literature, in the amount of five million Swedish kronor. The collection of Lindgren's original manuscripts in the National Library of Sweden in Stockholm was added to UNESCO's Memory of the World International Register in 2005. On 6 April 2011, Sweden's central bank Sveriges Riksbank announced that Lindgren's portrait would feature on the 20 kronor banknote, beginning in 2014\u20132015. The banknote had before that featured the Swedish author Selma Lagerl\u00f6f. In 2018, Pernille Fischer Christensen directed the film \"Becoming Astrid\" (Swedish: \"Unga Astrid\"), a biographical drama about Lindgren's early life.\nNobel Prize in Literature.\nIn 1972, Lindgren was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature by German literary critic Klaus Doderer and Austrian librarian Josef Stummvoll.\nAsteroid Lindgren.\nAsteroid 3204 Lindgren, discovered in 1978 by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Chernykh, was named after her. The name of the Swedish microsatellite Astrid 1, launched on 24 January 1995, was originally selected only as a common Swedish female name, but within a short time it was decided to name the payload instruments after characters in Lindgren's books: PIPPI (Prelude in Planetary Particle Imaging), EMIL (Electron Measurements \u2013 In-situ and Lightweight), and MIO (Miniature Imaging Optics).\nAstrid's Wellspring.\nIn memory of Lindgren, a memorial sculpture was created next to her childhood home, named (\"Astrid's Wellspring\" in English). It is situated at the spot where Lindgren first heard fairy tales. The sculpture consists of an artistic representation of a young person's head (1.37 m high), flattened on top, in the corner of a square pond, and, just above the water, a ring of rosehip thorns.\nLindgren's childhood home is near the statue and open to the public. Just from Astrid's Wellspring is a museum in her memory. The author is buried in Vimmerby, where the Astrid Lindgren's World theme park is located. The children's museum Junibacken, in Stockholm, was opened in June 1996 with the main theme of the permanent exhibition being devoted to Lindgren; at the heart of the museum is a theme train ride through the world of Lindgren's novels.\nWorks.\nBibliography.\nLindgren is best known for her children's book series featuring Pippi Longstocking, Emil of L\u00f6nneberga, Karlsson-on-the-Roof, and the Six Bullerby Children, and for the children's fantasy novels \"Mio, My Son\", \"Ronia the Robber's Daughter\", and \"The Brothers Lionheart\".\nAlthough best known for her children's and youth books, she has also worked in many other genres, with for example song lyrics, debate articles, realistic autobiographical works like \"Samuel August from Sevedstorp and Hanna i Hult\" and contemporary history like \"War Diaries, 1939\u20131945\".\nTranslations.\nBy 2012, Lindgren's books had been translated into 95 different languages or variants. The first chapter of \"Ronja the Robber's Daughter\" has in addition been translated into Latin. By 1997, some 3,000 editions of her books had been issued internationally. By the time of her death, her books had sold a total of 80 million copies. By 2010 that had risen to around 167 million books worldwide. \nFilmography.\nThe adaptation of Lindgren's books for film started with Rolf Husberg's 1947 \"Bill Bergson, Master Detective\". This was followed in 1949 by Per Gunvall's adaptation of \"Pippi Longstocking\", and then by many others.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37415", "revid": "50700161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37415", "title": "Years", "text": ""}
{"id": "37417", "revid": "37031437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37417", "title": "Mercury (mythology)", "text": "Roman god of trade, merchants and travel\nMercury (; ) is a major god in Roman religion and mythology, being one of the 12 Dii Consentes within the ancient Roman pantheon. He is the god of boundaries, commerce, communication (including divination), eloquence, financial gain, languages, luck, thieves, travelers, and trickery; he is also the guide of souls to the underworld.\nIn Roman mythology, he was the son of Maia, one of the seven daughters of the Titan Atlas, and Jupiter. In his earliest forms, he appears to have been related to the Etruscan deity Turms; both gods share characteristics with the Greek god Hermes. He is often depicted holding the caduceus in his left hand. Similar to his Greek equivalent Hermes, he was awarded a magic wand by Apollo, which later turned into the caduceus, the staff with intertwined snakes.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mercury\" is possibly related to the Latin words \"merx\" (\"merchandise\"; cf. \"merchant\", \"commerce\", etc.), ' (\"to trade\"), and ' (\"wages\"); another possible connection is the Proto-Indo-European root mer\u011d- for \"boundary, border\" (cf. Old English \", Old Norse \" and Latin \"\") and Greek (by analogy of /), as the \"keeper of boundaries,\" referring to his role as bridge between the upper and lower worlds. Also to note, per Matasovi\u0107 the terms \"merx\" and \"marg\u014d\" are cognate via PIE, cf. typologically Mongolian \u0437\u0430\u0445 \"border, boundary, edge; market, bazaar\".\nHistory.\nMercury did not appear among the \"\" of early Roman religion. Rather, he subsumed the earlier Dei Lucrii as Roman religion was syncretized with Greek religion during the time of the Roman Republic, starting around the 4th century BC. His cult was introduced also by influence of Etruscan religion in which Turms had similar characteristics. From the beginning, Mercury had essentially the same aspects as Hermes, wearing winged shoes (talaria) and a winged hat (), and carrying the caduceus, a herald's staff with two entwined snakes that was Apollo's gift to Hermes. He was often accompanied by a rooster, herald of the new day, a ram or goat, symbolizing fertility, and a tortoise, referring to Mercury's legendary invention of the lyre from a tortoise shell.\nLike Hermes, he was also a god of messages, eloquence and of trade, particularly of the grain trade. He was the patron of travelers and the god of thievery as well. Mercury was also considered a god of abundance and commercial success, particularly in Gaul, where he was said to have been particularly revered. He was also, like Hermes, the Romans' psychopomp, leading newly deceased souls to the afterlife. Additionally, Ovid wrote that Mercury carried Morpheus's dreams from the valley of Somnus to sleeping humans.\nArcheological evidence from Pompeii suggests that Mercury was among the most popular of Roman gods. The god of commerce was depicted on two early bronze coins of the Roman Republic, the sextans and the .\nSyncretism.\nWhen they described the gods of Celtic and Germanic tribes, rather than considering them separate deities, the Romans interpreted them as local manifestations or aspects of their own gods, a cultural trait called the \"\". Mercury, in particular, was reported as becoming extremely popular among the nations the Roman Empire conquered; Julius Caesar wrote of Mercury being the most popular god in Britain and Gaul, regarded as the inventor of all the arts. This is probably because, in the Roman syncretism, Mercury was equated with the Celtic god Lugus, and in this aspect was commonly accompanied by the Celtic goddess Rosmerta. Although Lugus may originally have been a deity of light or the sun (though this is disputed), similar to the Roman Apollo, his importance as a god of trade made him more comparable to Mercury, and Apollo was instead equated with the Celtic deity Belenus.\nRomans associated Mercury with the Germanic god , by \"; 1st-century Roman writer Tacitus identifies him as the chief god of the Germanic peoples. This association of Mercury and Wotan is seen in the English language day-name Wednesday and the French Mercredi.\nNames and epithets.\nMercury is known to the Romans as and occasionally in earlier writings as or \", had a number of epithets representing different aspects or roles, or representing syncretisms with non-Roman deities. The most common and significant of these epithets included the following:\nIn ancient literature.\nIn Virgil's \"Aeneid\", Mercury reminds Aeneas of his mission to found the city of Rome. In Ovid's \"Fasti\", Mercury is assigned to escort the nymph Larunda to the underworld. Mercury, however, falls in love with Larunda and makes love to her on the way. Larunda thereby becomes mother to two children, referred to as the Lares, invisible household gods.\nTemple.\nMercury's temple in Rome was situated in the Circus Maximus, between the Aventine and Palatine Hills, and was built in 495 BC.\nThat year saw disturbances at Rome between the patrician senators and the plebeians, which led to a secession of the plebs in the following year. At the completion of its construction, a dispute emerged between the consuls Appius Claudius Sabinus Regillensis and Publius Servilius Priscus Structus as to which of them should have the honour of dedicating the temple.\nThe Roman Senate referred the decision to the popular assembly, and also decreed that whichever was chosen should also exercise additional duties, including presiding over the markets, establish a merchants' guild, and exercising the functions of the . The people, because of the ongoing public discord, and in order to spite the senate and the consuls, instead awarded the honour of dedicating the temple to Marcus Laetorius, the senior military officer of one of the legions. The senate and the consuls, in particular the conservative Appius, were outraged at this decision, and it inflamed the ongoing situation.\nThe dedication occurred on 15 May, 495 BC.\nThe temple was regarded as a fitting place to worship a swift god of trade and travel, since it was a major center of commerce as well as a racetrack. Since it stood between the plebeian stronghold on the Aventine and the patrician center on the Palatine, it also emphasized the role of Mercury as a mediator.\nWorship.\nBecause Mercury was not one of the early deities surviving from the Roman Kingdom, he was not assigned a \"\" (priest), but he did have his own major festival, on 15\u00a0May, the Mercuralia. During the Mercuralia, merchants sprinkled water from his sacred well near the Porta Capena on their heads .\nIn popular culture.\nMercury features in the first published comic book story of Jack Kirby, \"Mercury in the 20th Century\", published in \"Red Raven Comics\" 1, 1940.\nThe United States' so-called Mercury dime, issued from 1916 to 1945, actually features a Winged Liberty and not the god Mercury, but despite wearing a Phrygian cap instead of a winged helm, the coin bears his name due to resemblance.\nThe United States E-6B aircraft flown by the United States Navy is a communications platform named after the god.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37419", "revid": "5739795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37419", "title": "Porsche 914", "text": "Mid-engine sports car (1969\u20131976)\nThe Porsche 914 or VW-Porsche 914 is a mid-engined sports car designed, manufactured and marketed collaboratively by Volkswagen and Porsche for model years 1969-1976. Available as a targa-topped two-seat roadster, across a single generation, the 914 was powered by either a or flat-six engine.\nHistory.\nPre-development.\nBy the late 1960s, both Volkswagen and Porsche were in need of new models; Porsche was looking for a replacement for their entry-level 912, and Volkswagen wanted a new range-topping sports coup\u00e9 to replace the Volkswagen Type 34 Karmann Ghia coup\u00e9. At the time the majority of Volkswagen's development work was handled by Porsche as part of an agreement that dated back to Porsche's founding. Volkswagen needed to contract out one last project to Porsche to fulfill the contract, and decided to make the 914 that project. Ferdinand Pi\u00ebch, who was in charge of research and development at Porsche, was put in charge of the 914 project.\nIn 1966 and 1967, German company Gugelot Design GmbH began showing a proposed design for a sports coupe built with technology developed in partnership with Bayer to several major car builders, including Volkswagen and Porsche. Some sources have suggested that the Gugelot proposal, suitably adapted, was the origin of the design of the 914. The rationale is that an outside design would be able to please both Volkswagen and Porsche without appearing too similar to either of the partners' existing products. Later sources have rejected this idea. While acknowledging that Porsche was aware of the Gugelot design, they assert that the 914 design was done in-house at Porsche, and is primarily the work of body engineer Heinrich Klie.\nJoint venture.\nOriginally intending to sell the vehicle with a flat four-cylinder engine as a Volkswagen and with a flat six-cylinder engine as a Porsche, Porsche decided during development that having Volkswagen and Porsche models sharing the same body would be risky for business in the American market, and convinced Volkswagen to allow them to sell both versions as Porsches in North America.On March 1, 1968, the first 914 prototype was presented. However, development became complicated after the death of Volkswagen's chairman, Heinrich Nordhoff, on April 12, 1968. His successor, Kurt Lotz, was not connected with the Porsche dynasty and the verbal agreement between Volkswagen and Porsche fell apart.\nIn Lotz's opinion, Volkswagen had all rights to the model, and no incentive to share it with Porsche if they would not share in tooling expenses. With this decision, the price and marketing concept for the 914 had failed before series production had begun. As a result, the price of the chassis went up considerably, and the 914/6 ended up costing only a bit less than the 911T, Porsche's next lowest priced car.\nThe 914 was \"Motor Trend\"'s Import Car of the Year for 1970.\nSlow sales and rising costs prompted Porsche to discontinue the 914/6 variant in 1972 after producing 3,351 of them.\nProduction of the 914 ended in 1976. The 2.0\u00a0L flat-4 engine continued to be used in the 912E, introduced that year as an entry-level model until the front-engined four-cylinder 924 was introduced the following model year.\nThe 914/4 became Porsche's top seller during its model run, outselling the Porsche 911 by a wide margin with over 118,000 units sold worldwide.\nFeatures.\nVolkswagen versions originally featured the fuel-injected 1.7\u00a0L flat-four engine producing .\nPorsche's 914/6 variant featured the 2.0\u00a0L air-cooled Type 901/3 flat-six engine from the 1967\u20131969 911T model. This was the least powerful flat-six in Porsche's lineup. This engine had revised pistons that reduced the compression ratio to 8.6:1. The cylinder barrels were entirely made of iron, in contrast to the iron and aluminum \"Biral\" barrels in the engines in the 911S and 911L. New camshafts had less lift, and relaxed timing characteristics. The venturis in the Weber 40IDT3C carburetors were , smaller than the other 911 engines, and the exhaust pipe diameter was also reduced in size. Power output was . When the 911T got a 2.2\u00a0L engine in 1970, the engine in the 914/6 remained at 2.0\u00a0L.\nAll engines were placed amidships in front of a version of the 1969 911's \"901\" gearbox configured for a mid-engined sports car. Karmann manufactured the rolling chassis at their plant, completing Volkswagen production in-house or delivering versions to Porsche for their final assembly.\nThe 914/6 models came with lower gear ratios and larger brakes to compensate for the greater weight and higher power output of the six-cylinder model. They also featured five-lug wheels and an ignition on the left side of the steering wheel. Suspension and handling were otherwise mostly the same. A Volkswagen-Porsche joint venture, Volkswagen of America, handled export to the U.S., where both versions were badged and sold as Porsches. The four-cylinder cars were sold as Volkswagen-Porsches at European Volkswagen dealerships.\nFor 1973 the discontinued 914/6 was replaced in the lineup by a variant powered by a new 2.0\u00a0L, fuel-injected version of Volkswagen's Type 4 engine.\nFor 1974, the 1.7\u00a0L engine was replaced by an 1.8 L, and the new Bosch L-Jetronic fuel injection system was added to American units to help with emissions control.\nModel year changes.\nOver the seven model years, Porsche made a number of changes to the 914. Some of these changes were cosmetic and others were in response to changing crash protection standards. From 1970 to 1972, the 914 was offered with chrome or painted bumpers. In early 1970, rear bumpers were produced with a straight crease on either side of the license plate indent. Between 1970 and 1972, both front and rear bumpers were smooth without bumper guards. In 1973, bumper guards were added to the front of the car. In 1974, guards were also added to the rear bumper. In 1975 and 1976, the chrome or painted bumpers were replaced with heavy, rubber-covered units which actually made the cars more stable at high speeds.\nThe headlight surrounds were white from the first 914s to mid-production of 1973 and subsequently black. Cars produced up to early 1972 had a fixed passenger seat and a removable passenger footrest. Later cars featured a movable passenger seat. Other interior differences included changing vinyl designs, gauge appearance, and air vent configurations in the dash.\nThe most significant performance upgrade during the vehicle's lifespan was the introduction of anti-roll bars, significantly improving the handling, and a change from the \"tail shifter\" to the \"side shifter\" gearbox for 1973 to 1976, improving the otherwise vague long linkage.\nTechnical summaries.\nTechnical specifications of the standard versions.\nThe Porsche 914 was produced from 1969 to 1976 in the following models:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConcept cars, prototypes, and factory specials.\nPorsche 914/6 GT, 914/6 R.\nOn 1 March 1970 the 914/6 was homologated by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) for Group 4, Special Grand Touring cars. That same month two cars were sent to the Targa Florio for testing, not as competitors. These were the first two 914/6 GT cars built. Externally the cars were distinguished by squared fender flares that were the full depth permitted by FIA rules. The chassis was reinforced with three welded plates on each side. For rally applications a stone guard protected the power-train and a stone shield did the same for the front of the car.\nThe GT cars received stronger lower front A-arms, and anti-roll bars were fitted front and rear. Ground clearance was reduced to . Brakes front and rear were upgraded to the same components used on the racing 911S model.\nFiberglass panels for the front and rear bumpers, front and rear deck lids, and left and right rocker panels replaced the original steel parts. The rear air intake grille was doubled in size. An inlet in the front bumper admitted air to a new supplementary oil cooler in the nose. The car's nose compartment was nearly filled by a fuel tank. The car weighed ready to race.\nThe engine remained at 2.0\u00a0litres displacement with Weber Carburetor induction, but was extensively upgraded otherwise. New cylinder heads with larger valves topped aluminum cylinder barrels with chrome-plated bores. A dual-ignition system fired two spark plugs per cylinder. High compression pistons and forged steel piston rods were borrowed from the 911S. A special crankshaft was added. Camshafts and rocker arms came from the 901/20 in the Carrera 6. Power output was up to at 8000 rpm.\nAlthough the factory campaigned the car in rallying, it was more successful in road racing.\nIn the United States the Porsche+Audi distributor called the car the 914/6R.\nM471, kits.\nTo qualify for SCCA homologation, 500 copies of a car had to be built. It is estimated that Porsche built fewer than 40 GTs with the full race engine. To add to the total, an additional 11 cars were equipped with the Competition Option Group M471 package that included the GT's steel fender flares, rocker panels and nose piece as well as wheel spacers, a set of 6-inch wide Fuchs wheels, and 185/70VR15 tires, but did not include the enhanced engine from the GT. Similar appearance-only kits were also supplied to dealers, totaling about 400 units.\nPorsche's application for homologation was successful, but instead of being added to the C Production class, the SCCA put the 914/6 GT into the more competitive B Production class.\n914/8.\nTwo prototype 914s, dubbed \"914/8\" generally and called \"914/S\" by Porsche, were built during 1969. An orange 914/8 was the first constructed, at the instigation of Ferdinand Pi\u00ebch (then head of the racing department), to prove the concept. Powered by a Type 908 flat-eight racing engine, it was built using a surplus handbuilt 914 development prototype bodyshell, chassis No. 914111, and included many differences from the standard vehicle, such as quad headlamps. The second 914/8, a silver, road-registered car powered by a carburetted and detuned 908 race engine making , was prepared as a gift to Ferry Porsche on his 60th birthday. Also based on a spare prototype shell (chassis No. 914006), it was much closer to the standard car in detail. By all accounts, Ferry did not like the car very much, and it is now in the Porsche Museum. Neither car saw a racetrack except for the purposes of testing. The 914/8 was not considered for production as a regular model.\nPorsche Tapiro.\nThe Porsche Tapiro was a concept car designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro's Italdesign studio and built on a 914/6 platform. The car had gullwing doors and two centrally hinged covers over the rear engine and storage compartments. The Tapiro debuted at the 1970 Turin Auto Show. Sold to Argentine composer Waldo de los R\u00edos, the car was extensively damaged in a fire. It was later bought by Italdesign.\nGoertz/Eurostyle 914/6R.\nThis car was a custom-bodied 914/6R that was first shown at the 1970 Turin Auto Show. The design was done by Count Albrecht von Goertz, and was built by the Turinese carrozzeria Eurostyle. Goertz, who had also done the design for the BMW 507 roadster, produced a body with a tapered nose and a roofline that extended straight back, ending with sloping sail panels that gave the car the appearance of a shooting-brake.\nGerber/Sbarro rotary 914.\nIn 1970 Swiss Industrialist Dr. Alfred Gerber contracted compatriot car designer Franco Sbarro to build a customized 914. Sbarro installed the 2-rotor Wankel engine and semi-automatic transaxle from Gerber's NSU Ro80 in the mid-engined Porsche. The transaxle's inboard disc brakes were retained, and special halfshafts and shift-linkage were fabricated. A radiator was installed in the nose of the car, with fans sourced from a Renault R16. The engine produced , and in the 914 returned while allowing the car to reach a top speed of .\nHeuliez Mur\u00e8ne.\nIn 1969 designer Jacques Cooper drew an interpretation of the 914 that he presented to his employer, Brissonneau and Lotz. The French company, a supplier of auto bodies and railcars, approved the project and obtained one of the first 914/6 models built, chassis 1300005, to serve as a basis for the redesigned car. Shortly after this Brissonneau encountered financial difficulties. Cooper, hoping to get the car into production, arranged, with Brissonneau's approval, for the Heuliez company to take on responsibility for development. A running prototype was completed in just two and one half months. The car was displayed at the 1970 Paris Auto Show on the Heuliez stand as the Heuliez Mur\u00e8ne. It did not reach production. Heuliez bought the Mur\u00e8ne from Brissonneau in 1971 for \u20a324,250. In 2012 the car was sold at auction for \u20ac42,889.\nHispano Alem\u00e1n Vizcaya.\nBusinessman Werner Bernhard Heiderich was the importer of Porsche for Spain. He established a company named Hispano Alem\u00e1n to build and sell customized cars. Heiderich contracted with Pietro Frua to produce a new body on a Porsche 914 platform. The car, named the Vizcaya, was first shown at the 1971 Geneva Motor Show. Swiss authorities seized the car owing to a dispute over it between Heiderich and Frua. Heiderich eventually prevailed, and the car next appeared at the 1972 Barcelona Motor Show. The Vizcaya did not go into production.\nPorsche 916.\nPlanned for the 1972 model year, the Porsche 916 program was cancelled after eleven prototypes were built. The car came with aerodynamic front and rear bumpers and either the 2.4\u00a0L engine from the 911S, or the 2.7\u00a0L from the Carrera. It was also to have a fixed steel roof, wider wheels, double grilled engine lid, and flared fenders as styled from the 914-6 GT cars. Ventilated disc brakes were fitted to all four wheels. The 916 also used a \"mid-engined\" version of the then-new 915 transmission, giving a conventional shift pattern with one to four in an H and fifth out on a limb. One 916 was built to US specs and on delivery to the US was fitted with air conditioning by the dealer (Brumos) and has been housed at the Automobile Atlanta 914 museum since 1990.\nNordstadt Carrera K\u00e4fer (Nordstadt Carrera Beetle).\nG\u00fcnter Artz was director of the Hannover Volkswagen dealer Autohaus Nordstadt. In 1973 Artz and Nordstadt unveiled a custom car called the Carrera K\u00e4fer that mounted a modified Volkswagen Beetle 1303 body on a Porsche 914/6 chassis. The engine was upgraded to a flat-six from a Porsche 911 Carrera that produced .\nGM XP-897GT.\nFirst shown in 1973, General Motors (GM) built the Corvette XP-897GT concept car to showcase their rotary engine technology. Lacking a suitable mid-engined platform, GM bought a 914/6 and shortened the wheelbase by . The body was designed in-house by GM and built by Pininfarina in Italy. A GM two-rotor Wankel engine powered the car through a new transaxle. The engine displaced and produced . When the rotary engine project was cancelled, GM stored the car at the Vauxhall Design Centre in England. The car was rescued from the crusher by an English enthusiast, who also managed to obtain an original GM rotary engine. The car was scheduled to appear at Amelia Island in 2019.\n914 Limited Edition.\nIn 1974, Porsche produced a series of Limited Edition cars for the North American market to commemorate Porsche's victories in the Can Am racing series. They were equipped with individual color schemes and came standard with otherwise optional equipment. The factory is said to have produced about 1,000 of these vehicles, about 50% Bumblebee and 50% Creamsicle. Variants of this series were manufactured and distributed in very limited numbers to European markets and Japan. Along with the regular Appearance Group option (fog lamps and center console with clock and additional gauges) at $300, the LE package set buyers back another $320. All Limited Editions models came with the 2.0\u00a0L (1,971\u00a0cc) flat four engine, which was otherwise optional in the standard 914, that produced 91\u00a0hp in U.S. trim.\nThe Creamsicle: With a cream color exterior (paint code U2V9), these cars sported Phoenix red trim, including color matched lower valences and bumpers. This light ivory color scheme concept carried over from the 1973 911 Carrera RS series.\nThe Bumblebee: Featuring a black exterior (paint code L041), these cars sported a Sunflower yellow trim (paint code L13K). Black body paint color was always an additional cost special option on standard 914 Porsche cars, but was included as a standard component on the black 914 LE cars. Like the Creamsicle All but one photo of the 914 Porsche Can Am prototype cars are Bumblebee cars. The black-based 914 LE color scheme is specific to the 914 LE cars and has no precedent with the Can Am race cars or the 1973 911 Carrera RS series cars. The majority of 914 Limited Editions seem to be Bumblebees.\nAll 914 LE cars featured a specially designed front spoiler and negative side stripes. Additionally, all Limited Editions were equipped with front and rear anti-roll bars, dual horns, leather covered steering wheel, driving lights, painted rear roll bar trim (as opposed to vinyl clad), Mahle cast aluminum wheels and a center console with an oil temperature gauge, clock, and voltmeter.\nOther.\nA factory prototype 914/6, (chassis no. 914114), surfaced in the US in 2001. Together with a surviving prototype Sportomatic 914/6 (chassis No. 914120), reputedly in Southern Germany, they are a special part of Porsche history.\nMotorsport.\nA 914/6 GT driven by Frenchmen Claude Ballot-L\u00e9na and Guy Chasseuil won the GTS class and finished sixth overall at the 1970 24 Hours of Le Mans.\nBrian Redman used a 914/6 to scout the course in practice runs for the 1970 Targa Florio.\nF1 safety car.\nThe Porsche 914 is renowned for having been Formula One's first safety car following its deployment at the 1973 Canadian Grand Prix to help manage the race, which had seen various incidents due to treacherous weather conditions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37420", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37420", "title": "East Malaysia", "text": "Part of Malaysia on the island of Borneo\nEast Malaysia (), or the Borneo States, also known as Malaysian Borneo, is the part of Malaysia on and near the island of Borneo, the world's third-largest island. East Malaysia comprises the states of Sabah, Sarawak, and the Federal Territory of Labuan. The small independent nation of Brunei comprises two enclaves in Sarawak. To the south and southeast is the Indonesian portion of Borneo, Kalimantan. East Malaysia lies to the east of Peninsular Malaysia (also known as the States of Malaya), the part of the country on the Malay Peninsula. The two are separated by the South China Sea.\nEast Malaysia is less populated and has fewer developed settlements than West Malaysia. While West Malaysia contains the country's major cities (Kuala Lumpur, Johor Bahru, and George Town), East Malaysia is larger and much more abundant in natural resources, particularly oil and gas reserves. In the pan-regional style, city status is reserved for only a few settlements, including Kuching, Kota Kinabalu and Miri. Various other significant settlements are classified as towns, including many with over 100,000 residents. East Malaysia includes a significant portion of the biodiverse Borneo lowland rain forests and Borneo montane rain forests.\nStates and territories.\nEast Malaysia or the Borneo States comprise 2 of the 13 states, and one out of the three federal territories of Malaysia.\nHistory.\nSome parts of present-day East Malaysia, especially the coastal regions, were once part of the thalassocracy of the Sultanate of Brunei. However, most parts of the interior region consisted of independent tribal societies.\nIn 1658, the northern and eastern coasts of Sabah were ceded to the Sultanate of Sulu while the west coast of Sabah and most of Sarawak remained part of Brunei. James Brooke assumes governorship in Sarawak in 1841. In 1888, Sabah and Sarawak together with Brunei became British protectorates. The Japanese invaded the region in 1941 but they were fought away by the Australians in 1945 and a year later Sabah and Sarawak became separate British colonies. The region will undergo \"konfrontasi\" with Indonesia but join Malaysia in 1963.\nFederation.\nSabah (formerly British North Borneo) and Sarawak were separate British colonies from Malaya, and did not become part of the Federation of Malaya in 1957. Later on however, the then Federation merged with the self-governing State of Singapore and the British Colonies of North Borneo (now known as Sabah) and Sarawak under the Malaysia Agreement as the States of Malaya, the Borneo States of Sabah and Sarawak, and the State of Singapore of the new Federation called Malaysia on 16 September 1963, now known as Malaysia Day. Singapore left the Federation two years later in 1965 after being expelled by then the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman. Previously, there were efforts to unite Brunei, Sabah, and Sarawak under the North Borneo Federation but that failed after the Brunei Revolt occurred.\nThe Borneo States retained a higher degree of local government and legislative autonomy than the States of Malaya. For example, both states have their own immigration controls, requiring Malaysian citizens from West Malaysia to carry passports or identity cards when visiting East Malaysia.\nThe islands of Labuan were once part of North Borneo in 1946 before becoming a Federal Territory in Malaysia on 16 April 1984. It was used to establish a centre for offshore finance in 1990.\nSince 2010, there has been some speculation and discussion, at least on the ground level, about the possibility of secession from the Federation of Malaysia because of allegations of resource mishandling, illegal processing of immigrants, etc.\nAdministration.\nThe Borneo States of Sabah and Sarawak joined the Federation of Malaysia as equal partners with Malaya and Singapore. Sabah and Sarawak retained their rights covered under the Malaysia Agreement of 1963 and their degree of autonomy compared to the other states in Peninsular Malaysia. For example, the Malaysian Borneo States have separate laws regulating the entry of citizens from other states in Malaysia (including the other East Malaysian state), whereas, in Peninsular Malaysia, there are no restrictions on interstate travel or migration, including visitors from East Malaysia. There are also separate land laws governing Sabah and Sarawak, as opposed to the National Land Code, which governs Peninsular Malaysia.\nIn December 2021, constitutional amendments were passed to restore the status of Sabah and Sarawak as equal partners to Malaya, with 199 members of Parliament backing the amendment bill without opposition. Apart from restoring Article 1(2) to its pre-1976 wording, the bill defines Malaysia Day for the first time and redefines the federation with the inclusion of Malaysia Agreement (MA63). Previously, only Merdeka Day (independence day of the Federation of Malaya) was defined, and the federation was defined merely by the Malaya Agreement 1957. The Constitution (Amendment) Act 2022 received royal assent on 19 January 2022 and came into force on 11 February 2022.\nWith regard to the administration of justice, the courts in East Malaysia are part of the federal court system in Malaysia. The Constitution of Malaysia provides that there shall be two High Courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction. The High Court in Malaya and the High Court in Sabah and Sarawak (formerly the High Court in Borneo). The current Chief Judge of Sabah and Sarawak is Abang Iskandar Abang Hashim from Sarawak. His office is the fourth highest in the Malaysian judicial system (behind the Chief Judge of Malaya, President of the Court of Appeal, and Chief Justice of Malaysia).\nPolitics.\nCompared to West Malaysia, political parties in Sarawak and Sabah started relatively late. This first political party in Sarawak emerged in 1959 while the first political party in Sabah emerged in August 1961. Sarawak held its first local authorities election in 1959 and did not have any directly elected legislature until 1970. Sabah only held its first district council election in December 1962 and first direct election in April 1967. Both the states were new and had little experience in organised, competitive politics. Therefore, there had been the appearance and rapid disappearance of political parties in Sarawak and Sabah within a short period of time, with some parties took opportunistic moves to form alliances without a definite loyalty to a certain political alignment. The ethnic composition of East Malaysia is also different from West Malaysia. The indigenous people in both Sarawak and Sabah do not form an absolute majority, while the non-native population in East Malaysia mainly consisting of entirely Chinese. Political parties in Sarawak and Sabah were formed largely based on communal lines and can be categorised roughly into native non-Muslim, native Muslim, and non-native parties. With the support of the Malaysia federal government, native Muslim parties in Sabah and Sarawak were strengthened. In Sabah, the native Muslim party United Sabah National Organisation (USNO) first clinged on the chief minister post in 1965 and later consolidated its power in 1967. In Sarawak, native Muslim party named Parti Bumiputera (which later regrouped into Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu (PBB) held the chief minister post since 1970.\nIn 1976, all the Sabah and Sarawak MPs (except 4 absentees) supported the Malaysian parliament bill which downgraded both the states from being equal partners to Malaya as a whole, to one of the 13 states in the federation.\nSince 2008, East Malaysia played a more significant role in the national political landscape. The loss of two-thirds majority of Barisan Nasional (BN) government in the West Malaysia caused the BN to rely on East Malaysian politicians to cling on power. After the conclusion of 2013 Malaysian general election, there was an increase in ministers and deputy ministers allocation for East Malaysia in the Malaysian Cabinet from 11 out of 57 portfolios in 2008 election to 20 out of 61 portfolios. There had been no prime minister or deputy prime minister coming from East Malaysia until 2022, when Fadillah Yusof became the first deputy prime minister from East Malaysia. On several occasions, the federal government chaired its weekly cabinet meetings in Kuching instead of Putrajaya.\nAs of 2012, Sarawak, Sabah and Labuan held a total of 57 out 222 seats (25.68%) in the Malaysian parliament. Since 2014, Sarawak have been actively seeking for devolution of powers from the Malaysian federal government. In October 2018, both Sabah and Sarawak chief ministers met to discuss common goals in demanding from the Malaysian federal government regarding the rights stipulated inside the Malaysia Agreement. In December 2021, constitutional amendments were passed to restore the status of Sabah and Sarawak as equal partners to Malaya, with 199 members of Parliament backing the amendment bill without opposition. Apart from restoring Article 1(2) to its pre-1976 wording, the bill defines Malaysia Day for the first time and redefines the federation with the inclusion of Malaysia Agreement (MA63). Previously, only Merdeka Day (independence day of the Federation of Malaya) was defined, and the federation was defined merely by the Malaya Agreement 1957. The Constitution (Amendment) Act 2022 received royal assent on 19 January 2022 and came into force on 11 February 2022.\nPhysical geography.\nThe landscape of East Malaysia is mostly lowland rain forests with areas of mountain rain forest towards the hinterland.\nThe total area of East Malaysia is 198,447\u00a0km2, representing approximately 60% of the total land area of Malaysia and 26.4% of the total area of Borneo, which is 50% bigger than Peninsular Malaysia at , comparable with South Dakota or Great Britain.\nEast Malaysia contains the five highest mountains in Malaysia, the highest being Mount Kinabalu at 4095 m, which is also the highest mountain in Borneo and the 10th highest mountain peak in Southeast Asia. It also contains the two longest rivers in Malaysia\u00a0\u2013 Rajang River and Kinabatangan River.\nBanggi Island in Sabah and Bruit Island in Sarawak are the two largest islands that are located entirely within Malaysia. The largest island is Borneo, which is shared with Indonesia and Brunei. The second largest island is Sebatik Island, in Sabah, which is shared with Indonesia.\nSarawak contains the Mulu Caves within Gunung Mulu National Park. Its Sarawak Chamber is the largest (by area) known cave chamber in the world. The Gunung Mulu National Park was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in November 2000.\nSabah's attractions include World Heritage Site Kinabalu Park (which includes Mount Kinabalu), and Sipadan Island (a diving and bio-diversity hot-spot).\nGeology.\nSeveral oil and gas fields have been discovered offshore, including the Samarang oil field (1972) offshore Sabah, the Baronia oil field (1967) offshore Sarawak, and the Central Luconia natural gas fields (1968), also offshore Sarawak. The Baronia Field is a domal structural trap between two east\u2013west growth faults, which produces from late Miocene sandstones interbedded with siltstones and clays at 2\u00a0km depth in 75 m of water. The Samarang Field produces from late Miocene sandstones in an alternating sequence of sandstones, siltstones and clays in an anticline at a depth of about 3\u00a0km in water 9\u201345 m. The Central Luconia Gas Fields produce from middle to late Miocene carbonate platform and pinnacle reefs from 1.25 to 3.76\u00a0km deep and water depths 60-100m.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe total population of East Malaysia in 2010 was 5.77\u00a0million (3.21\u00a0million in Sabah, 2.47\u00a0million in Sarawak, and 0.09\u00a0million in Labuan), which represented 20.4% of the population of Malaysia. A significant part of the population of East Malaysia today reside in towns and cities. The largest city and urban centre is Kuching, which is also the capital of Sarawak and has a population of over 600,000 people. Kota Kinabalu is the second largest, and one of the most important cities in East Malaysia. Kuching, Kota Kinabalu, and Miri are the only three places with city status in East Malaysia. Other important towns include Sandakan and Tawau in Sabah, Sibu and Bintulu in Sarawak, and Victoria in Labuan. The 2020 estimated population is 6\u00a0million (3,418,785 in Sabah, 2,453,677 in Sarawak and 95,120 in Labuan).\nThe earliest inhabitants of East Malaysia were the Dayak people and other related ethnic groups such as the Kadazan-Dusun people. These indigenous people form a significant portion, but not the majority, of the population. For hundreds of years, there has been significant migration into East Malaysia and Borneo from many parts of the Malay Archipelago, including Java, the Lesser Sunda Islands, Sulawesi, and Sulu. More recently, there has been immigration from India and China.\nThe indigenous inhabitants were originally animists. Islamic influence began as early as the 15th century, while Christian influence started in the 19th century.\nThe indigenous inhabitants are generally partisan and maintain culturally distinct dialects of the Malay language, in addition to their own ethnic languages. Approximately over one-tenth of the population of Sabah and Labuan, and almost a quarter of the population of Sarawak, is composed of local Chinese communities. The local Malay consists approximately 13.6% in East Malaysia, with over two-thirds of Malay in East Malaysia resides in the state of Sarawak, predominantly found in the city of Kuching and the surrounding areas. While among Indian communities, unlike their fellows in Peninsular Malaysia where they are considered as one of the several major ethnic groups in Peninsula, their population in East Malaysia was quite tiny, consists just about 0.3%, with the majority of them resides in the urban areas such as Kota Kinabalu, Tawau, Labuan and Miri, in addition to Kuching.\nHowever, the demography of Sabah has been altered dramatically with the alleged implementation of Project IC in the 1990s. Citizenships are alleged to be granted to immigrants from Indonesia and Philippines in order to keep the UMNO ruling party in power. Royal Commission of Inquiry (RCI) has been conducted from 11 August 2012 to 20 September 2013. The outcome of the investigation was submitted to the prime minister on 19 May 2014. The report was released on 3 December 2014 after 6 months delay. It stated that Project IC might have existed, which was responsible for a sudden spike in the state population. However, the report did not pinpoint any responsibility except for \"corrupt officials\" who took advantage of the system.\nEducation.\nEast Malaysia currently has two public universities, namely Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS) and Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS). Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM) also has branch campuses in both states. Labuan's own institution of higher education is Universiti Malaysia Sabah Labuan International Campus, which has a branch in Sepanggar Bay, Kota Kinabalu. All prospective university entrants from Sabah, Sarawak, and Labuan must sit the examinations of one matriculation college, Kolej Matrikulasi Labuan.\nUCSI University, Sarawak Campus, University College of Technology Sarawak (UCTS) Tunku Abdul Rahman University College (Sabah campus), International University College of Technology Twintech (Sabah campus), and Open University Malaysia (Sabah campus) have local private university branch campuses in East Malaysia. Curtin University, Malaysia and Swinburne University of Technology Sarawak Campus are foreign university branch campuses in Sarawak.\nThere are 4 teacher training colleges (Malay: \"Maktab Perguruan\") in Sarawak, and 4 teacher training colleges in Sabah.\nTransport.\nThe Pan Borneo Highway connects Sabah, Sarawak, and Brunei. The road has been poorly maintained since it was built. The narrow road is dark at night without any street lights and there are many danger spots, sharp bends, blind spots, potholes, and erosion. However, federal government funds have been allocated for the upgrade of the highway, which will be carried out in stages until completion in 2025.\nThe major airports in East Malaysia are Kuching International Airport, Labuan Airport and Kota Kinabalu International Airport. Kota Kinabalu International Airport has also become the second largest airport in Malaysia, with an annual capacity of 12 million passengers \u2013 9 million for Terminal 1 and 3 million for Terminal 2. There are frequent air flights by including Malaysia Airlines (MAS) and AirAsia between East Malaysia and Peninsular Malaysia. Other ports of entry to East Malaysia include Sibu Airport, Bintulu Airport, and Miri Airport in Sarawak, Sandakan Airport and Tawau Airport in Sabah. MAS also operates international flights to major cities in East Malaysia.\nThe rural areas in Borneo can only be accessed by air or river boat. River transport is especially prevalent in Sarawak because there are many large and long rivers, with Rajang River being the most used. Rivers are used by boats and ferries for communications (i.e. mail) and passenger transport between inland areas and coastal towns. Timber is also transported via vessels and log carriers down the rivers of Sarawak.\nThe Labuan Ferry operates boat express and vehicle ferries from Labuan Island to Sabah, Sarawak and Brunei. Ferries have overtaken air travel as the chief transportation mode on and off the island.\nEconomy.\nShipyards in Sabah and Sarawak build steel vessels for offshore supply, tug, barge and river ferries when compared to shipyards in Peninsular Malaysia that focus on building steel and aluminium vessels for the government as well as oil and gas companies. This makes the shipyards in Sabah and Sarawak more competitive and innovative in design, process and material, compared to the shipyards in peninsular Malaysia, where the big projects are dependent on government funding.\nSecurity.\nThe state of Sabah has been subjected to attacks by Moro pirates and militants since the 1960s and intensification in 1985, 2000, 2013. The Eastern Sabah Security Zone (ESSZONE) and Eastern Sabah Security Command (ESSCOM) were established on 25 March 2013 to tighten security in the region. Since 2014, a 12-hour dusk-to-dawn curfew has been imposed on six Sabah east coast districts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37421", "revid": "23999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37421", "title": "Bowline", "text": "Simple knot used to form a fixed loop at the end of a rope\nThe bowline () is an ancient and simple knot used to form a fixed loop at the end of a rope. It has the virtues of being both easy to tie and untie; most notably, it is easy to untie after being subjected to a load. The bowline is sometimes referred to as \"king of the knots\" because of its importance. Along with the sheet bend and the clove hitch, the bowline is often considered one of the most essential knots. \nThe common bowline shares some structural similarity with the sheet bend. Virtually all end-to-end joining knots (i.e., bends) have a corresponding loop knot. \nAlthough the bowline is generally considered a reliable knot, its main deficiencies are a tendency to work loose when not under load (or under cyclic loading), to slip when pulled sideways, and the bight portion of the knot to capsize in certain circumstances. To address these shortcomings, a number of more secure variations of the bowline have been developed for use in safety-critical applications, or by securing the knot with an overhand knot backup.\nHistory.\nThe bowline's name has an earlier meaning, dating to the age of sail. On a square-rigged ship, a bowline (sometimes spelled as two words, \"bow line\") is a rope that holds the edge of a square sail towards the bow of the ship and into the wind, preventing it from being taken aback. A ship is said to be on a \"taut bowline\" when these lines are made as taut as possible in order to sail close-hauled to the wind.\nThe bowline knot is thought to have been first mentioned in John Smith's 1627 work \"A Sea Grammar\" under the name Boling knot. Smith considered the knot to be strong and secure, saying, \"The \"Boling knot\" is also so firmly made and fastened by the bridles into the cringles of the sails, they will break, or the sail split before it will slip.\"\nAnother possible finding was discovered on the rigging of the Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh Khufu's solar ship during an excavation in 1954.\nUsage.\nThe bowline is used to make a loop at one end of a line. It is tied with the rope's working end also known as the \"tail\" or \"end\". The loop may pass around or through an object during the making of the knot. The knot tightens when loaded at (pulled by) the standing part of the line.\nThe bowline is commonly used in sailing small craft, for example to fasten a halyard to the head of a sail or to tie a jib sheet to a clew of a jib. The bowline is well known as a rescue knot for such purposes as rescuing people who might have fallen down a hole, or off a cliff onto a ledge. This knot is particularly useful in such a situation because it is possible to tie with one hand. As such, a person needing rescue could hold onto the rope with one hand and use the other to tie the knot around their waist before being pulled to safety by rescuers. The Federal Aviation Administration recommends the bowline knot for tying down light aircraft.\nA rope with a bowline retains approximately 2/3 of its strength, with variances depending upon the nature of the rope, as in practice the exact strength depends on a variety of factors.\nIn the United Kingdom, the knot is listed as part of the training objectives for the Qualified Firefighter Assessment.\nTying.\nA mnemonic used to teach the tying of the bowline is to imagine the working end of the rope as a rabbit.\nThis can be taught to children with the rhyme: \"Up through the rabbit hole, round the big tree; down through the rabbit hole and off goes he.\"\nThere is a potential with beginners to wrongly tie the bowline. This faulty knot stems from an incorrect first step while tying the rabbit hole. If the loop is made backwards so that the working end of the rope is on the bottom, the resulting knot will be the Eskimo bowline, looking like a sideways bowline, which is also a stable knot.\nSecurity.\nAs noted above, the simplicity of the bowline makes it a good knot for a general purpose end-of-line loop. However, in situations that require additional security, several variants have been developed:\nRound turn bowline.\nThe round turn bowline is made by the addition of an extra turn in the formation of the \"rabbit hole\" before the working end is threaded through.\nWater bowline.\nSimilar to the double bowline, the water bowline is made by forming a clove hitch before the working end is threaded through. It is said to be stronger and also more resistant to jamming than the other variations, especially when wet.\nYosemite bowline.\nIn this variation the knot's working end is taken round the loop in the direction of the original round turn, then threaded back up through the original round turn before the knot is drawn tight. The Yosemite bowline is often used in climbing.\nOther variants.\nThe cowboy bowline (also called Dutch bowline), French bowline, and Portuguese bowline are variations of the bowline, each of which makes one loop. (Names of knots are mostly traditional and may not reflect their origins.) A running bowline can be used to make a noose which draws tighter as tension is placed on the standing part of the rope. The \"Birmingham bowline\" has two loops; the working part is passed twice around the standing part (the \"rabbit\" makes two trips out of the hole and around the tree). Other two-loop bowline knots include the Spanish bowline and the bowline on the bight; these can be tied in the middle of a rope without access to the ends. A triple bowline is used to make three loops. An Eskimo bowline or Cossack knot is a bowline where the running end goes around the loop-start rather than the main part and has a more symmetric triangular shaped knot. A slipped version of the Cossack knot is called Kalmyk loop.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37422", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37422", "title": "Loop", "text": "Loop or LOOP may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37423", "revid": "48934066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37423", "title": "Bend", "text": "Bend may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37424", "revid": "46115515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37424", "title": "Colorimeter", "text": "For articles on Colorimeter see:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37425", "revid": "21436738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37425", "title": "Equilibrium", "text": "Equilibrium may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37426", "revid": "3736169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37426", "title": "Squeak", "text": "Object-oriented programming language\nSqueak is an object-oriented, class-based, and reflective programming language. It was derived from Smalltalk-80 by a group that included some of Smalltalk-80's original developers, initially at Apple Computer, then at Walt Disney Imagineering, where it was intended for use in internal Disney projects. The group later was supported by HP Labs and SAP.\nSqueak runs on a stack virtual machine (VM), allowing for a high degree of portability. The Squeak system includes code for generating a new version of the VM on which it runs, along with a VM simulator written in Squeak.\nDevelopers.\nDan Ingalls, an important contributor to the Squeak project, wrote the paper upon which Squeak is built, and constructed the architecture for five generations of the Smalltalk language.\nAlan Kay is an important contributor to the Squeak project, and Squeak incorporates many elements of his proposed Dynabook concept.\nUser interface frameworks.\nSqueak includes four user interface frameworks:\nUses.\nMany Squeak contributors collaborate on Open Cobalt, a free and open source virtual world browser and construction toolkit built on Squeak.\nThe first version of Scratch was implemented in Squeak.\nOpenQwaq, a virtual conferencing and collaboration system, is based on Squeak.\nSqueak is also used in the Nintendo ES operating system.\nLicense.\nSqueak 4.0 and later may be downloaded at no cost, including source code, as a prebuilt virtual machine image licensed under the MIT License, with the exception of some of the original Apple code, which is governed by the Apache License.\nSqueak was originally released by Apple under its own \"Squeak License\". While source code was available and modification permitted, the Squeak License contained an indemnity clause that prevented it from qualifying as true free and open-source software.\nIn 2006, Apple relicensed Squeak twice. First, in May, Apple used its own Apple Public Source License, which satisfies the Free Software Foundation's concept of a Free Software License and has attained official approval from the Open Source Initiative as an Open Source License. However, The Apple Public Source License fails to conform to the Debian Free Software Guidelines. To enable inclusion of Etoys in the One Laptop Per Child project, a second relicensing was undertaken using the Apache License. At this point, an effort was also made to address the issue of code contributed by members of the Squeak community, which it was not in Apple's power to unilaterally relicense.\nFor each contribution made under the Squeak License since 1996, a relicensing statement was obtained authorizing distribution under the MIT license, and finally in March 2010, the result was released as Squeak 4.0, now under combined MIT and Apache licenses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37427", "revid": "28976922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37427", "title": "Le Chatelier's principle", "text": "Principle to predict effects of a change in conditions on a chemical equilibrium\nIn chemistry, Le Chatelier's principle (pronounced or ) is a principle used to predict the effect of a change in conditions on chemical equilibrium. Other names include Chatelier's principle, Braun\u2013Le Chatelier principle, Le Chatelier\u2013Braun principle or the equilibrium law.\nThe principle is named after French chemist Henry Louis Le Chatelier who enunciated the principle in 1884 by extending the reasoning from the Van 't Hoff relation of how temperature variations changes the equilibrium to the variations of pressure and what's now called chemical potential, and sometimes also credited to Karl Ferdinand Braun, who discovered it independently in 1887. It can be defined as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the equilibrium of a system is disturbed by a change in one or more of the determining factors (as temperature, pressure, or concentration) the system tends to adjust itself to a new equilibrium by counteracting as far as possible the effect of the change\u2014\u200a\nIn scenarios outside thermodynamic equilibrium, there can arise phenomena in contradiction to an over-general statement of Le Chatelier's principle.\nLe Chatelier's principle is sometimes alluded to in discussions of topics other than thermodynamics.\nThermodynamic statement.\nThe Le Chatelier\u2013Braun principle analyzes the qualitative behaviour of a thermodynamic system when a particular one of its externally controlled state variables, say formula_1 changes by an amount formula_2 the 'driving change', causing a change formula_3 the 'response of prime interest', in its conjugate state variable formula_4 all other externally controlled state variables remaining constant. The response illustrates 'moderation' in ways evident in two related thermodynamic equilibria. Obviously, one of formula_1 formula_6 has to be intensive, the other extensive. Also as a necessary part of the scenario, there is some particular auxiliary 'moderating' state variable formula_7, with its conjugate state variable formula_8 For this to be of interest, the 'moderating' variable formula_7 must undergo a change formula_10 or formula_11 in some part of the experimental protocol; this can be either by imposition of a change formula_12, or with the holding of formula_13 constant, written formula_14 For the principle to hold with full generality, formula_7 must be extensive or intensive accordingly as formula_6 is so. Obviously, to give this scenario physical meaning, the 'driving' variable and the 'moderating' variable must be subject to separate independent experimental controls and measurements.\nExplicit statement.\nThe principle can be stated in two ways, formally different, but substantially equivalent, and, in a sense, mutually 'reciprocal'. The two ways illustrate the Maxwell relations, and the stability of thermodynamic equilibrium according to the second law of thermodynamics, evident as the spread of energy amongst the state variables of the system in response to an imposed change.\nThe two ways of statement differ in their experimental protocols. They share an \"index protocol\" (denoted formula_17 that may be described as 'changed driver, moderation permitted'. Along with the driver change formula_2 it imposes a constant formula_19 with formula_20 and allows the uncontrolled 'moderating' variable response formula_21 along with the 'index' response of interest formula_22\nThe two ways of statement differ in their respective \"compared protocols\". One form of \"compared protocol\" posits 'changed driver, no moderation' (denoted formula_23 The other form of \"compared protocol\" posits 'fixed driver, imposed moderation' (denoted formula_24)\nForced 'driver' change, free or fixed 'moderation'.\nThis way compares formula_25 with formula_26 to compare the effects of the imposed the change formula_27 with and without moderation. The protocol formula_28 prevents 'moderation' by enforcing that formula_29 through an adjustment formula_30 and it observes the 'no-moderation' response formula_31 Provided that the observed response is indeed that formula_32 then the principle states that formula_33.\nIn other words, change in the 'moderating' state variable formula_7 moderates the effect of the driving change in formula_35 on the responding conjugate variable formula_36\nForcedly changed or fixed 'driver', respectively free or forced 'moderation'.\nThis way also uses two experimental protocols, formula_37 and formula_38, to compare the index effect formula_39 with the effect formula_40 of 'moderation' alone. The \"index protocol\" formula_37 is executed first; the response of prime interest, formula_42 is observed, and the response formula_43 of the 'moderating' variable is also measured. With that knowledge, then the \"fixed driver, imposed moderation protocol\" formula_38 enforces that formula_45 with the driving variable formula_35 held fixed; the protocol also, through an adjustment formula_47 imposes a change formula_43 (learnt from the just previous measurement) in the 'moderating' variable, and measures the change formula_49 Provided that the 'moderated' response is indeed that formula_50 then the principle states that the signs of formula_39 and formula_40 are opposite.\nAgain, in other words, change in the 'moderating' state variable formula_7 opposes the effect of the driving change in formula_35 on the responding conjugate variable formula_36\nOther statements.\nThe duration of adjustment depends on the strength of the negative feedback to the initial shock. The principle is typically used to describe closed negative-feedback systems, but applies, in general, to thermodynamically closed and isolated systems in nature, since the second law of thermodynamics ensures that the disequilibrium caused by an instantaneous shock is eventually followed by a new equilibrium.\nWhile well rooted in chemical equilibrium, Le Chatelier's principle can also be used in describing mechanical systems in that a system put under stress will respond in such a way as to reduce or minimize that stress. Moreover, the response will generally be via the mechanism that most easily relieves that stress. Shear pins and other such sacrificial devices are design elements that protect systems against stress applied in undesired manners to relieve it so as to prevent more extensive damage to the entire system, a practical engineering application of Le Chatelier's principle.\nChemistry.\nEffect of change in concentration.\nChanging the concentration of a chemical will shift the equilibrium to the side that would counter that change in concentration. The chemical system will attempt to partly oppose the change that affected the original state of equilibrium. In turn, the rate of reaction, extent, and yield of products will be altered corresponding to the impact on the system.\nThis can be illustrated by the equilibrium of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gas, reacting to form methanol. \nCO + 2 H2 \u21cc CH3OH\nSuppose we were to increase the concentration of CO in the system. Using Le Chatelier's principle, we can predict that the concentration of methanol will increase, decreasing the total change in CO. If we are to add a species to the overall reaction, the reaction will favor the side opposing the addition of the species. Likewise, the subtraction of a species would cause the reaction to \"fill the gap\" and favor the side where the species was reduced. This observation is supported by the collision theory. As the concentration of CO is increased, the frequency of successful collisions of that reactant would increase also, allowing for an increase in forward reaction, and generation of the product. Even if the desired product is not thermodynamically favored, the end-product can be obtained if it is continuously removed from the solution.\nThe effect of a change in concentration is often exploited synthetically for condensation reactions (i.e., reactions that extrude water) that are equilibrium processes (e.g., the formation of an ester from carboxylic acid and alcohol or an imine from an amine and aldehyde). This can be achieved by physically sequestering water, by adding desiccants like anhydrous magnesium sulfate or molecular sieves, or by continuous removal of water by distillation, often facilitated by a Dean-Stark apparatus.\nEffect of change in temperature.\nThe effect of changing the temperature in the equilibrium can be made clear by 1) incorporating heat as either a reactant or a product, and 2) assuming that an increase in temperature increases the heat content of a system. When the reaction is exothermic (\u0394\"H\" is negative and energy is released), heat is included as a product, and when the reaction is endothermic (\u0394\"H\" is positive and energy is consumed), heat is included as a reactant. Hence, whether increasing or decreasing the temperature would favor the forward or the reverse reaction can be determined by applying the same principle as with concentration changes.\nTake, for example, the reversible reaction of nitrogen gas with hydrogen gas to form ammonia:\nN2(g) + 3 H2(g) \u21cc 2 NH3(g)\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u0394\"H\" = \u221292 kJ mol\u22121\nBecause this reaction is exothermic, it produces heat:\nN2(g) + 3 H2(g) \u21cc 2 NH3(g) + \"heat\"\nIf the temperature were increased, the heat content of the system would increase, so the system would consume some of that heat by shifting the equilibrium to the left, thereby producing less ammonia. More ammonia would be produced if the reaction were run at a lower temperature, but a lower temperature also lowers the rate of the process, so, in practice (the Haber process) the temperature is set at a compromise value that allows ammonia to be made at a reasonable rate with an equilibrium concentration that is not too unfavorable.\nIn exothermic reactions, an increase in temperature decreases the equilibrium constant, \"K\", whereas in endothermic reactions, an increase in temperature increases \"K\".\nLe Chatelier's principle applied to changes in concentration or pressure can be understood by giving \"K\" a constant value. The effect of temperature on equilibria, however, involves a change in the equilibrium constant. The dependence of \"K\" on temperature is determined by the sign of \u0394\"H\". The theoretical basis of this dependence is given by the Van 't Hoff equation.\nEffect of change in pressure.\nThe equilibrium concentrations of the products and reactants do not directly depend on the total pressure of the system. They may depend on the partial pressure of the products and reactants, but if the number of moles of gaseous reactants is equal to the number of moles of gaseous products, pressure has no effect on equilibrium.\nChanging total pressure by adding an inert gas at constant volume does not affect the equilibrium concentrations (see ).\nChanging total pressure by changing the volume of the system changes the partial pressures of the products and reactants and can affect the equilibrium concentrations (see below).\nEffect of change in volume.\nChanging the volume of the system changes the partial pressures of the products and reactants and can affect the equilibrium concentrations. With a pressure increase due to a decrease in volume, the side of the equilibrium with fewer moles is more favorable and with a pressure decrease due to an increase in volume, the side with more moles is more favorable. There is no effect on a reaction where the number of moles of gas is the same on each side of the chemical equation.\nConsidering the reaction of nitrogen gas with hydrogen gas to form ammonia:\nN2 + 3 H24 moles \u21cc 2 NH32 moles\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u0394H = \u221292kJ mol\u22121\nNote the number of moles of gas on the left-hand side and the number of moles of gas on the right-hand side. When the volume of the system is changed, the partial pressures of the gases change. If we were to decrease pressure by increasing volume, the equilibrium of the above reaction will shift to the left, because the reactant side has a greater number of moles than does the product side. The system tries to counteract the decrease in partial pressure of gas molecules by shifting to the side that exerts greater pressure. Similarly, if we were to increase pressure by decreasing volume, the equilibrium shifts to the right, counteracting the pressure increase by shifting to the side with fewer moles of gas that exert less pressure. If the volume is increased because there are more moles of gas on the reactant side, this change is more significant in the denominator of the equilibrium constant expression, causing a shift in equilibrium.\nEffect of adding an inert gas.\nAn inert gas (or noble gas), such as helium, is one that does not react with other elements or compounds. Adding an inert gas into a gas-phase equilibrium at constant volume does not result in a shift. This is because the addition of a non-reactive gas does not change the equilibrium equation, as the inert gas appears on both sides of the chemical reaction equation. For example, if A and B react to form C and D, but X does not participate in the reaction: &lt;chem&gt;\\mathit{a}A{} + \\mathit{b}B{} + \\mathit{x}X &lt;=&gt; \\mathit{c}C{} + \\mathit{d}D{} + \\mathit{x}X&lt;/chem&gt;. While it is true that the total pressure of the system increases, the total pressure does not have any effect on the equilibrium constant; rather, it is a change in partial pressures that will cause a shift in the equilibrium. If, however, the volume is allowed to increase in the process, the partial pressures of all gases would be decreased resulting in a shift towards the side with the greater number of moles of gas. The shift will never occur on the side with fewer moles of gas. It is also known as Le Chatelier's postulate.\nEffect of a catalyst.\nA catalyst increases the rate of a reaction without being consumed in the reaction. The use of a catalyst does not affect the position and composition of the equilibrium of a reaction, because both the forward and backward reactions are sped up by the same factor.\nFor example, consider the Haber process for the synthesis of ammonia (NH3):\nN2 + 3 H2 \u21cc 2 NH3\nIn the above reaction, iron (Fe) and molybdenum (Mo) will function as catalysts if present. They will accelerate any reactions, but they do not affect the state of the equilibrium.\nGeneral statements.\nThermodynamic equilibrium processes.\nLe Chatelier's principle refers to states of thermodynamic equilibrium. The latter are stable against perturbations that satisfy certain criteria; this is essential to the definition of thermodynamic equilibrium.\nOR\nIt states that changes in the temperature, pressure, volume, or concentration of a system will result in predictable and opposing changes in the system in order to achieve a new equilibrium state.\nFor this, a state of thermodynamic equilibrium is most conveniently described through a fundamental relation that specifies a cardinal function of state, of the energy kind, or of the entropy kind, as a function of state variables chosen to fit the thermodynamic operations through which a perturbation is to be applied.\nIn theory and, nearly, in some practical scenarios, a body can be in a stationary state with zero macroscopic flows and rates of chemical reaction (for example, when no suitable catalyst is present), yet not in thermodynamic equilibrium, because it is metastable or unstable; then Le Chatelier's principle does not necessarily apply.\nNon-equilibrium processes.\nA simple body or a complex thermodynamic system can also be in a stationary state with non-zero rates of flow and chemical reaction; sometimes the word \"equilibrium\" is used in reference to such a state, though by definition it is not a thermodynamic equilibrium state. Sometimes, it is proposed to consider Le Chatelier's principle for such states. For this exercise, rates of flow and of chemical reaction must be considered. Such rates are not supplied by equilibrium thermodynamics. For such states, there are no simple statements that echo Le Chatelier's principle. Prigogine and Defay demonstrate that such a scenario may exhibit moderation, or may exhibit a measured amount of anti-moderation, though not a run-away anti-moderation that goes to completion. The example analysed by Prigogine and Defay is the Haber process.\nThis situation is clarified by considering two basic methods of analysis of a process. One is the classical approach of Gibbs, the other uses the near- or local equilibrium approach of De Donder. The Gibbs approach requires thermodynamic equilibrium. The Gibbs approach is reliable within its proper scope, thermodynamic equilibrium, though of course it does not cover non-equilibrium scenarios. The De Donder approach can cover equilibrium scenarios, but also covers non-equilibrium scenarios in which there is only local thermodynamic equilibrium, and not thermodynamic equilibrium proper. The De Donder approach allows state variables called extents of reaction to be independent variables, though in the Gibbs approach, such variables are not independent. Thermodynamic non-equilibrium scenarios can contradict an over-general statement of Le Chatelier's Principle.\nRelated system concepts.\nIt is common to treat the principle as a more general observation of systems, such as\nor, \"roughly stated\":\nThe concept of systemic maintenance of a stable steady state despite perturbations has a variety of names, and has been studied in a variety of contexts, chiefly in the natural sciences. In chemistry, the principle is used to manipulate the outcomes of reversible reactions, often to increase their yield. In pharmacology, the binding of ligands to receptors may shift the equilibrium according to Le Chatelier's principle, thereby explaining the diverse phenomena of receptor activation and desensitization. In biology, the concept of homeostasis is different from Le Chatelier's principle, in that homoeostasis is generally maintained by processes of active character, as distinct from the passive or dissipative character of the processes described by Le Chatelier's principle in thermodynamics. In economics, even further from thermodynamics, allusion to the principle is sometimes regarded as helping explain the price equilibrium of efficient economic systems. In some dynamic systems, the end-state cannot be determined from the shock or perturbation.\nEconomics.\nIn economics, a similar concept also named after Le Chatelier was introduced by American economist Paul Samuelson in 1947. There the generalized Le Chatelier principle is for a maximum condition of economic equilibrium: Where all unknowns of a function are independently variable, auxiliary constraints\u2014\"just-binding\" in leaving initial equilibrium unchanged\u2014reduce the response to a parameter change. Thus, factor-demand and commodity-supply elasticities are hypothesized to be lower in the short run than in the long run because of the fixed-cost constraint in the short run.\nSince the change of the value of an objective function in a neighbourhood of the maximum position is described by the envelope theorem, Le Chatelier's principle can be shown to be a corollary thereof."}
{"id": "37428", "revid": "50998409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37428", "title": "Beirut", "text": "Capital and largest city of Lebanon\nBeirut ( ; ) is the capital and largest city of Lebanon. As of 2014[ [update]], Greater Beirut has a population of 2.5\u00a0million, just under half of Lebanon's population, which makes it the twelfth-largest city in the Levant region and the sixteenth-largest in the Arab world. The city is situated on a peninsula at the midpoint of Lebanon's Mediterranean coast. Beirut has been inhabited for more than 5,000 years, making it one of the oldest cities in the world.\nBeirut is Lebanon's seat of government and plays a central role in the Lebanese economy, with many banks and corporations based in the city. Beirut is an important seaport for the country and region, and rated a Beta- World City by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Beirut was severely damaged by the Lebanese Civil War, the 2006 Lebanon War, and the 2020 massive explosion in the Port of Beirut, and was subsequently rebuilt after each of these events. Its architectural and demographic structure underwent major change in recent decades.\nEtymology.\nThe English name Beirut is an early transcription of the Arabic name (). The same name's transcription into French is , which was sometimes used during Lebanon's French mandate. The Arabic name derives from Phoenician \"b\u0113\u02ber\u016bt\" ( ). This was a modification of the Phoenician word later \"b\u0113\u02ber\u016bt\", meaning \"wells\", in reference to the site's accessible water table. The name is first attested in the 14thcenturyBC, when it was mentioned in three Akkadian cuneiform tablets of the Amarna letters, letters sent by King Ammunira of \"Biruta\" to Amenhotep III or Amenhotep IV of Egypt. \"Biruta\" was also mentioned in the Amarna letters from King Rib-Hadda of Byblos.\nThe Greeks hellenised the name as (), which the Romans latinised as . When it attained the status of a Roman colony, it was notionally refounded and its official name was emended to to include its imperial sponsors.\nAt the time of the crusades, the city was known in French as Barut or Baruth.\nHistory.\nThe earliest settlement of Beirut was on an island in the Beirut River, but the channel that separated it from the banks silted up and the island ceased to be. Excavations in the downtown area have unearthed layers of Phoenician, Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, Arab, Crusader, Persian and Ottoman remains.\nPrehistory.\nBeirut was settled over 5,000 years ago, and there is evidence that the surrounding area had already been inhabited for tens of thousands of years prior to this. Several prehistoric archaeological sites have been discovered within the urban area of Beirut, revealing flint tools from sequential periods dating from the Middle Palaeolithic and Upper Paleolithic through the Neolithic to the Bronze Age.\nBeirutI (\"Minet el-Hosn\") was listed as \"the town of Beirut\" () by Louis Burkhalter and said to be on the beach near the Orient and Bassoul hotels on the Avenue des Fran\u00e7ais in central Beirut. The site was discovered by Lortet in 1894 and discussed by Godefroy Zumoffen in 1900. The flint industry from the site was described as Mousterian and is held by the Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon.\nBeirutII (\"Umm el-Khatib\") was suggested by Burkhalter to have been south of Tarik el Jedideh, where P.E. Gigues discovered a Copper Age flint industry at around above sea level. The site had been built on and destroyed by 1948.\nBeirutIII (\"Furn esh-Shebbak\"), listed as , was suggested to have been located on the left bank of the Beirut River. Burkhalter suggested that it was west of the Damascus road, although this determination has been criticised by Lorraine Copeland. P. E. Gigues discovered a series of Neolithic flint tools on the surface along with the remains of a structure suggested to be a hut circle. Auguste Bergy discussed polished axes that were also found at this site, which has now completely disappeared as a result of construction and urbanisation of the area.\nBeirutIV (\"Furn esh-Shebbak\", river banks) was also on the left bank of the river and on either side of the road leading eastwards from the Furn esh Shebbak police station towards the river that marked the city limits. The area was covered in red sand that represented Quaternary river terraces. The site was found by Jesuit Father Dillenseger and published by fellow Jesuits Godefroy Zumoffen, Raoul Describes and Auguste Bergy. Collections from the site were made by Bergy, Describes and another Jesuit, Paul Bovier-Lapierre. Many Middle Paleolithic flint tools were found on the surface and in side gullies that drain into the river. They included around 50 varied bifaces accredited to the Acheulean period, some with a lustrous sheen, now held at the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory. Henri Fleisch also found an Emireh point amongst material from the site, which has now disappeared beneath buildings.\nBeirutV (\"Nahr Beirut\", Beirut River) was discovered by Dillenseger and said to be in an orchard of mulberry trees on the left bank of the river, near the river mouth, and to be close to the railway station and bridge to Tripoli. Levallois flints and bones and similar surface material were found amongst brecciated deposits. The area has now been built on.\nBeirutVI (Patriarchate) was a site discovered while building on the property of the Lebanese Evangelical School for Girls in the Patriarchate area of Beirut. It was notable for the discovery of a finely styled Canaanean blade javelin suggested to date to the early or middle Neolithic periods of Byblos and which is held in the school library.\nBeirutVII, the Rivoli Cinema and Byblos Cinema sites near the Bourj in the Rue el Arz area, are two sites discovered by Lorraine Copeland, Peter Wescombe, and Marina Hayek in 1964 and examined by Diana Kirkbride and Roger Saidah. One site was behind the parking lot of the Byblos Cinema and showed collapsed walls, pits, floors, charcoal, pottery and flints. The other, overlooking a cliff west of the Rivoli Cinema, was composed of three layers resting on limestone bedrock. Fragments of blades and broad flakes were recovered from the first layer of black soil, above which some Bronze Age pottery was recovered in a layer of grey soil. Pieces of Roman pottery and mosaics were found in the upper layer. Middle Bronze Age tombs were found in this area, and the ancient tell of Beirut is thought to be in the Bourj area.\nPhoenician period.\nThe Phoenician port of Beirut was located between Rue Foch and Rue Allenby on the north coast. The port or harbour was excavated and reported on several years ago and now lies buried under the city. Another suggested port or dry dock was claimed to have been discovered around to the west in 2011 by a team of Lebanese archaeologists from the Directorate General of Antiquities of Lebanese University. Controversy arose on 26 June 2012 when authorisation was given by Lebanese Minister of Culture Gaby Layoun for a private company called Venus Towers Real Estate Development Company to destroy the ruins (archaeological site BEY194) in the $500\u00a0million construction project of three skyscrapers and a garden behind Hotel Monroe in downtown Beirut. Two later reports by an international committee of archaeologists appointed by Layoun, including Hanz Curver, and an expert report by Ralph Pederson, a member of the institute of Nautical Archaeology and now teaching in Marburg, Germany, dismissed the claims that the trenches were a port, on various criteria. The exact function of site BEY194 may never be known, and the issue raised heated emotions and led to increased coverage on the subject of Lebanese heritage in the press.\nHellenistic period.\nIn 140BC, the Phoenician city was destroyed by Diodotus Tryphon during his conflict with Antiochus VII Sidetes for the throne of the Hellenistic Seleucid monarchy. Laodicea in Phoenicia was built upon the same site on a more conventional Hellenistic plan. Present-day Beirut overlies this ancient one, and little archaeology was carried out until after the civil war in 1991. The salvage excavations after 1993 have yielded new insights into the layout and history of this period of Beirut's history. Public architecture included several areas and buildings.\nMid-1st-century coins from Berytus bear the head of Tyche, goddess of fortune; on the reverse, the city's symbol appears: a dolphin entwines an anchor. This symbol was later taken up by the early printer Aldus Manutius in 15th century Venice. After a state of civil war and decline the Seleucid Empire faced, King Tigranes the Great of the Kingdom of Armenia conquered Beirut and placed it under effective Armenian control. However, after the Battle of Tigranocerta, Armenia forever lost their holdings in Syria and Beirut was conquered by Roman general Pompey.\nRoman period.\nLaodicea was conquered by Pompey in 64 BC and the name Berytus was restored to it. The city was assimilated into the Roman Empire, soldiers were sent there, and large building projects were undertaken. From the 1st century BC, the Bekaa Valley served as a source of grain for the Roman provinces of the Levant and even for Rome itself. Under Claudius, Berytus expanded to reach the Bekaa Valley and include Heliopolis (Baalbek). The city was settled by Roman colonists who promoted agriculture in the region.\nAs a result of this settlement, the city quickly became Romanised, and the city became the only mainly Latin-speaking area in the Syria-Phoenicia province. In 14BC, during the reign of Herod the Great, Berytus became a colony, one of four in the Syria-Phoenicia region and the only one with full Italian rights (\"\") exempting its citizens from imperial taxation. Beirut was considered the most Roman city in the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire. Furthermore, the veterans of two Roman legions were established in the city of Berytus by emperor Augustus: the 5th Macedonian and the 3rd Gallic Legions.\nBerytus's law school was widely known; two of Rome's most famous jurists, Papinian and Ulpian, were natives of Phoenicia and taught there under the Severan emperors. Ecclesiastical historian Sozomen studied at the law school in Beirut between 400 and 402. When Justinian assembled his \"Pandects\" in the 6th century, a large part of the corpus of laws was derived from these two jurists, and in AD533 Justinian recognised the school as one of the three official law schools of the empire.\nIn 551, a major earthquake struck Berytus, causing widespread damage. The earthquake reduced cities along the coast to ruins and killed many, 30,000 in Berytus alone by some measurements. As a result, the students of the law school were transferred to Sidon.\nSalvage excavations since 1993 have yielded new insights in the layout and history of Roman Berytus. Public architecture included several bath complexes, Colonnaded Streets, a circus and theatre; residential areas were excavated in the Garden of Forgiveness, Martyrs' Square and the Beirut Souks.\nMiddle Ages.\nBeirut was conquered by the Muslims in 635. As a trading centre of the eastern Mediterranean, Beirut was as important as Acre (in modern-day Israel) during the Middle Ages. From 1110 to 1291, the town and Lordship of Beirut was part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The city was taken by Saladin in 1187 and recaptured in 1197 by Henry I of Brabant as part of the German Crusade of 1197. John of Ibelin, known as the Old Lord of Beirut, was granted the lordship of the city in 1204. He rebuilt the city after its destruction by the Ayyubids and also built the House of Ibelin palace in Beirut.\nIn 1291 Beirut was captured and the Crusaders expelled by the Mamluk army of Sultan al-Ashraf Khalil.\nOttoman rule.\nUnder the Ottoman sultan Selim I (1512\u20131520), the Ottomans conquered Syria including present-day Lebanon. Beirut was controlled by local Druze emirs throughout the Ottoman period. One of them, Fakhr-al-Din II, fortified it early in the 17th century, but the Ottomans reclaimed it in 1763. With the help of Damascus, Beirut successfully broke Acre's monopoly on Syrian maritime trade and for a few years supplanted it as the main trading centre in the region. During the succeeding epoch of rebellion against Ottoman hegemony in Acre under Jezzar Pasha and Abdullah Pasha, Beirut declined to a small town with a population of about 10,000 and was an object of contention between the Ottomans, the local Druze, and the Mamluks. After Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt captured Acre in 1832, Beirut began its revival.\nAfter the Albanian fighter Tafil Buzi was interned and then pardoned by the Ottoman administration for his constant uprisings, he raised 3,000 Albanian mercenaries to fight in Lebanon; some of them became notorious shortly afterwards for having been responsible for the widespread disorders in Beirut.\nBy the second half of the nineteenth century, Beirut was developing close commercial and political ties with European imperial powers, particularly France. European interests in Lebanese silk and other export products transformed the city into a major port and commercial centre. This boom in cross-regional trade allowed certain groups, such as the Sursock family, to establish trade and manufacturing empires that further strengthened Beirut's position as a key partner in the interests of imperial dynasties. Meanwhile, Ottoman power in the region continued to decline. Sectarian and religious conflicts, power vacuums, and changes in the political dynamics of the region culminated in the 1860 Lebanon conflict. Beirut became a destination for Maronite Christian refugees fleeing from the worst areas of the fighting on Mount Lebanon and in Damascus. This in turn altered the religious composition of Beirut itself, sowing the seeds of future sectarian and religious troubles there and in greater Lebanon. However, Beirut was able to prosper in the meantime. This was again a product of European intervention, and also a general realisation amongst the city's residents that commerce, trade, and prosperity depended on domestic stability. After petitions by the local bourgeois, the governor of Syria Vilayet Mehmed Rashid Pasha authorised the establishment of the Beirut Municipal Council, the first municipality established in the Arab provinces of the Empire. The council was elected by an assembly of city notables and played an instrumental role governing the city through the following decades.\nVilayet of Beirut.\nIn 1888, Beirut was made capital of a vilayet (governorate) in Syria, including the sanjaks (prefectures) Latakia, Tripoli, Beirut, Acre and Bekaa. By this time, Beirut had grown into a cosmopolitan city and had close links with Europe and the United States. It also became a centre of missionary activity that spawned educational institutions such as the American University of Beirut. Provided with water from a British company and gas from a French one, silk exports to Europe came to dominate the local economy. After French engineers established a modern harbour in 1894 and a rail link across Lebanon to Damascus and Aleppo in 1907, much of the trade was carried by French ships to Marseille. French influence in the area soon exceeded that of any other European power. Though French infrastructure investments in the region were supportive, the local merchant elites were able to independently maintain economic power even after the end of the First World War. In contrast, although Beirut was not the only city to receive French attention in this time, it was able to leverage its critical position to its advantage over others (e.g. Damascus). The 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" reported a population consisting of 36,000 Muslims, 77,000 Christians, 2,500 Jews, 400 Druze and 4,100 foreigners. At the start of the 20th century, Salim Ali Salam was one of the most prominent figures in Beirut, holding numerous public positions including deputy from Beirut to the Ottoman parliament and President of the Municipality of Beirut. Given his modern way of life, the emergence of Salim Ali Salam as a public figure constituted a transformation in terms of the social development of the city.\nIn his 2003 book entitled \"Beirut and its Seven Families\", Yussef Bin Ahmad Bin Ali Al Husseini says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The seven families of Beirut are the families who bonded among each other and made the famous historical agreement with the governor of the Syrian Coast in 1351 to protect and defend the city of Beirut and its shores, and chase the invaders and stop their progress towards it.\nModern era.\nCapital of Lebanon.\nAfter World War I and the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, Beirut, along with the rest of Lebanon, was placed under the French Mandate. Lebanon achieved independence in 1943, and Beirut became the capital city. The city remained a regional intellectual capital, becoming a major tourist destination and a banking haven, especially for the Persian Gulf oil boom.\nBeirut International Airport was opened on 23 April 1954. It was renamed Rafic Hariri International Airport in 2005 following his assassination. Beirut serves its sole commercial airport as Lebanon's main gateway for flights.\nThis era of relative prosperity ended in 1975 when the Lebanese Civil War broke out throughout the country. During most of the war, Beirut was divided between the Muslim west part and the Christian east. The downtown area, previously the home of much of the city's commercial and cultural activity, became a no man's land known as the Green Line. Many inhabitants fled to other countries. About 60,000 people died in the first two years of the war (1975\u20131976), and much of the city was devastated. A particularly destructive period was the 1978 Syrian siege of Achrafiyeh, the main Christian district of Beirut. Syrian troops relentlessly shelled the eastern quarter of the city, but Christian militias defeated multiple attempts by Syria's elite forces to capture the strategic area in a three-month campaign later known as the Hundred Days' War.\nAnother destructive chapter was the 1982 Lebanon War, during which most of West Beirut was under siege by Israeli troops. In 1983, French and US barracks were bombed, killing 241 American servicemen, 58 French servicemen, six civilians and the two suicide bombers.\nBetween 1989 and 1990 parts on East Beirut were destroyed in fighting between Lebanese army units loyal to General Aoun and Samir Geagea's Maronite Christian Lebanese Forces with the Syrian Armed Forces-backed Elias Hrawi and Salim Al-Huss Lebanese army forces.\nSince the end of the war in 1990, the people of Lebanon have been rebuilding Beirut, whose urban agglomeration was mainly constituted during war time through an anarchic urban development stretching along the littoral corridor and its nearby heights. By the start of the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict the city had somewhat regained its status as a tourist, cultural and intellectual centre in the Middle East and as a centre for commerce, fashion, and media. The reconstruction of downtown Beirut has been largely driven by Solidere, a development company established in 1994 by Prime Minister Rafic Hariri. The city has hosted both the Asian Club Basketball Championship and the Asian Football Cup, and has hosted the Miss Europe pageant nine times: 1960\u20131964, 1999, 2001\u20132002, and 2016.\nRafic Hariri was assassinated in 2005 near the Saint George Hotel in Beirut. A month later about one million people gathered for an opposition rally in Beirut. The Cedar Revolution was the largest rally in Lebanon's history at that time. The last Syrian troops withdrew from Beirut on 26 April 2005, and the two countries established diplomatic relations on 15 October 2008.\nDuring the 2006 Lebanon War, Israeli bombardment caused damage in many parts of Beirut, especially the predominantly Shiite southern suburbs of Beirut. On 12 July 2006, the \"Operation Truthful Promise\" carried out by Hezbollah ended with 8 Israeli deaths and 6 injuries. In response, the IDF targeted Hezbollah's main media outlets. There were then artillery raids against targets in southern Lebanon, and the Israeli cabinet held Beirut responsible for the attacks. Then on 13 July 2006 Israel began implementing a naval and air blockade over Lebanon; during this blockade Israel bombed the runways at Beirut International Airport and the major Beirut-Damascus highway in Eastern Lebanon.\nIn May 2008, after the government decided to disband Hezbollah's communications network (a decision it later rescinded), violent clashes broke out briefly between government allies and opposition forces, before control of the city was handed over to the Lebanese Army. After this a national dialogue conference was held in Doha at the invitation of the Prince of Qatar. The conference agreed to appoint a new president of Lebanon and to establish a new national government involving all the political adversaries. As a result of the Doha Agreement, the opposition's barricades were dismantled and so were the opposition's protest camps in Martyrs' Square. On 19 October 2012, a car bomb killed eight people in the Beirut's neighbourhood of Achrafiyeh, including Brigadier General Wissam al-Hassan, chief of the Intelligence Bureau of the Internal Security Forces. In addition, 78 others were wounded in the bombing. It was the largest attack in the capital since 2008. On 27 December 2013, a car bomb exploded in the Central District killing at least five people, including the former Lebanese ambassador to the U.S. Mohamad Chatah, and wounding 71 others.\nIn the 12 November 2015 Beirut bombings, two suicide bombers detonated explosives outside a mosque and inside a bakery, killing 43 people and injuring 200. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant immediately claimed responsibility for the attacks.\nOn 4 August 2020, a massive explosion in the Port of Beirut resulted in the death of at least 203 people (with an additional three missing) and the wounding of more than 6,500. Foreigners from at least 22 countries were among the casualties. Furthermore, at least 108 Bangladeshis were injured in the blasts, making them the most affected foreign community. The cause of the blast is believed to be from government-confiscated and stored ammonium nitrate. As many as 300,000 people have been left homeless by the explosion. Protesters in Lebanon called on the government on 8 August 2020 for the end of the alleged negligence that resulted in the 4 August explosion. On 10 August 2020, as a result of the protests, Prime Minister Hassan Diab announced his resignation. Weeks later, a huge fire erupted in an oil and tyre warehouse in the port's duty-free zone, on 10 September 2020.\nGeography.\nBeirut sits on a peninsula extending westward into the Mediterranean Sea. It is flanked by the Lebanon Mountains and has taken on a triangular shape, largely influenced by its situation between and atop two hills: Al-Ashrafieh and Al-Musaytibah. The Beirut Governorate occupies , and the city's metropolitan area . The coast is rather diverse, with rocky beaches, sandy shores and cliffs situated beside one another.\nClimate.\nBeirut has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\", bordering on \"As\", Trewartha: \"Csal\") characterised by mild days and nights, as its coastal location allows temperatures to be moderated by the sea. Autumn and spring are warm, but short. Winter is mild and rainy; frost has never been recorded. Summer is prolonged, hot and humid. The prevailing wind during the afternoon and evening is from the west (onshore, blowing in from the Mediterranean); at night it reverses to offshore, blowing from the land out to sea.\nThe average annual rainfall is , with the large majority of it falling from October to April. Much of the autumn and spring rain falls in heavy downpours on a limited number of days, but in winter it is spread more evenly over many days. Summer receives very little rainfall, if any. Snow is rare, except in the mountainous eastern suburbs, where snowfall occurs due to the region's high altitudes. Hail (which can often be heavy) occurs a few times per year, mostly during winter.\nEnvironmental issues.\nLebanon, especially Beirut and its suburbs, suffered a massive garbage crisis, mainly from July 2015 up to March 2016. The issue began when authorities shut down the main landfill site originally used for Beirut's garbage south-east of the city and failed to provide any alternative solutions for months. As a result, garbage mounted in the streets in Greater Beirut and caused protests to erupt, which sometimes invoked police action. This problem was commonly blamed on the country's political situation. This garbage crisis birthed a movement called \"You Stink\" which was directed at the country's politicians. In March 2016, the government came up with a so-called temporary solution to establish two new landfills East and South of the city to store the garbage, while several municipalities across the country, in an unprecedented move, began recycling and managing waste more efficiently, building waste-management facilities and relying on themselves rather than the central government. Moreover, Beirut has a lack of green areas with just two main public gardens (sanayeh and horch Beirut). In fact, concrete roofs cover 80% of the capital area.\nQuarters and sectors.\nBeirut is divided into 12 quarters ():\nThese quarters are divided into 59 sectors ().\nBadaro is an edgy, bohemian style neighbourhood, within the green district of Beirut () which also include the Beirut Hippodrome and the Beirut Pine Forest and the French ambassador's Pine Residence. It is one of Beirut's favourite hip nightlife destination.\nTwo of the twelve official Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon are located in the southern suburbs of Beirut: Bourj el-Barajneh and Shatila. There is also one within its municipal boundaries: Mar Elias.\nSouthern suburban districts include Chiyah, Ghobeiry (Bir Hassan, Jnah and Ouzai are part of the Ghobeiry municipality), Haret Hreik, Burj al Barajneh, Laylake-Mreijeh, Hay al Sillum and Hadath. Eastern suburbs include Burj Hammoud, Sin el Fil, Dekwane and Mkalles. Hazmiyeh is also considered as an eastern suburb with its close proximity to the capital. Of the 15 unregistered or unofficial refugee camps, Sabra, which lies adjacent to Shatila, is also located in southern Beirut and was the scene of a massacre during the civil war.\nPeople in Lebanon often use different names for the same geographic locations, and few people rely on official, government-provided street numbers. Instead, historic and commercial landmarks are more commonly used.\nDemographics.\nNo population census has been taken in Lebanon since 1932, but estimates of Beirut's population range from as low as 938,940 through 1,303,129 to as high as 2,200,000 as part of Greater Beirut.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBeirut is one of the most cosmopolitan and religiously diverse cities of Lebanon and all of the Middle East. Before the civil war the neighbourhoods of Beirut were fairly heterogeneous, but they became largely segregated by religion since the conflict. East Beirut has a mainly Christian population with a small Muslim minority, whilst West Beirut has a Sunni Muslim majority with small minorities of Shia, Christians and Druze. Since the end of the civil war, East and West Beirut have begun to see an increase in Muslims and Christians moving into each half. Christians comprise 35% of Beirut's population, Muslims 63%, Druze 1%, and others 1%.\nFamily matters such as marriage, divorce and inheritance are still handled by the religious authorities representing a person's faith (the Ottoman \"millet\" system). Calls for civil marriage are unanimously rejected by the religious authorities, but civil marriages held in another country are recognised by Lebanese civil authorities.\nLanguages.\nLebanon does not hold a census survey; researchers at the American University of Beirut have found that trilingualism - between Lebanese Arabic, French and English - is common and normal among Beirut residents. The use of all three languages crosses between the city's different sects and geography, and are a common occurrence in both the more cosmopolitan and the more conservative neighbourhoods. The research found that French or English is disproportionately heard nearby Francophone or Anglophone, respectively, educational institutions. Some minorities in Beirut also speak Armenian, Aramaic, and Amharic.\nBeirut Central District.\nThe Beirut Central District (BCD) or \"Centre Ville\" is the name given to Beirut's historical and geographical core by \"Solidere\", the \"vibrant financial, commercial, and administrative hub of the country\". It is an area thousands of years old, traditionally a focus of business, finance, culture and leisure. Its reconstruction constitutes one of the most ambitious contemporary urban developments. Due to the devastation incurred on the city centre from the Lebanese Civil War, the Beirut Central District underwent a thorough reconstruction and development plan that gave it back its cultural and economic position in the region. Ever since, Beirut Central District has evolved into an integrated business and commercial environment and the focus of the financial activity in the region. That evolution was accompanied with the relocation of international organisations, reoccupation of civic and government buildings, expansion of financial activities, and establishment of regional headquarters and global firms in the city centre.\nAssessment of the demand for build-up space in the BCD has been done in reference to a number of macro-economic, demographic, and urban planning considerations at a time of marked need for new activity poles in the city, such as Souks, financial, cultural and recreational centres. The district's total area is , the majority of which is dedicated to residential space (). The Beirut Central District contains over 60 gardens, squares and open spaces. These spaces comprise landscaped streets, gardens, historical squares, pedestrian areas and sea promenades thus totalling to an area of of open spaces.\nThe central district is Lebanon's prime location for shopping, entertainment, and dining. There are over 100 cafes, restaurants, pubs and nightclubs open in the Beirut Central District, and over 350 retail outlets distributed along its streets and quarters. Beirut Souks alone are home to over 200 stores and a handful of restaurants and cafes. Beirut Souks are the Central District's old medieval market, recently renovated along with the original Hellenistic street grid that characterised the old souks and the area's historical landmarks along long vaulted shopping alleys and arcades. Solidere, the company responsible for the reconstruction and renovation of the district, organises music and entertainment events all throughout the year like the Beirut Marathon, F\u00eate de la Musique, Beirut Jazz Festival.\nHowever, the means of urban development in this particular area of the city was subject to much criticism and controversy. Rafic Hariri, who would later become prime minister, was the majority stakeholder of the company, which raises concerns of conflict of interest in the context of a public-private partnership. Many of the expropriations that have made the project possible have been made at undervalued land rates, and partly paid in company share. Strict urbanisation laws were put in order to oblige people to sell and not renovate themselves. Today, Solidere acts as a de facto municipality, thus this quarter of the city is effectively privatised. It is for example forbidden to ride bikes on Zeituna Bay, a marina where many restaurants are located, and these laws are enforced by private security guards not national or municipal police.\nThe project was also criticised for destroying some of the city's architectural and cultural heritage. \"Among the hundreds of destroyed buildings were \"the last Ottoman and medieval remains in Beirut\" wrote American University of Beirut professor Nabil Beyhum in the \"Journal The Beirut Review\" in 1992. Much of the damage had been done through unapproved demolitions in the 1980s and early 1990s, bringing down \"some of the capital's most significant buildings and structures,\" wrote UCLA professor Saree Makdisi in the journal, Critical Inquiry, in 1997.\". Moreover, many of the traditional privately owned shops in the Beirut Downtown were replaced by luxury outlets and high-end restaurants that only few people could afford. And most of public spaces promised by Solidere since the start of the reconstruction, such as \"The Garden of Forgiveness\", a central park, and an archaeological museum, remain unfinished until today, putting into question the actual benefit of the project to the population.\nThe actual success of the project has recently been in doubt, given that large quarters of the BCD are today empty, due to strong military presence, the Nejmeh Square where the parliament is located is most frequently completely deserted, and the businesses located there have mostly moved.\nEconomy.\nBeirut's economy is service-oriented with the main growth sectors being banking and tourism.\nBeirut became a banking hub by leveraging its position as a commercial port and cultural centre within the world economy. Under French mandate after World War I, France heavily invested in the city, reinforcing its role as a regional financial centre. The Open Door Policy facilitated foreign capital inflows, with French firms dominating investments and four of Beirut's five leading banks being French-owned by the 1920s, after which the city further solidified its status as a key financial link between the West and the decolonising Middle East.\nIn an area dominated by authoritarian or militarist regimes, the Lebanese capital was generally regarded as a haven of libertarianism, though a precarious one, as the Lebanese Civil War (1975\u20131990) and subsequent conflicts significantly altered the political landscape. With its seaport and airport\u2014coupled with Lebanon's free economic and foreign exchange system, solid gold-backed currency, banking-secrecy law, and favourable interest rates\u2014Beirut became an established banking centre for Arab wealth, much of which was invested in construction, commercial enterprise, and industry (mostly the manufacture of textiles and shoes, food processing, and printing). The economy of Beirut is diverse, including publishing, banking, trade and various industries. During that period, Beirut was the region's financial services centre. At the onset of the oil boom starting in the 1960s, Lebanon-based banks were the main recipients of the region's petrodollars.\nBeirut is the focal point of the Economy of Lebanon. The capital hosts the headquarters of Banque du Liban (Lebanon's central bank), the Beirut Stock Exchange, the head office of Lebanon's flag-carrier Middle East Airlines, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, the Union of Arab Banks, and the Union of Arab Stock Exchanges.\nBanking and finance.\nThe banking system is the backbone of the local economy with a balance sheet of $152\u00a0billion at the end of 2012, nearing 3.5 times the GDP estimated at $43\u00a0billion by the IMF. Bank deposits also increased in 2012 by 8% to 125\u00a0billion dollars, 82 percent of the sector's assets. \"Banks are still attracting deposits because the interest rates offered are higher than the ones in Europe and the United States\", says Marwan Mikhael, head of research at BLOM Bank.\nBeirut's foreign reserves were still close to an all-time high when they reached $32.5\u00a0billion in 2011 and analysts say that the Central Bank can cover nearly 80 percent of the Lebanese currency in the market. This means that the Central Bank can easily cope with any unforeseen crisis in the future thanks to the massive foreign currency reserves.\nThe Lebanese banking system is endowed with several characteristics that promote the role of Beirut as a regional financial centre, in terms of ensuring protection for foreign capital and earnings. The Lebanese currency is fully convertible and can be exchanged freely with any other currency. Moreover, no restrictions are put on the free flow of capital and earnings into and out of the Lebanese economy. The passing of the banking secrecy law on 3 September 1956, subjected all banks established in Lebanon as well as foreign banks' branches to the \"secret of the profession\". Both article 16 of law No. 282 dated 30 December 1993 and article 12 of decree No. 5451 dated 26 August 1994, offer exemptions from income tax on all interest and revenues earned on all types of accounts opened in Lebanese banks. On the first of April 1975, decree No. 29 established a free banking zone by granting the Lebanese government the right to exempt non-residents' deposits and liabilities in foreign currency from: the income tax on interest earned, the required reserves imposed by the Banque Du Liban by virtue of article 76 of the Code of Money and Credit, the premium of deposit guarantee imposed on bank deposits to the profit of the National Deposit Guarantee Institution.\nTourism.\nThe tourism industry in Beirut has been historically important to the local economy and remains to this day to be a major source of revenue for the city, and Lebanon in general. Before the Lebanese Civil War, Beirut was widely regarded as the \"Paris of the Middle East\", and also \"Switzerland of the Middle East\", often cited as a financial and business hub where visitors could experience the Levantine Mediterranean culture. Beirut's diverse atmosphere and ancient history make it an important destination which is slowly rebuilding itself after continued turmoil. However, in recent times, certain countries, such as the United States, have frequently placed Lebanon, and Beirut in particular, on their travel warnings lists due to the many car bombings and orchestrated acts of political violence.\nAccording to the 2012 tourist statistics, 34% of the tourists in Beirut came from states within the Arab League, 33% came from European countries (mainly France, Germany, and Britain), and 16% from the Americas (about half of which are from the United States).\nThe largely pedestrianised Beirut Central District is the core of the Beirut tourism scene. The district is a cluster of stone-fa\u00e7ade buildings lining arcaded streets and radial alleyways. The architecture of the area is a mix of French Architecture and Venetian Gothic architecture mixed with Arabesque and Ottoman Architecture. The district contains numerous old mosques and crusader churches, as well as uncovered remnants and ruins of the Roman era. The District contains dozens of restaurants, cafes and pubs, as well as a wide range of shopping stores mainly in Beirut Souks. High-rise hotels and towers line the district's New Waterfront, marina and seaside promenade.\nAnother popular tourist destination in Beirut is the Corniche Beirut, a pedestrian promenade that encircles the capital's seafront from the Saint George Bay in the north all the way to Avenue de Paris and Avenue General de Gaulle south of the city. The corniche reaches its maximum height above sea level at Raouch\u00e9, a high-rise residential neighbourhood rising over a giant white limestone cliff and facing the recognisable off-shore Raouch\u00e9 Rocks.\nBadaro is one of Beirut's most appealing neighbourhoods, a lovely place to stroll during daytime and a destination for going out in the evening. Badaro is within Beirut's green district with a public park (The Beirut Pine forest) and a hippodrome. It is a neighbourhood on a very human scale with small groceries around every corner. The neighbourhood residents, a mix of old impoverished Christian bourgeoisie, bohemian style people in their 30s and well-established urban professionals, are loyal to local bakery and pastry shops. Because of the blossoming caf\u00e9 and bar scene it has become lately a hip destination for Beirut's young and restless but old Beirutis remember that Badaro was already Beirut's version of the Village in the swinging sixties. Groceries and eateries can be found on almost every street of the area. There are dozens of restaurants, pubs and footpath caf\u00e9s of virtually every style. Badaro \"Village\" thrives on local residents, day-trippers and hipsters from all over Beirut, office employees and many expatriates.\nHamra Street is a long cobblestone street connecting the Beirut Central District with the coastal Raouche area. The street is a large concentration of shopping stores, boutiques, restaurants, banks, street vendors, footpath cafes, newspaper kiosks, and a booming nightlife spurred by students from the neighbouring American University of Beirut. The AUB campus is another popular visitor destination, composed of a cluster of 19th century red-roofed buildings dispersed on a wooded hillside overlooking the Mediterranean.\nGemmayzeh is Beirut's artistic bohemian quarter, full of narrow streets and historic buildings from the French era. It is located East of the Beirut Central District, bordering the Saifi Village. The neighbourhood is well known for its trendy bars and pubs, cafes, restaurants and lounges; most are directly located on Rue Gouraud, the main thoroughfare that cuts through the middle of the district. Travel + Leisure magazine called Gemmayzeh \"SoHo by the Sea,\" due to its colourful and chic caf\u00e9s amid 1950s apartment buildings and hole-in-the-wall shops. However, Gemmayzeh received the most damage by the Beirut explosion in 2020.\nBeirut is a destination for tourists from both the Arab world and West. In \"Travel + Leisure\" magazine's World Best Awards 2006, it was ranked the 9th best city in the world. That list was voted upon shortly before the 2006 Lebanon War broke out, but in 2008 \"The Guardian\" listed Beirut as one of its top ten cities in the world. \"The New York Times\" ranked it at number one on its \"44 places to go\" list of 2009. 2011 MasterCard Index revealed that Beirut had the second-highest visitor spending levels in the Middle East and Africa, totalling $6.5\u00a0billion. Beirut was chosen in 2012 by Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveller as the best city in the Middle East, beating Tel Aviv and Dubai.\nMany of the tourists are returning Lebanese expatriates, but many are from Western countries. Approximately 3\u00a0million visitors visited in 2010; the previous record was 1.4\u00a0million in 1974.\nLike other forms of tourism, medical tourism in Lebanon is on the rise recently. Although visitors from neighbouring Arab nations make up the bulk of medical tourism patients here due to its proximity, Beirut is strongly trying to woo more Southern Europeans, Asians and North Americans to its land. Its Agency for Investment Development in Lebanon reports that growth in the medical tourism industry is growing by up to 30% a year since 2009. The country's tourism ministry is working closely with the medical sector and top-class hotels to create an organised, quality medical destination. Major hotel and spa chains work with local clinics, travel agencies and the tourism ministry to create comprehensive healthcare and recuperation packages for foreign visitors. The government is highly involved in this industry and strives to make the process as easy as possible.\nCosmetic surgery is a major component of medical tourism in Lebanon. Most of the foreign patients come for routine operations like plastic surgery, dental or eye surgery, and Beirut's hospitals are also capable of performing specialised procedures such as internal bypass surgery and other technical treatments. Its top clinics and hospitals like Sahel General are equipped to handle the full range of surgical procedures. Beirut-based Clemenceau Medical Center (CMC), affiliated with Johns Hopkins International, was ranked one of the world's top ten best hospitals for medical tourism in 2012.\nGovernment.\nBeirut is the capital of Lebanon and its seat of government. The Lebanese Parliament, all the Ministries and most of the public administrations, embassies and consulates are there. Beirut Governorate is one of eight \"mohafazat\" (plural of \"mohafazah\", or governorate).\nInternational organisations.\nThe city is home to numerous international organisations. The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) is headquartered in downtown Beirut, The Arab Air Carriers' Organization (AACO), the Union of Arab Banks and the Union of Arab Stock Exchanges and the World youth alliance are also headquartered in the city. The International Labour Organization (ILO) and UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) both have regional offices in Beirut covering the Arab world.\nEducation.\nHigher education throughout Lebanon is provided by universities, colleges and technical and vocational institutes. The Directorate General of Higher Education is responsible for managing universities, colleges, and institutes in Beirut and nationwide.\nThe American University of Beirut (AUB) and Universit\u00e9 Saint-Joseph (USJ) are the oldest English-language and French-language universities in the country, respectively. AUB was founded in 1866, and USJ in 1875. The Lebanese University is the only public institution for higher education in Beirut. Beirut is also home to Lebanese American University (LAU), American University of Science and Technology (AUST), University of Balamand, \u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure des Affaires (ESA), Beirut Arab University (BAU), Haigazian University (HU), Lebanese International University (LIU), Notre Dame University \u2013 Louaize (NDU), and Universit\u00e9 La Sagesse (ULS).\nAmong the private secondary schools in Beirut are Lycee Abdel Kader, Grand Lyc\u00e9e Franco-Libanais, Lyc\u00e9e Franco-Libanais Verdun, American Community School, International College, Coll\u00e8ge Louise Wegmann, Rawdah High School, Saint Mary's Orthodox College, Coll\u00e8ge Notre Dame de Nazareth, Coll\u00e8ge du Sacr\u00e9-Coeur Gemmayz\u00e9, Coll\u00e8ge Protestant Fran\u00e7ais, Armenian Evangelical Central High School, German School of Beirut, and the Armenian Hamazkayin Arslanian College.\nTransportation.\nThe city's renovated airport is the Rafic Hariri International Airport, located in the southern suburbs. The Port of Beirut, one of the largest and most commercial in the eastern Mediterranean, is another port of entry. As a final destination, Lebanon can be reached by road from Damascus via the Beqaa valley in the east.\nBeirut has frequent bus connections to other cities in Lebanon and major cities in Syria such as Homs and its capital Damascus. There are a number of different companies providing public transport in Lebanon. The publicly owned buses are managed by Office des Chemins de Fer et des Transports en Commun (OCFTC\u00a0\u2013 \"Railway and Public Transportation Authority\"). Buses for northern destinations and Syria leave from Charles Helou Station.\nThe ministry of transport and public works purchased an extra 250 intra and inter-buses in 2012 to better serve regions outside the capital as well as congestion-choked Beirut, hoping to lessen the use of private cars.\nBeirut has also private buses that are provided by the Lebanese Commuting Company.\nIn 2017, Beirut introduced a bike sharing service in certain areas of the city.\nIn 2024, Ahdab Commuting and Trading Company (ACTC), alongside the Ministry of Transport, reintroduced a proper public bus system with an appropriate network of lanes using the 50 buses donated by France in 2022. \nThe network connects most areas of Beirut through 7 major lines (B1-7), as well as connecting Beirut to other major cities like Tripoli and Saida through 4 lines (ML1-4). These lines however do not replace the existing service microbuses, they complement them.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Beirut has evolved under the influence of many different peoples and civilisations, such as Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Ottoman Turks and French. The law school in downtown Beirut was one of the world's earliest and was considered to be a leading centre of legal studies in the Eastern Roman Empire.\nBeirut hosted the Francophonie and Arab League summits in 2002, and in 2007 it hosted the ceremony for the Prix Albert Londres, which rewards outstanding francophone journalists every year. The city also hosted the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009. In the same year, it was proclaimed World Book Capital by UNESCO.\nBeirut has also been called the \"party capital of the Arab world\". Rue Monnot has an international reputation among clubbers, and Rue Gouraud in districts such as Gemmayze and Mar Mikhael have emerged as new hotspots for bar patrons and clubbers, as well as \"The Alleyway\" in Hamra Street.\nMuseums.\nThe National Museum of Beirut is the principal museum of archaeology in Lebanon. It has about 1,300 exhibits ranging in date from prehistoric times to the medieval Mamluk period. The Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut is the third-oldest museum in the Middle East, exhibiting a wide range of artefacts from Lebanon and neighbouring countries. Sursock Museum was built by the illustrious Sursock family at the end of the 19th century as a private villa for Nicolas Sursock, and then donated to the Lebanese state upon his death. It now houses Beirut's most influential and popular art museum. The permanent collection shows a set of Japanese engravings, numerous works of Islamic art and classic Italian paintings, while temporary exhibitions are also shown throughout the year. The Robert Mouawad Private Museum near Beirut's Grand Serail exhibits Henri Pharaon's private collection of archaeology and antiques.\nPlanet Discovery is a children's science museum with interactive experiments, exhibitions, performances, workshops and awareness competitions. The Saint Joseph University opened the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory in 2000, the first prehistory museum in the Arabic Middle East, displaying bones, stone tools and neolithic pottery collected by Jesuits.\nIn October 2013, Mim Museum, a private mineral museum, opened its doors to the public. It has on display some 2000 minerals from more than 70 countries. Mim museum's collection is considered to be one of the world's paramount private collection for the variety and quality of its minerals. A didactic circuit, accompanied by screens showing films and scientific applications of mineralogy, will reveal a world of unsuspected marvels\u2014priceless both from an aesthetic and scientific point of view. \"Mimodactylus libanensis\" \"mimo\", the fossil of a Pterodactyl, is featured in a special wing. This one-of-a-kind complete specimen in the Middle-East was found in Lebanon. It is promoted by means of state-of-the-art modern techniques: a hologram, an auto-stereoscopic movie, a full-scale reconstitution and a game \"fly with mimo\" \u2013 an entertainment that delights children and adults. Moreover, Mim hosts a thematic exhibition of 200 marine fossils. \"Fish'n'Stone\" was organised with the collaboration of M\u00e9moire du Temps. Known throughout the world, those fossils were quarried in the Lebanese mountains. The history of the fossil formation is shown through an animation that submerges you in the marine life \u2013 a time capsule that takes you in a journey to some 100\u00a0million of years ago.\nTourism.\nBeirut was named the top place to visit by \"The New York Times\" in 2009, and as one of the ten liveliest cities in the world by Lonely Planet in the same year. According to a 2010 study by the American global consulting firm Mercer comparing high-end items such as upscale residential areas and entertainment venues, Beirut was ranked as the 4th most expensive city in the Middle East and 15th among the Upper Middle Income Countries included in the survey. Beirut came in first place regionally and 10th place internationally in a 2010 study by \"EuroCost International\" about the rental markets for high quality housing. Beirut is an international hub of highly active and diverse nightlife with bars, dance bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight.\nThe 2011 MasterCard Index revealed that Beirut had the second-highest visitor spending levels in the Middle East and Africa, totalling $6.5\u00a0billion. Beirut was chosen in 2012 by Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveller as the best city in the Middle East. In 2013, Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveller ranked Beirut in the top 20 best cities in the world.\nOn 7 December 2014, Beirut was selected to be among the New 7 Wonders of Cities, along with Doha, Durban, La Paz, Havana, Kuala Lumpur and Vigan. The campaign was held by New 7 Wonders.\nIn 2016, Yahoo listed Beirut as the best international city for food. Travel and Leisure ranked Beirut in the top 15 of the world's best cities.\nIt was voted the must-visit city for the year 2019 by World Tourists.\nDue to anti-government protests as of October 2019 followed by dire economic situation and travel bans due to coronavirus outbreak, the tourism sector was badly affected resulting in decrease of number of tourists.\nMedia.\nA large number of TV networks, radio stations, newspaper, and book publishing industries run operations and therefore are headquartered in Beirut.\nTelevision stations that are headquartered in Beirut include state run T\u00e9l\u00e9 Liban, in addition to the private networks LBC, \u00d3TV (Orange TV), MTV Lebanon, Tele Lumiere (Catholic TV), Future TV, New TV, NBN, and ANB among others. Some of these networks are linked to various Lebanese political parties.\nOther channels that can be seen here include Saudi TV 1 on 33 UHF as well as MBC 1, MBC 4, MBC Action, Al Jazeera, Rotana, OSN First, OSN News, Al Yawm and Arabic Series Channel on 45 UHF.\nRadio Stations Mix FM Lebanon, Virgin Radio Lebanon, Radio One Lebanon, Sawt el Ghad, RLL, Jaras Scoop, and NRJ Lebanon are based in Beirut and run operations from here.\nWhile newspapers that headquartered here include Daily Beirut, An-Nahar, Al Joumhouria, As-Safir, Al Mustaqbal, Al-Akhbar, Al-Balad, Ad-Diyar, Al Anwar, Al Sharq, newspapers and magazines that are published in French and English are also available, and these include L'Orient Le Jour (since 1970), La Revue Du Liban, Al Balad-French Version, Al Intiqad, Magazine L'Hebdo, Le Commerce du Levant, Executive Magazine (weekly), Beirut Online, Beirut Times (weekly) and Monday Morning.\nSports.\nThe Lebanese capital hosted the Mediterranean Games in 1959, FIBA Asia Champions Cup in 1999, 2000, 2012, the AFC Asian Cup in 2000, and the FIBA Asia Cup in 2010. Beirut was the host city for the 6th Annual Games of the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009. Beirut also hosted the Pan Arab Games in 1957 and 1997. In 2017, Beirut also hosted the 2017 FIBA Asia Cup.\nBeirut, with Sidon and Tripoli, hosted the 2000 AFC Asian Cup. There are two stadiums in the city, Camille Chamoun Sports City Stadium and Beirut Municipal Stadium.\nBasketball is the most popular sport in Lebanon. Currently, 6 Beirut teams play in the Lebanese Basketball League: Sagesse, Al Riyadi Beirut, Homenetmen Beirut, Hoops Club, Beirut Club and Dynamo Beirut.\nOther sports events in Beirut include the annual Beirut Marathon, hip ball, weekly horse racing at the Beirut Hippodrome, and golf and tennis tournaments that take place at Golf Club of Lebanon. Three out of the five teams in the Lebanese rugby league championship are based in Beirut. Lebanon men's national ice hockey team plays out of Montreal, in Canada.\nArt and fashion.\nThere are hundreds of art galleries in Beirut and its suburbs. Every year, hundreds of fine art students graduate from universities and institutions. Artist workshops exist all over Lebanon. The inauguration of the Beirut Art Center, a non-profit association, space and platform dedicated to contemporary art in Lebanon, in the Mkalles suburb of Beirut added to the number of exhibition spaces available in the city, with a screening and performance room, mediatheque, book store, caf\u00e9 and terrace. Adjacent to the latter is the Ashkal Alwan Home Workspace, a venue hosting cultural events and educational programmes.\nA number of international fashion designers have displayed their work in big fashion shows. Most major fashion labels have shops in Beirut's shopping districts, and the city is home to a number of local fashion designers, some of whom like Elie Saab, Yara Farhat, Reem Acra, Zuhair Murad, Georges Chakra, Georges Hobeika, Jean Faris, Nicolas Jebran, Rabih Kayrouz and Abed Mahfouz have achieved international fame.\nBeirut is also the home for a dynamic street art scene that has developed after the Lebanese Civil War, one of the most notable street artists is Yazan Halwani who is known to produce the largest murals on the walls of Beirut in areas such as Gemmayzeh, Hamra, Verdun and Achrafieh.\nBeirut is also international artists' concert tour stop city. Notable artists that have included Beirut on their concert tours include Shakira, Mariah Carey, Enrique Iglesias, Andrea Bocelli, Pitbull, Engelbert Humperdinck, and Scorpions.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nBeirut is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37430", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37430", "title": "Dmitrii Mendeleev", "text": ""}
{"id": "37431", "revid": "50236370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37431", "title": "Solvent", "text": "Substance dissolving a solute resulting in a solution\nA solvent (from the Latin \"solv\u014d\", \"loosen, untie, solve\") is a substance that dissolves a solute, resulting in a solution. A solvent is usually a liquid but can also be a solid, a gas, or a supercritical fluid. Water is a solvent for polar molecules, and the most common solvent used by living things; all the ions and proteins in a cell are dissolved in water within the cell.\nMajor uses of solvents are in paints, paint removers, inks, and dry cleaning. Specific uses for organic solvents are in dry cleaning (e.g. tetrachloroethylene); as paint thinners (toluene, turpentine); as nail polish removers and solvents of glue (acetone, methyl acetate, ethyl acetate); in spot removers (hexane, petrol ether); in detergents (citrus terpenes); and in perfumes (ethanol). Solvents find various applications in chemical, pharmaceutical, oil, and gas industries, including in chemical syntheses and purification processes\nSome petrochemical solvents are highly toxic and emit volatile organic compounds. Biobased solvents are usually more expensive, but ideally less toxic and biodegradable. Biogenic raw materials usable for solvent production are for example lignocellulose, starch and sucrose, but also waste and byproducts from other industries (such as terpenes, vegetable oils and animal fats).\nSolutions and solvation.\nWhen one substance is dissolved into another, a solution is formed. This is opposed to the situation when the compounds are insoluble like sand in water. In a solution, all of the ingredients are uniformly distributed at a molecular level and no residue remains. A solvent-solute mixture consists of a single phase with all solute molecules occurring as \"solvates\" (solvent-solute complexes), as opposed to separate continuous phases as in suspensions, emulsions and other types of non-solution mixtures. The ability of one compound to be dissolved in another is known as solubility; if this occurs in all proportions, it is called miscible.\nIn addition to mixing, the substances in a solution interact with each other at the molecular level. When something is dissolved, molecules of the solvent arrange around molecules of the solute. Heat transfer is involved and entropy is increased making the solution more thermodynamically stable than the solute and solvent separately. This arrangement is mediated by the respective chemical properties of the solvent and solute, such as hydrogen bonding, dipole moment and polarizability. Solvation does not cause a chemical reaction or chemical configuration changes in the solute. However, solvation resembles a coordination complex formation reaction, often with considerable energetics (heat of solvation and entropy of solvation) and is thus far from a neutral process.\nWhen one substance dissolves into another, a solution is formed. A solution is a homogeneous mixture consisting of a solute dissolved into a solvent. The solute is the substance that is being dissolved, while the solvent is the dissolving medium. Solutions can be formed with many different types and forms of solutes and solvents.\nSolvent classifications.\nSolvents can be broadly classified into two categories: \"polar\" and \"non-polar\". A special case is elemental mercury, whose solutions are known as amalgams; also, other metal solutions exist which are liquid at room temperature.\nGenerally, the dielectric constant of the solvent provides a rough measure of a solvent's polarity. The strong polarity of water is indicated by its high dielectric constant of 88 (at 0\u00a0\u00b0C). Solvents with a dielectric constant of less than 15 are generally considered to be nonpolar.\nThe dielectric constant measures the solvent's tendency to partly cancel the field strength of the electric field of a charged particle immersed in it. This reduction is then compared to the field strength of the charged particle in a vacuum. Heuristically, the dielectric constant of a solvent can be thought of as its ability to reduce the solute's effective internal charge. Generally, the dielectric constant of a solvent is an acceptable predictor of the solvent's ability to dissolve common ionic compounds, such as salts.\nOther polarity scales.\nDielectric constants are not the only measure of polarity. Because solvents are used by chemists to carry out chemical reactions or observe chemical and biological phenomena, more specific measures of polarity are required. Most of these measures are sensitive to chemical structure.\nThe \"Grunwald\u2013Winstein mY scale\" measures polarity in terms of solvent influence on buildup of positive charge of a solute during a chemical reaction.\n\"Kosower's Z scale\" measures polarity in terms of the influence of the solvent on UV-absorption maxima of a salt, usually pyridinium iodide or the pyridinium zwitterion.\n\"Donor number and donor acceptor scale\" measures polarity in terms of how a solvent interacts with specific substances, like a strong Lewis acid or a strong Lewis base.\nThe \"Hildebrand parameter\" is the square root of cohesive energy density. It can be used with nonpolar compounds, but cannot accommodate complex chemistry.\nReichardt's dye, a solvatochromic dye that changes color in response to polarity, gives a scale of \"ET\"(30) values. \"ET\" is the transition energy between the ground state and the lowest excited state in kcal/mol, and (30) identifies the dye. Another, roughly correlated scale (\"ET\"(33)) can be defined with Nile red.\nGregory's solvent \u03f8 parameter is a quantum chemically derived charge density parameter. This parameter seems to reproduce many of the experimental solvent parameters (especially the donor and acceptor numbers) using this charge decomposition analysis approach, with an electrostatic basis. The \u03f8 parameter was originally developed to quantify and explain the Hofmeister series by quantifying polyatomic ions and the monatomic ions in a united manner.\nThe polarity, dipole moment, polarizability and hydrogen bonding of a solvent determines what type of compounds it is able to dissolve and with what other solvents or liquid compounds it is miscible. Generally, polar solvents dissolve polar compounds best and non-polar solvents dissolve non-polar compounds best; hence \"like dissolves like\". Strongly polar compounds like sugars (e.g. sucrose) or ionic compounds, like inorganic salts (e.g. table salt) dissolve only in very polar solvents like water, while strongly non-polar compounds like oils or waxes dissolve only in very non-polar organic solvents like hexane. Similarly, water and hexane (or vinegar and vegetable oil) are not miscible with each other and will quickly separate into two layers even after being shaken well.\nPolarity can be separated to different contributions. For example, the Kamlet-Taft parameters are dipolarity/polarizability (\"\u03c0*\"), hydrogen-bonding acidity (\"\u03b1\") and hydrogen-bonding basicity (\"\u03b2\"). These can be calculated from the wavelength shifts of 3\u20136 different solvatochromic dyes in the solvent, usually including Reichardt's dye, nitroaniline and diethylnitroaniline. Another option, Hansen solubility parameters, separates the cohesive energy density into dispersion, polar, and hydrogen bonding contributions.\nPolar protic and polar aprotic.\nSolvents with a dielectric constant (more accurately, relative static permittivity) greater than 15 (i.e. polar or polarizable) can be further divided into protic and aprotic. Protic solvents, such as water, solvate anions (negatively charged solutes) strongly via hydrogen bonding. Polar aprotic solvents, such as acetone or dichloromethane, tend to have large dipole moments (separation of partial positive and partial negative charges within the same molecule) and solvate positively charged species via their negative dipole. In chemical reactions the use of polar protic solvents favors the SN1 reaction mechanism, while polar aprotic solvents favor the SN2 reaction mechanism. These polar solvents are capable of forming hydrogen bonds with water to dissolve in water whereas non-polar solvents are not capable of strong hydrogen bonds.\nPhysical properties.\nProperties table of common solvents.\nThe solvents are grouped into nonpolar, polar aprotic, and polar protic solvents, with each group ordered by increasing polarity. The properties of solvents which exceed those of water are bolded.\nThe ACS Green Chemistry Institute maintains a tool for the selection of solvents based on a principal component analysis of solvent properties.\nHansen solubility parameter values.\nThe Hansen solubility parameter (HSP) values are based on dispersion bonds (\u03b4D), polar bonds (\u03b4P) and hydrogen bonds (\u03b4H). These contain information about the inter-molecular interactions with other solvents and also with polymers, pigments, nanoparticles, etc. This allows for rational formulations knowing, for example, that there is a good HSP match between a solvent and a polymer. Rational substitutions can also be made for \"good\" solvents (effective at dissolving the solute) that are \"bad\" (expensive or hazardous to health or the environment). The following table shows that the intuitions from \"non-polar\", \"polar aprotic\" and \"polar protic\" are put numerically \u2013 the \"polar\" molecules have higher levels of \u03b4P and the protic solvents have higher levels of \u03b4H. Because numerical values are used, comparisons can be made rationally by comparing numbers. For example, acetonitrile is much more polar than acetone but exhibits slightly less hydrogen bonding.\nIf, for environmental or other reasons, a solvent or solvent blend is required to replace another of equivalent solvency, the substitution can be made on the basis of the Hansen solubility parameters of each. The values for mixtures are taken as the weighted averages of the values for the neat solvents. This can be calculated by trial-and-error, a spreadsheet of values, or HSP software. A 1:1 mixture of toluene and 1,4 dioxane has \u03b4D, \u03b4P and \u03b4H values of 17.8, 1.6 and 5.5, comparable to those of chloroform at 17.8, 3.1 and 5.7 respectively. Because of the health hazards associated with toluene itself, other mixtures of solvents may be found using a full HSP dataset.\nBoiling point.\nThe boiling point is an important property because it determines the speed of evaporation. Small amounts of low-boiling-point solvents like diethyl ether, dichloromethane, or acetone will evaporate in seconds at room temperature, while high-boiling-point solvents like water or dimethyl sulfoxide need higher temperatures, an air flow, or the application of vacuum for fast evaporation.\nDensity.\nMost organic solvents have a lower density than water, which means they are lighter than and will form a layer on top of water. Important exceptions are most of the halogenated solvents like dichloromethane or chloroform will sink to the bottom of a container, leaving water as the top layer. This is crucial to remember when partitioning compounds between solvents and water in a separatory funnel during chemical syntheses.\nOften, specific gravity is cited in place of density. Specific gravity is defined as the density of the solvent divided by the density of water at the same temperature. As such, specific gravity is a unitless value. It readily communicates whether a water-insoluble solvent will float (SG &lt; 1.0) or sink (SG &gt; 1.0) when mixed with water.\nMulticomponent solvents.\nMulticomponent solvents appeared after World War II in the USSR, and continue to be used and produced in the post-Soviet states. These solvents may have one or more applications, but they are not universal preparations.\nSafety.\nFire.\nMost organic solvents are flammable or highly flammable, depending on their volatility. Exceptions are some chlorinated solvents like dichloromethane and chloroform. Mixtures of solvent vapors and air can explode. Solvent vapors are heavier than air; they will sink to the bottom and can travel large distances nearly undiluted. Solvent vapors can also be found in supposedly empty drums and cans, posing a flash fire hazard; hence empty containers of volatile solvents should be stored open and upside down.\nBoth diethyl ether and carbon disulfide have exceptionally low autoignition temperatures which increase greatly the fire risk associated with these solvents. The autoignition temperature of carbon disulfide is below 100\u00a0\u00b0C (212\u00a0\u00b0F), so objects such as steam pipes, light bulbs, hotplates, and recently extinguished bunsen burners are able to ignite its vapors.\nIn addition some solvents, such as methanol, can burn with a very hot flame which can be nearly invisible under some lighting conditions. This can delay or prevent the timely recognition of a dangerous fire, until flames spread to other materials.\nExplosive peroxide formation.\nEthers like diethyl ether and tetrahydrofuran (THF) can form highly explosive organic peroxides upon exposure to oxygen and light. THF is normally more likely to form such peroxides than diethyl ether. One of the most susceptible solvents is diisopropyl ether, but all ethers are considered to be potential peroxide sources.\nThe heteroatom (oxygen) stabilizes the formation of a free radical which is formed by the abstraction of a hydrogen atom by another free radical. The carbon-centered free radical thus formed is able to react with an oxygen molecule to form a peroxide compound. The process of peroxide formation is greatly accelerated by exposure to even low levels of light, but can proceed slowly even in dark conditions.\nUnless a desiccant is used which can destroy the peroxides, they will concentrate during distillation, due to their higher boiling point. When sufficient peroxides have formed, they can form a crystalline, shock-sensitive solid precipitate at the mouth of a container or bottle. Minor mechanical disturbances, such as scraping the inside of a vessel, the dislodging of a deposit, or merely twisting the cap may provide sufficient energy for the peroxide to detonate or explode violently. \nPeroxide formation is not a significant problem when fresh solvents are used up quickly; they are more of a problem in laboratories which may take years to finish a single bottle. Low-volume users should acquire only small amounts of peroxide-prone solvents, and dispose of old solvents on a regular periodic schedule.\nTo avoid explosive peroxide formation, ethers should be stored in an airtight container, away from light, because both light and air can encourage peroxide formation.\nA number of tests can be used to detect the presence of a peroxide in an ether; one is to use a combination of iron(II) sulfate and potassium thiocyanate. The peroxide is able to oxidize the Fe2+ ion to an Fe3+ ion, which then forms a deep-red coordination complex with the thiocyanate.\nPeroxides may be removed by washing with acidic iron(II) sulfate, filtering through alumina, or distilling from sodium/benzophenone. Alumina degrades the peroxides but some could remain intact in it, therefore it must be disposed of properly. The advantage of using sodium/benzophenone is that moisture and oxygen are removed as well.\nHealth effects.\nGeneral health hazards associated with solvent exposure include toxicity to the nervous system, reproductive damage, liver and kidney damage, respiratory impairment, cancer, hearing loss, and dermatitis.\nAcute exposure.\nMany solvents can lead to a sudden loss of consciousness if inhaled in large amounts. Solvents like diethyl ether and chloroform have been used in medicine as anesthetics, sedatives, and hypnotics for a long time. Many solvents (e.g. from gasoline or solvent-based glues) are abused recreationally in glue sniffing, often with harmful long-term health effects such as neurotoxicity or cancer. Fraudulent substitution of 1,5-pentanediol by the psychoactive 1,4-butanediol by a subcontractor caused the Bindeez product recall.\nEthanol (grain alcohol) is a widely used and abused psychoactive drug. If ingested, the so-called \"toxic alcohols\" (other than ethanol) such as methanol, 1-propanol, and ethylene glycol metabolize into toxic aldehydes and acids, which cause potentially fatal metabolic acidosis. The commonly available alcohol solvent methanol can cause permanent blindness or death if ingested. The solvent 2-butoxyethanol, used in fracking fluids, can cause hypotension and metabolic acidosis.\nChronic exposure.\nChronic solvent exposures are often caused by the inhalation of solvent vapors, or the ingestion of diluted solvents, repeated over the course of an extended period.\nSome solvents can damage internal organs like the liver, the kidneys, the nervous system, or the brain. The cumulative brain effects of long-term or repeated exposure to some solvents is called chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy (CSE).\nChronic exposure to organic solvents in the work environment can produce a range of adverse neuropsychiatric effects. For example, occupational exposure to organic solvents has been associated with higher numbers of painters suffering from alcoholism. Ethanol has a synergistic effect when taken in combination with many solvents; for instance, a combination of toluene/benzene and ethanol causes greater nausea/vomiting than either substance alone.\nSome organic solvents are known or suspected to be cataractogenic. A mixture of aromatic hydrocarbons, aliphatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, esters, ketones, and terpenes were found to greatly increase the risk of developing cataracts in the lens of the eye.\nEnvironmental contamination.\nA major pathway of induced health effects arises from spills or leaks of solvents, especially chlorinated solvents, that reach the underlying soil. Since solvents readily migrate substantial distances, the creation of widespread soil contamination is not uncommon; this is particularly a health risk if aquifers are affected. Vapor intrusion can occur from sites with extensive subsurface solvent contamination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37432", "revid": "36170109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37432", "title": "Westminster", "text": "City in Central London, England\nWestminster is the main settlement of the City of Westminster in Central London, England. It extends from the River Thames to Oxford Street and has many famous landmarks, including the Palace of Westminster, Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, Westminster Cathedral, Trafalgar Square and much of the West End cultural centre including the entertainment precinct of West End theatre.\nThe name () originated from the informal description of the abbey church and royal peculiar of St Peter's (Westminster Abbey), west of the City of London (until the English Reformation there was also an Eastminster abbey, on the other side of the City of London, in the East End of London). The abbey's origins date from between the 7th and 10th centuries, but it rose to national prominence when rebuilt by Edward the Confessor in the 11th century. With the development of the old palace alongside the abbey, Westminster has been the home of England's government since about 1200, and from 1707 the Government of the United Kingdom. In 1539, it became a city.\nWestminster is often used as a metonym to refer to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which sits in the Palace of Westminster.\nGeography.\nPhysical geography.\nThe City and Liberty of Westminster and other historical Westminster administrative units (except the broader modern City of Westminster, a London Borough created in 1965) extended from the River Thames to the old Roman road from the City to western England, which is now locally called Oxford Street.\nWestminster before urbanisation. The Roman road (modern Oxford Street) is shown at top running west.\nThorney Island lay between the arms of the former River Tyburn at its confluence with the Thames, while the western boundary with Chelsea was formed by the similarly lost River Westbourne. The line of the river still forms (with very slight revisions) the boundaries of the modern borough with the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.\nFurther north, away from the river mouth, Westminster included land on both sides of the Westbourne, notably Knightsbridge (including the parts of Hyde Park west of the Serpentine lake (originally formed by damming the river) and most of Kensington Gardens).\nLocalities.\nWestminster includes the sub-districts of Soho, St James, Mayfair, Covent Garden (shared with neighbouring Camden), Pimlico, Victoria, Belgravia and Knightsbridge (shared with neighbouring Kensington).\nThe former City of Westminster merged with the neighbouring boroughs of Paddington and Marylebone in 1965 to form a larger modern borough. These neighbouring areas (except for a small area of Paddington in part of Kensington Gardens), lie north of Oxford Street and its westward continuation, Bayswater Road.\nOpen spaces.\nThe district's open spaces include:\nOrigins and administration.\nThe development of the area began with the establishment of Westminster Abbey on a site then called Thorney Island. The site may have been chosen because of the natural ford which is thought to have carried Watling Street over the Thames in the vicinity. The wider district became known as Westminster in reference to the church.\nLegendary origin.\nThe legendary origin is that in the early 7th century, a local fisherman named Edric (or Aldrich) ferried a stranger in tattered foreign clothing over the Thames to Thorney Island. It was a miraculous appearance of St Peter, a fisherman himself, coming to the island to consecrate the newly built church, which later developed into Westminster Abbey. He rewarded Edric with a bountiful catch when he next dropped his nets. Edric was instructed to present the king and St. Mellitus, Bishop of London, with a salmon and various proofs that the consecration had already occurred. Every year on 29 June, St Peter's Day, the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers presents the Abbey with a salmon in memory of this event.\nRecorded origin.\nA charter of 785, possibly a forgery, grants land to \"the needy people of God in Thorney, in the dreadful spot which is called Westminster\". The text suggests a pre-existing monastic community who chose to live in a very challenging location.\nThe recorded origins of the Abbey (rather than a less important religious site) date to the 960s or early 970s, when Saint Dunstan and King Edgar installed a community of Benedictine monks on the site.\nBetween 1042 and 1052, King Edward the Confessor began rebuilding St Peter's Abbey to provide himself with a royal burial church. It was the first church in England built in the Romanesque style. The building was completed around 1060 and was consecrated on 28 December 1065, only a week before Edward's death on 5 January 1066. A week later, he was buried in the church; and, nine years later, his wife Edith was buried alongside him. His successor, Harold II, was probably crowned in the abbey, although the first documented coronation is that of William the Conqueror later the same year.\nThe only extant depiction of Edward's abbey, together with the adjacent Palace of Westminster, is in the Bayeux Tapestry. Some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory, an extension of the south transept, survive in the Norman Undercroft of the Great School, including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey. Increased endowments supported a community that increased from a dozen monks in Dunstan's original foundation, up to a maximum of about eighty monks.\nLocal government.\nParish of Westminster St Margaret.\nMost of the parishes of Westminster originated as daughter parishes of St Margaret's parish, in the City and Liberty of Westminster, Middlesex. The exceptions to this were St Clement Danes, St Mary le Strand and possibly some other small areas.\nThe ancient parish was St Margaret; after 1727 this became the civil parish of 'St Margaret and St John', the latter a new church required for the increasing population. The area around Westminster Abbey formed the extra-parochial Close of the Collegiate Church of St Peter. Like many large parishes, Westminster was divided into smaller units called \"Hamlets\" (meaning a territorial sub-division, rather than a small village). These would later become independent daughter parishes.\nUntil 1900 the local authority was the combined vestry of St Margaret and St John (also known as the Westminster District Board of Works from 1855 to 1887), which was based at Westminster Town Hall in Caxton Street from 1883.\nCity and Liberty of Westminster.\nThe Liberty of Westminster, governed by the Westminster Court of Burgesses, also included St Martin in the Fields and several other parishes and places. Westminster had its own quarter sessions, but the Middlesex sessions also had jurisdiction.\nMetropolitan Borough of Westminster.\nUnder local government reforms in 1889, the area fell within the newly created County of London, and the local government of Westminster was further reformed in 1900, when the court of burgesses and the parish vestries were abolished and replaced by the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster. The borough was given city status at the same time, allowing it to be known as the City of Westminster and its council as Westminster City Council.\nThe City and Liberty of Westminster and the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster were very similar in extent, covering the parts of the wider modern City of Westminster south of the Oxford Street, and its continuations Hyde Park Place. The exception is that part of Kensington Gardens, south of that road, are part of Paddington.\nWestminster merged with St Marylebone and Paddington in 1965, but the combined area was allowed to keep the title City of Westminster.\nHistory.\nRoyal seat.\nThe former Thorney Island, the site of Westminster Abbey, formed the historic core of Westminster. The abbey became the traditional venue of the coronations of the kings and queens of England from that of Harold Godwinson (1066) onwards.\nFrom about 1200 the Palace of Westminster, near the abbey, became the principal royal residence, a transition marked by the transfer of royal treasury and financial records to Westminster from Winchester. Later the palace housed the developing Parliament and England's law courts. Thus, London developed two focal points: the City of London (financial/economic) and Westminster (political and cultural).\nThe monarchs moved their principal residence to the Palace of Whitehall (1530\u20131698), then to St James's Palace in 1698, and eventually to Buckingham Palace and other palaces after 1762. The main law courts moved to the Royal Courts of Justice in the late-19th century.\nMedieval and Tudor.\nThe settlement grew up around the palace and abbey, as a service area for them. The parish church, St Margaret's Westminster served the wider community of the parish; the servants of the palace and abbey as well as the rural population and those associated with the high status homes developing on the road from the city. The area became larger and in the Georgian period became connected through urban ribbon development with the City along the Strand.\nHenry VIII's Reformation in the early 16th century abolished the abbey and established a cathedral \u2013 thus the parish ranked as a \"City\", although it was only a fraction of the size of the City of London and the Borough of Southwark at that time.\nIndeed, the cathedral and diocesan status of the church lasted only from 1539 to 1556, but the \"city\" status remained for a mere parish within Middlesex. As such it is first known to have had two Members of Parliament in 1545 as a new Parliamentary Borough, centuries after the City of London and Southwark were enfranchised.\nThe growing Elizabethan city had a High Constable, Bailiff, Town Clerk, and a keeper of the ponds.\nVictorian divide.\nCharles Booth's poverty map showing Westminster in 1889 recorded the full range of income- and capital-brackets living in adjacent streets within the area; its central western area had become (by 1850) (the) Devil's Acre in the southern flood-channel ravine of the River Tyburn, yet Victoria Street and other small streets and squares had the highest colouring of social class in London: yellow/gold. Westminster has shed the abject poverty with the clearance of this slum and with drainage improvement, but there is a typical Central London property distinction within the area which is very acute, epitomised by grandiose 21st-century developments, architectural high-point listed buildings and nearby social housing (mostly non-council housing) buildings of the Peabody Trust founded by philanthropist George Peabody.\nWider uses of the name.\nGiven the focus on Westminster in English and British public life over centuries, the name \"Westminster\" is casually used as a metonym for the UK Parliament and for the political community of the United Kingdom generally. (The civil service is similarly referred to using the name of the northern sub-neighbourhood which it inhabits, \"Whitehall\".) \"Westminster\" is consequently also used in reference to the Westminster system, the parliamentary model of democratic government that has evolved in the United Kingdom and for those other nations, particularly in the Commonwealth of Nations and for other parts of the former British Empire that adopted it.\nThe term \"Westminster Village\", sometimes used in the context of British politics, does not refer to a geographical area at all; employed especially in the phrase \"Westminster Village gossip\", it denotes a supposedly close social circle of members of parliament, political journalists, so-called spin-doctors and others connected to events in the Palace of Westminster and in Government ministries.\nEconomy.\nThe area has a substantial residential population. By the 20th century Westminster saw rising numbers of residential apartments with wealthy inhabitants. Hotels, large Victorian homes and barracks exist near to Buckingham Palace.\nHigh Commissions.\nWestminster hosts the High Commissions of many Commonwealth countries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nWithin the area is Westminster School, a major public school which grew out of the abbey, and the University of Westminster, attended by over 20,000 students.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37433", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37433", "title": "Standard temperatures and pressure", "text": ""}
{"id": "37436", "revid": "50966225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37436", "title": "Emergence", "text": "Unpredictable phenomenon in complex systems\nIn philosophy, systems theory, science, and art, emergence occurs when a complex entity has properties or behaviors that its parts do not have on their own, and emerge only when they interact in a wider whole.\nEmergence plays a central role in theories of integrative levels and of complex systems. For instance, the phenomenon of life as studied in biology is an emergent property of chemistry and physics.\nIn philosophy, theories that emphasize emergent properties have been called emergentism.\nIn philosophy.\nPhilosophers often understand emergence as a claim about the etiology of a system's properties. An emergent property of a system, in this context, is one that is not a property of any component of that system, but is still a feature of the system as a whole. Nicolai Hartmann (1882\u20131950), one of the first modern philosophers to write on emergence, termed this a \"categorial novum\" (new category).\nDefinitions.\nThis concept of emergence dates from at least the time of Aristotle. In Heideggerian thought, the notion of emergence is derived from the Greek word \"poiein\", meaning \"to make\", and refers to a bringing-forth that encompasses not just a process of crafting (\"techne\") but also the broader sense of something coming into being or revealing itself. Heidegger used emerging blossoms and butterflies as examples to illustrate \"poi\u00easis\" as a threshold event where something moves from one state to another. Many scientists and philosophers have written on the concept, including John Stuart Mill (\"Composition of Causes\", 1843) and Julian Huxley (1887\u20131975).\nThe philosopher G. H. Lewes coined the term \"emergent\" in 1875, distinguishing it from the merely \"resultant\":\nEvery resultant is either a sum or a difference of the co-operant forces; their sum, when their directions are the same \u2013 their difference, when their directions are contrary. Further, every resultant is clearly traceable in its components, because these are homogeneous and commensurable. It is otherwise with emergents, when, instead of adding measurable motion to measurable motion, or things of one kind to other individuals of their kind, there is a co-operation of things of unlike kinds. The emergent is unlike its components insofar as these are incommensurable, and it cannot be reduced to their sum or their difference.\nStrong and weak emergence.\nUsage of the notion \"emergence\" may generally be subdivided into two perspectives, that of \"weak emergence\" and \"strong emergence\". One paper discussing this division is \"Weak Emergence\", by philosopher Mark Bedau. In terms of physical systems, weak emergence is a type of emergence in which the emergent property is amenable to computer simulation or similar forms of after-the-fact analysis (for example, the formation of a traffic jam, the structure of a flock of starlings in flight or a school of fish, or the formation of galaxies). Crucial in these simulations is that the interacting members retain their independence. If not, a new entity is formed with new, emergent properties: this is called strong emergence, which it is argued cannot be simulated, analysed or reduced.\nDavid Chalmers writes that emergence often causes confusion in philosophy and science due to a failure to demarcate strong and weak emergence, which are \"quite different concepts\".\nSome common points between the two notions are that emergence concerns new properties produced as the system grows, which is to say ones which are not shared with its components or prior states. Also, it is assumed that the properties are supervenient rather than metaphysically primitive.\nWeak emergence describes new properties arising in systems as a result of the interactions at a fundamental level. However, Bedau stipulates that the properties can be determined only by observing or simulating the system, and not by any process of a reductionist analysis. As a consequence the emerging properties are scale dependent: they are only observable if the system is large enough to exhibit the phenomenon. Chaotic, unpredictable behaviour can be seen as an emergent phenomenon, while at a microscopic scale the behaviour of the constituent parts can be fully deterministic.\nBedau notes that weak emergence is not a universal metaphysical solvent, as the hypothesis that consciousness is weakly emergent would not resolve the traditional philosophical questions about the physicality of consciousness. However, Bedau concludes that adopting this view would provide a precise notion that emergence is involved in consciousness, and second, the notion of weak emergence is metaphysically benign.\nStrong emergence describes the direct causal action of a high-level system on its components; qualities produced this way are irreducible to the system's constituent parts. The whole is other than the sum of its parts. It is argued then that no simulation of the system can exist, for such a simulation would itself constitute a reduction of the system to its constituent parts. Physics lacks well-established examples of strong emergence, unless it is interpreted as the impossibility \"in practice\" to explain the whole in terms of the parts. Practical impossibility may be a more useful distinction than one in principle, since it is easier to determine and quantify, and does not imply the use of mysterious forces, but simply reflects the limits of our capability.\nViability of strong emergence.\nOne of the reasons for the importance of distinguishing these two concepts with respect to their difference concerns the relationship of purported emergent properties to science. Some thinkers question the plausibility of strong emergence as contravening our usual understanding of physics. Mark A. Bedau observes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although strong emergence is logically possible, it is uncomfortably like magic. How does an irreducible but supervenient downward causal power arise, since by definition it cannot be due to the aggregation of the micro-level potentialities? Such causal powers would be quite unlike anything within our scientific ken. This not only indicates how they will discomfort reasonable forms of materialism. Their mysteriousness will only heighten the traditional worry that emergence entails illegitimately getting something from nothing.\nThe concern that strong emergence does so entail is that such a consequence must be incompatible with metaphysical principles such as the principle of sufficient reason or the Latin dictum \"ex nihilo nihil fit\", often translated as \"nothing comes from nothing\".\nStrong emergence can be criticized for leading to causal overdetermination. The canonical example concerns emergent mental states (M and M\u2217) that supervene on physical states (P and P\u2217) respectively. Let M and M\u2217 be emergent properties. Let M\u2217 supervene on base property P\u2217. What happens when M causes M\u2217? Jaegwon Kim says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In our schematic example above, we concluded that M causes M\u2217 by causing P\u2217. So M causes P\u2217. Now, M, as an emergent, must itself have an emergence base property, say P. Now we face a critical question: if an emergent, M, emerges from basal condition P, why cannot P displace M as a cause of any putative effect of M? Why cannot P do all the work in explaining why any alleged effect of M occurred? If causation is understood as nomological (law-based) sufficiency, P, as M's emergence base, is nomologically sufficient for it, and M, as P\u2217's cause, is nomologically sufficient for P\u2217. It follows that P is nomologically sufficient for P\u2217 and hence qualifies as its cause...If M is somehow retained as a cause, we are faced with the highly implausible consequence that every case of downward causation involves overdetermination (since P remains a cause of P\u2217 as well). Moreover, this goes against the spirit of emergentism in any case: emergents are supposed to make distinctive and novel causal contributions.\nIf M is the cause of M\u2217, then M\u2217 is overdetermined because M\u2217 can also be thought of as being determined by P. One escape-route that a strong emergentist could take would be to deny downward causation. However, this would remove the proposed reason that emergent mental states must supervene on physical states, which in turn would call physicalism into question, and thus be unpalatable for some philosophers and physicists.\nCarroll and Parola propose a taxonomy that classifies emergent phenomena by how the macro-description relates to the underlying micro-dynamics.\n A coarse-graining map \u03a6 from a micro state space \"A\" to a macro state space \"B\" that commutes with time evolution, without requiring any further decomposition into subsystems.\n Emergence where the macro theory is defined in terms of localized collections of micro-subsystems. This category is subdivided into:\n Type\u20111a (Direct) Emergence: When the emergence map \u03a6 is algorithmically simple (i.e. compressible), so that the macro behavior is easily deduced from the micro-states.\n Type\u20111b (Incompressible) Emergence: When \u03a6 is algorithmically complex (i.e. incompressible), making the macro behavior appear more novel despite being determined by the micro-dynamics.\n Cases in which both the micro and macro theories admit subsystem decompositions, yet the macro entities are defined nonlocally with respect to the micro-structure, meaning that macro behavior depends on widely distributed micro information.\n A form of strong emergence in which the macro theory introduces additional ontological variables that do not supervene on the micro-states, thereby positing genuinely novel macro-level entities.\nObjective or subjective quality.\nCrutchfield regards the properties of complexity and organization of any system as subjective qualities determined by the observer.\nDefining structure and detecting the emergence of complexity in nature are inherently subjective, though essential, scientific activities. Despite the difficulties, these problems can be analysed in terms of how model-building observers infer from measurements the computational capabilities embedded in non-linear processes. An observer's notion of what is ordered, what is random, and what is complex in its environment depends directly on its computational resources: the amount of raw measurement data, of memory, and of time available for estimation and inference. The discovery of structure in an environment depends more critically and subtly, though, on how those resources are organized. The descriptive power of the observer's chosen (or implicit) computational model class, for example, can be an overwhelming determinant in finding regularity in data.\nThe low entropy of an ordered system can be viewed as an example of subjective emergence: the observer sees an ordered system by ignoring the underlying microstructure (i.e. movement of molecules or elementary particles) and concludes that the system has a low entropy.\nOn the other hand, chaotic, unpredictable behaviour can also be seen as subjective emergent, while at a microscopic scale the movement of the constituent parts can be fully deterministic.\nIn science.\nIn physics, \"weak\" emergence is used to describe a property, law, or phenomenon which occurs at macroscopic scales (in space or time) but not at microscopic scales, despite the fact that a macroscopic system can be viewed as a very large ensemble of microscopic systems.\nAn emergent behavior of a physical system is a qualitative property that can only occur in the limit that the number of microscopic constituents tends to infinity.\nAccording to Robert Laughlin, for many-particle systems, nothing can be calculated exactly from the microscopic equations, and macroscopic systems are characterised by broken symmetry: the symmetry present in the microscopic equations is not present in the macroscopic system, due to phase transitions. As a result, these macroscopic systems are described in their own terminology, and have properties that do not depend on many microscopic details.\nNovelist Arthur Koestler used the metaphor of Janus (a symbol of the unity underlying complements like open/shut, peace/war) to illustrate how the two perspectives (strong vs. weak or holistic vs. reductionistic) should be treated as non-exclusive, and should work together to address the issues of emergence. Theoretical physicist Philip W. Anderson states it this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ability to reduce everything to simple fundamental laws does not imply the ability to start from those laws and reconstruct the universe. The constructionist hypothesis breaks down when confronted with the twin difficulties of scale and complexity. At each level of complexity entirely new properties appear. Psychology is not applied biology, nor is biology applied chemistry. We can now see that the whole becomes not merely more, but very different from the sum of its parts.\nMeanwhile, others have worked towards developing analytical evidence of strong emergence. Renormalization methods in theoretical physics enable physicists to study critical phenomena that are not tractable as the combination of their parts. In 2009, Gu \"et al.\" presented a class of infinite physical systems that exhibits non-computable macroscopic properties. More precisely, if one could compute certain macroscopic properties of these systems from the microscopic description of these systems, then one would be able to solve computational problems known to be undecidable in computer science. These results concern infinite systems, finite systems being considered computable. However, macroscopic concepts which only apply in the limit of infinite systems, such as phase transitions and the renormalization group, are important for understanding and modeling real, finite physical systems. Gu \"et al.\"\nRecent developments in theoretical physics have explored strong emergence through intrinsic mechanisms for the quantum to classical transition. In the https:// (2025) proposes that classical directional motion emerges as a probabilistic resolution beyond a discrete temporal threshold formula_1, where quantum path uncertainty transitions to deterministic trajectories via a switching function formula_2, reinterpreting the Feynman path integral over finite histories without relying on decoherence or measurement collapse. Similarly, Prakash's https:// framework (2025) describes the emergence of classical spacetime curvature from standing wave patterns in vibrational fields generated by quantum fluctuations interacting with a foam like spacetime structure, modulated by a curvature dependent logarithmic suppression function formula_3 that governs coherence and leads to the Quantum Equivalence Principle, unifying quantum and classical behaviors geometrically. These approaches suggest that macroscopic laws may involve non-computable elements from microscopic quantum descriptions, complementing earlier work on undecidability in physical systems. \nRecent work by https://.(2025) synthesizes entropic stochastic resonance in Brownian transport with foundational quantum models like https://, https://, and https://, alongside objective collapse theories such as https:// and Continuous Spontaneous Localisation, deriving extensions to colored noise and non-Markovian fluctuation dissipation relations to integrate a stochastic Schr\u00f6dinger equation for joint position momentum measurement, suggesting entropic mechanisms drive quantum state transitions in stochastic geometries. These approaches suggest that macroscopic laws may involve non-computable elements from microscopic quantum descriptions, complementing earlier work on undecidability in physical systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although macroscopic concepts are essential for understanding our world, much of fundamental physics has been devoted to the search for a 'theory of everything', a set of equations that perfectly describe the behavior of all fundamental particles. The view that this is the goal of science rests in part on the rationale that such a theory would allow us to derive the behavior of all macroscopic concepts, at least in principle. The evidence we have presented suggests that this view may be overly optimistic. A 'theory of everything' is one of many components necessary for complete understanding of the universe, but is not necessarily the only one. The development of macroscopic laws from first principles may involve more than just systematic logic, and could require conjectures suggested by experiments, simulations or insight.\nIn humanity.\nHuman beings are the basic elements of social systems, which perpetually interact and create, maintain, or untangle mutual social bonds. Social bonds in social systems are perpetually changing in the sense of the ongoing reconfiguration of their structure. An early argument (1904\u201305) for the emergence of social formations can be found in Max Weber's most famous work, \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\". Recently, the emergence of a new social system is linked with the emergence of order from nonlinear relationships among multiple interacting units, where multiple interacting units are individual thoughts, consciousness, and actions. In the case of the global economic system, under capitalism, growth, accumulation and innovation can be considered emergent processes where not only does technological processes sustain growth, but growth becomes the source of further innovations in a recursive, self-expanding spiral. In this sense, the exponential trend of the growth curve reveals the presence of a long-term positive feedback among growth, accumulation, and innovation; and the emergence of new structures and institutions connected to the multi-scale process of growth. This is reflected in the work of Karl Polanyi, who traces the process by which labor and nature are converted into commodities in the passage from an economic system based on agriculture to one based on industry. This shift, along with the idea of the self-regulating market, set the stage not only for another economy but also for another society. The principle of emergence is also brought forth when thinking about alternatives to the current economic system based on growth facing social and ecological limits. Both degrowth and social ecological economics have argued in favor of a co-evolutionary perspective for theorizing about transformations that overcome the dependence of human wellbeing on economic growth.\nEconomic trends and patterns which emerge are studied intensively by economists. Within the field of group facilitation and organization development, there have been a number of new group processes that are designed to maximize emergence and self-organization, by offering a minimal set of effective initial conditions. Examples of these processes include SEED-SCALE, appreciative inquiry, Future Search, the world cafe or knowledge cafe, Open Space Technology, and others (Holman, 2010). In international development, concepts of emergence have been used within a theory of social change termed SEED-SCALE to show how standard principles interact to bring forward socio-economic development fitted to cultural values, community economics, and natural environment (local solutions emerging from the larger socio-econo-biosphere). These principles can be implemented utilizing a sequence of standardized tasks that self-assemble in individually specific ways utilizing recursive evaluative criteria.\nLooking at emergence in the context of social and systems change, invites us to reframe our thinking on parts and wholes and their interrelation. Unlike machines, living systems at all levels of recursion - be it a sentient body, a tree, a family, an organisation, the education system, the economy, the health system, the political system etc - are continuously creating themselves. They are continually growing and changing along with their surrounding elements, and therefore are more than the sum of their parts. As Peter Senge and co-authors put forward in the book \"Presence: Exploring profound change in People, Organizations and Society\", \"as long as our thinking is governed by habit - notably industrial, \"machine age\" concepts such as control, predictability, standardization, and \"faster is better\" - we will continue to recreate institutions as they have been, despite their disharmony with the larger world, and the need for all living systems to evolve.\" While change is predictably constant, it is unpredictable in direction and often occurs at second and nth orders of systemic relationality. Understanding emergence and what creates the conditions for different forms of emergence to occur, either insidious or nourishing vitality, is essential in the search for deep transformations.\nThe works of Nora Bateson and her colleagues at the International Bateson Institute delve into this. Since 2012, they have been researching questions such as \"what makes a living system ready to change? Can unforeseen ready-ness for change be nourished?\" Here being ready is not thought of as being prepared, but rather as nourishing the flexibility we do not yet know will be needed. These inquiries challenge the common view that a theory of change is produced from an identified preferred goal or outcome. As explained in their paper \"An essay on ready-ing: Tending the prelude to change\": \"While linear managing or controlling of the direction of change may appear desirable, tending to how the system becomes ready allows for pathways of possibility previously unimagined.\" This brings a new lens to the field of emergence in social and systems change as it looks to tending the pre-emergent process. Warm Data Labs are the fruit of their praxis, they are spaces for transcontextual mutual learning in which aphanipoetic phenomena unfold. Having hosted hundreds of Warm Data processes with 1000s of participants, they have found that these spaces of shared poly-learning across contexts lead to a realm of potential change, a necessarily obscured zone of wild interaction of unseen, unsaid, unknown flexibility. It is such flexibility that nourishes the ready-ing living systems require to respond to complex situations in new ways and change. In other words, this readying process preludes what will emerge. When exploring questions of social change, it is important to ask ourselves, what is submerging in the current social imaginary and perhaps, rather than focus all our resources and energy on driving direct order responses, to nourish flexibility with ourselves, and the systems we are a part of.\nAnother approach that engages with the concept of emergence for social change is Theory U, where \"deep emergence\" is the result of self-transcending knowledge after a successful journey along the U through layers of awareness. This practice nourishes transformation at the inner-being level, which enables new ways of being, seeing and relating to emerge. The concept of emergence has also been employed in the field of facilitation. In \"Emergent Strategy\", adrienne maree brown defines emergent strategies as \"ways for humans to practice complexity and grow the future through relatively simple interactions\".\nIn linguistics, the concept of emergence has been applied in the domain of stylometry to explain the interrelation between the syntactical structures of the text and the author style (Slautina, Marusenko, 2014). It has also been argued that the structure and regularity of language grammar, or at least language change, is an emergent phenomenon. While each speaker merely tries to reach their own communicative goals, they use language in a particular way. If enough speakers behave in that way, language is changed. In a wider sense, the norms of a language, i.e. the linguistic conventions of its speech society, can be seen as a system emerging from long-time participation in communicative problem-solving in various social circumstances.\nIn technology.\nThe bulk conductive response of binary (RC) electrical networks with random arrangements, known as the universal dielectric response (UDR), can be seen as emergent properties of such physical systems. Such arrangements can be used as simple physical prototypes for deriving mathematical formulae for the emergent responses of complex systems. Internet traffic can also exhibit some seemingly emergent properties. In the congestion control mechanism, TCP flows can become globally synchronized at bottlenecks, simultaneously increasing and then decreasing throughput in coordination. Congestion, widely regarded as a nuisance, is possibly an emergent property of the spreading of bottlenecks across a network in high traffic flows which can be considered as a phase transition. Some artificially intelligent (AI) computer applications simulate emergent behavior. One example is Boids, which mimics the swarming behavior of birds.\nIn religion and art.\nIn religion, emergence grounds expressions of religious naturalism and syntheism in which a sense of the sacred is perceived in the workings of entirely naturalistic processes by which more complex forms arise or evolve from simpler forms. Examples are detailed in \"The Sacred Emergence of Nature\" by Ursula Goodenough &amp; Terrence Deacon and \"Beyond Reductionism: Reinventing the Sacred\" by Stuart Kauffman, both from 2006, as well as \"Syntheism \u2013 Creating God in The Internet Age\" by Alexander Bard &amp; Jan S\u00f6derqvist from 2014 and \"Emergentism: A Religion of Complexity for the Metamodern World\" by Brendan Graham Dempsey (2022).\nMichael J. Pearce has used emergence to describe the experience of works of art in relation to contemporary neuroscience. Practicing artist Leonel Moura, in turn, attributes to his \"artbots\" a real, if nonetheless rudimentary, creativity based on emergent principles.\nIn daily life and nature.\nObjects consist of components with properties differing from the object itself. We call these properties emergent because they did not exist at the component level. The same applies to \"artifacts\" (structures, devices, tools, and even works of art). They are created for a specific purpose and are therefore \"subjectively\" emergent: someone who doesn't understand the purpose can't use it.\nThe artifact is the result of an \"invention\": through a clever combination of components, something new is created with emergent properties and functionalities. This invention is often difficult to predict and therefore usually based on a chance \"discovery\". An invention based on discovery is often improved through a feedback loop, making it more applicable. This is an example of \"downward causation\".\n\"Example 1\": A hammer is a combination of a head and a handle, each with different properties. By cleverly connecting them, the hammer becomes an artifact with new, emergent functionalities. Through downward causation, you can improve the head and handle components in such a way that the hammer's functionality increases. \"Example 2\": A mixture of tin and copper produces the alloy bronze, with new, emergent properties (hardness, lower melting temperature). Finding the correct ratio of tin to copper is an example of downward causation. \"Example 3\": Finding the right combination of chemicals to create a superconductor at high temperatures (i.e room temperature) is a great challenge for many scientists, where chance plays a significant role. Conversely, however, the properties of all these invented artifacts can be readily explained reductionistically.\nSomething similar occurs in nature: random mutations in genes rarely create a creature with new, emergent properties, increasing its chances of survival in a changing ecosystem. This is how evolution works. Here too, through downward causation, new creatures can sometimes manipulate their ecosystem in such a way that their chances of survival are further increased.\nIn both artifacts and living beings, certain components can be crucial to the emergent end result: the end result \"supervenes\" on these components. Examples include: a construction error, a bug in a software program, an error in the genetic code, or the absence of a particular gene.\nBoth aspects: \"supervenience\" and the \"unpredictability\" of the emergent result are characteristic of \"strong emergence\" (see above). (This definition, however, differs significantly from the definition in philosophical literature).\nNotable philosophers and scientists.\nEmergence has been significantly shaped and debated by numerous philosophers and scientists over the years\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "37438", "revid": "48018036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37438", "title": "Complex system", "text": "System composed of many interacting components\nA complex system is a system composed of many components that interact with one another. Examples of complex systems are Earth's global climate, organisms, the human brain, infrastructure such as power grid, transportation or communication systems, complex software and electronic systems, social and economic organizations (like cities), an ecosystem, a living cell, and, ultimately, for some authors, the entire universe.\nThe behavior of a complex system is intrinsically difficult to model due to the dependencies, competitions, relationships, and other types of interactions between their parts or between a given system and its environment. Systems that are \"complex\" have distinct properties that arise from these relationships, such as nonlinearity, emergence, spontaneous order, adaptation, and feedback loops, among others. Because such systems appear in a wide variety of fields, the commonalities among them have become the topic of their independent area of research. In many cases, it is useful to represent such a system as a network where the nodes represent the components and links represent their interactions.\nThe term \"complex systems\" often refers to the study of complex systems, which is an approach to science that investigates how relationships between a system's parts give rise to its collective behaviors and how the system interacts and forms relationships with its environment. The study of complex systems regards collective, or system-wide, behaviors as the fundamental object of study; for this reason, complex systems can be understood as an alternative paradigm to reductionism, which attempts to explain systems in terms of their constituent parts and the individual interactions between them.\nAs an interdisciplinary domain, complex systems draw contributions from many different fields, such as the study of self-organization and critical phenomena from physics, of spontaneous order from the social sciences, chaos from mathematics, adaptation from biology, and many others. \"Complex systems\" is therefore often used as a broad term encompassing a research approach to problems in many diverse disciplines, including statistical physics, information theory, nonlinear dynamics, anthropology, computer science, meteorology, sociology, economics, psychology, and biology.\nTypes of systems.\nComplex systems can be:\nKey concepts.\nAdaptation.\nComplex adaptive systems are special cases of complex systems that are adaptive in that they have the capacity to change and learn from experience. Examples of complex adaptive systems include the international trade markets, social insect and ant colonies, the biosphere and the ecosystem, the brain and the immune system, the cell and the developing embryo, cities, manufacturing businesses and any human social group-based endeavor in a cultural and social system such as political parties or communities.\nDecomposability.\nA system is decomposable if the parts of the system (subsystems) are independent from each other, for example the model of a perfect gas consider the relations among molecules negligible. \nIn a nearly decomposable system, the interactions between subsystems are weak but not negligible, this is often the case in social systems. Conceptually, a system is nearly decomposable if the variables composing it can be separated into classes and subclasses, if these variables are independent for many functions but affect each other, and if the whole system is greater than the parts.\nFeatures.\nComplex systems may have the following features:\n Complex systems are usually open systems \u2013 that is, they exist in a thermodynamic gradient and dissipate energy. In other words, complex systems are frequently far from energetic equilibrium: but despite this flux, there may be pattern stability, see synergetics.\nCritical transitions are abrupt shifts in the state of ecosystems, the climate, financial and economic systems or other complex systems that may occur when changing conditions pass a critical or bifurcation point. The 'direction of critical slowing down' in a system's state space may be indicative of a system's future state after such transitions when delayed negative feedbacks leading to oscillatory or other complex dynamics are weak.\nThe components of a complex system may themselves be complex systems. For example, an economy is made up of organisations, which are made up of people, which are made up of cells \u2013 all of which are complex systems. The arrangement of interactions within complex bipartite networks may be nested as well. More specifically, bipartite ecological and organisational networks of mutually beneficial interactions were found to have a nested structure. This structure promotes indirect facilitation and a system's capacity to persist under increasingly harsh circumstances as well as the potential for large-scale systemic regime shifts.\nAs well as coupling rules, the dynamic network of a complex system is important. Small-world or scale-free networks which have many local interactions and a smaller number of inter-area connections are often employed. Natural complex systems often exhibit such topologies. In the human cortex for example, we see dense local connectivity and a few very long axon projections between regions inside the cortex and to other brain regions.\nComplex systems may exhibit behaviors that are emergent, which is to say that while the results may be sufficiently determined by the activity of the systems' basic constituents, they may have properties that can only be studied at a higher level. For example, empirical food webs display regular, scale-invariant features across aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems when studied at the level of clustered 'trophic' species. Another example is offered by the termites in a mound which have physiology, biochemistry and biological development at one level of analysis, whereas their social behavior and mound building is a property that emerges from the collection of termites and needs to be analyzed at a different level.\n In practical terms, this means a small perturbation may cause a large effect (see butterfly effect), a proportional effect, or even no effect at all. In linear systems, the effect is \"always\" directly proportional to cause. See nonlinearity.\nBoth negative (damping) and positive (amplifying) feedback are always found in complex systems. The effects of an element's behavior are fed back in such a way that the element itself is altered.\nHistory.\nIn 1948, Dr. Warren Weaver published an essay on \"Science and Complexity\", exploring the diversity of problem types by contrasting problems of simplicity, disorganized complexity, and organized complexity. Weaver described these as \"problems which involve dealing simultaneously with a sizable number of factors which are interrelated into an organic whole.\"\nWhile the explicit study of complex systems dates at least to the 1970s, the first research institute focused on complex systems, the Santa Fe Institute, was founded in 1984. Early Santa Fe Institute participants included physics Nobel laureates Murray Gell-Mann and Philip Anderson, economics Nobel laureate Kenneth Arrow, and Manhattan Project scientists George Cowan and Herb Anderson. Today, there are over 50 institutes and research centers focusing on complex systems.\nSince the late 1990s, the interest of mathematical physicists in researching economic phenomena has been on the rise. The proliferation of cross-disciplinary research with the application of solutions originated from the physics epistemology has entailed a gradual paradigm shift in the theoretical articulations and methodological approaches in economics, primarily in financial economics. The development has resulted in the emergence of a new branch of discipline, namely \"econophysics\", which is broadly defined as a cross-discipline that applies statistical physics methodologies which are mostly based on the complex systems theory and the chaos theory for economics analysis.\nThe 2021 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Syukuro Manabe, Klaus Hasselmann, and Giorgio Parisi for their work to understand complex systems. Their work was used to create more accurate computer models of the effect of global warming on the Earth's climate.\nApplications.\nComplexity in practice.\nThe traditional approach to dealing with complexity is to reduce or constrain it. Typically, this involves compartmentalization: dividing a large system into separate parts. Organizations, for instance, divide their work into departments that each deal with separate issues. Engineering systems are often designed using modular components. However, modular designs become susceptible to failure when issues arise that bridge the divisions.\nComplexity of cities.\nJane Jacobs described cities as being a problem in organized complexity in 1961, citing Dr. Weaver's 1948 essay. As an example, she explains how an abundance of factors interplay into how various urban spaces lead to a diversity of interactions, and how changing those factors can change how the space is used, and how well the space supports the functions of the city. She further illustrates how cities have been severely damaged when approached as a problem in simplicity by replacing organized complexity with simple and predictable spaces, such as Le Corbusier's \"Radiant City\" and Ebenezer Howard's \"Garden City\". Since then, others have written at length on the complexity of cities.\nComplexity economics.\nOver the last decades, within the emerging field of complexity economics, new predictive tools have been developed to explain economic growth. Such is the case with the models built by the Santa Fe Institute in 1989 and the more recent economic complexity index (ECI), introduced by the MIT physicist Cesar A. Hidalgo and the Harvard economist Ricardo Hausmann.\nRecurrence quantification analysis has been employed to detect the characteristic of business cycles and economic development. To this end, Orlando et al. developed the so-called recurrence quantification correlation index (RQCI) to test correlations of RQA on a sample signal and then investigated the application to business time series. The said index has been proven to detect hidden changes in time series. Further, Orlando et al., over an extensive dataset, shown that recurrence quantification analysis may help in anticipating transitions from laminar (i.e. regular) to turbulent (i.e. chaotic) phases such as USA GDP in 1949, 1953, etc. Last but not least, it has been demonstrated that recurrence quantification analysis can detect differences between macroeconomic variables and highlight hidden features of economic dynamics.\nComplexity and education.\nFocusing on issues of student persistence with their studies, Forsman, Moll and Linder explore the \"viability of using complexity science as a frame to extend methodological applications for physics education research\", finding that \"framing a social network analysis within a complexity science perspective offers a new and powerful applicability across a broad range of PER topics\".\nComplexity in healthcare research and practice.\nHealthcare systems are prime examples of complex systems, characterized by interactions among diverse stakeholders, such as patients, providers, policymakers, and researchers, across various sectors like health, government, community, and education. These systems demonstrate properties like non-linearity, emergence, adaptation, and feedback loops. Complexity science in healthcare frames knowledge translation as a dynamic and interconnected network of processes\u2014problem identification, knowledge creation, synthesis, implementation, and evaluation\u2014rather than a linear or cyclical sequence. Such approaches emphasize the importance of understanding and leveraging the interactions within and between these processes and stakeholders to optimize the creation and movement of knowledge. By acknowledging the complex, adaptive nature of healthcare systems, complexity science advocates for continuous stakeholder engagement, transdisciplinary collaboration, and flexible strategies to effectively translate research into practice.\nComplexity and biology.\nComplexity science has been applied to living organisms, and in particular to biological systems. Within the emerging field of fractal physiology, bodily signals, such as heart rate or brain activity, are characterized using entropy or fractal indices. The goal is often to assess the state and the health of the underlying system, and diagnose potential disorders and illnesses.\nComplexity and chaos theory.\nComplex systems theory is related to chaos theory, which in turn has its origins more than a century ago in the work of the French mathematician Henri Poincar\u00e9. Chaos is sometimes viewed as extremely complicated information, rather than as an absence of order. Chaotic systems remain deterministic, though their long-term behavior can be difficult to predict with any accuracy. With perfect knowledge of the initial conditions and the relevant equations describing the chaotic system's behavior, one can theoretically make perfectly accurate predictions of the system, though in practice this is impossible to do with arbitrary accuracy.\nThe emergence of complex systems theory shows a domain between deterministic order and randomness which is complex. This is referred to as the \"edge of chaos\".\nWhen one analyzes complex systems, sensitivity to initial conditions, for example, is not an issue as important as it is within chaos theory, in which it prevails. As stated by Colander, the study of complexity is the opposite of the study of chaos. Complexity is about how a huge number of extremely complicated and dynamic sets of relationships can generate some simple behavioral patterns, whereas chaotic behavior, in the sense of deterministic chaos, is the result of a relatively small number of non-linear interactions. For recent examples in economics and business see Stoop et al. who discussed Android's market position, Orlando who explained the corporate dynamics in terms of mutual synchronization and chaos regularization of bursts in a group of chaotically bursting cells and Orlando et al. who modelled financial data (Financial Stress Index, swap and equity, emerging and developed, corporate and government, short and long maturity) with a low-dimensional deterministic model.\nTherefore, the main difference between chaotic systems and complex systems is their history. Chaotic systems do not rely on their history as complex ones do. Chaotic behavior pushes a system in equilibrium into chaotic order, which means, in other words, out of what we traditionally define as 'order'. On the other hand, complex systems evolve far from equilibrium at the edge of chaos. They evolve at a critical state built up by a history of irreversible and unexpected events, which physicist Murray Gell-Mann called \"an accumulation of frozen accidents\". In a sense chaotic systems can be regarded as a subset of complex systems distinguished precisely by this absence of historical dependence. Many real complex systems are, in practice and over long but finite periods, robust. However, they do possess the potential for radical qualitative change of kind whilst retaining systemic integrity. Metamorphosis serves as perhaps more than a metaphor for such transformations.\nComplexity and network science.\nA complex system is usually composed of many components and their interactions. Such a system can be represented by a network where nodes represent the components and links represent their interactions. For example, the Internet can be represented as a network composed of nodes (computers) and links (direct connections between computers). Other examples of complex networks include social networks, financial institution interdependencies, airline networks, and biological networks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37439", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37439", "title": "AAI RQ-7 Shadow", "text": "American unmanned aerial vehicle\nThe AAI RQ-7 Shadow is an American unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) used by the United States Army, Australian Army, Swedish Army, Turkish Air Force and Italian Army for reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition and battle damage assessment. Launched from a trailer-mounted pneumatic catapult, it is recovered with the aid of arresting gear similar to jets on an aircraft carrier. Its gimbal-mounted, digitally stabilized, liquid nitrogen-cooled electro-optical/infrared (EO/IR) camera relays video in real time via a C-band line-of-sight data link to the ground control station (GCS).\nThe US Army's 2nd Battalion, 13th Aviation Regiment at Fort Huachuca, Arizona, trains soldiers, Marines, and civilians in the operation and maintenance of the Shadow UAS. The Shadow is operated in the U.S. Army at brigade-level.\nDevelopment.\nThe RQ-7 Shadow is the result of a continued US Army search for an effective battlefield UAS after the cancellation of the Alliant RQ-6 Outrider aircraft. AAI Corporation followed up their RQ-2 Pioneer with the Shadow 200, a similar, more refined UAS. In late 1999, the army selected the Shadow 200 to fill the tactical UAS requirement, redesignating it the RQ-7. Army requirements specified a UAS that used an aviation gasoline engine, could carry an electro-optic/infrared imaging sensor turret, and had a maximum range of 31 miles (50 kilometers) with four-hour, on-station endurance. The Shadow 200 offered at least twice that range. The specifications also dictated that UAS would be able to land in an athletic field.\nDesign.\nThe RQ-7 Shadow 200 unmanned aircraft system is of a high-wing, constant chord pusher configuration with a twin-tailboom empennage and an inverted v-tail. The aircraft is powered by a AR741-1101 Wankel engine designed and manufactured by UAV Engines Ltd in the United Kingdom. Onboard electrical systems are powered by a GEC/Plessey 28 volt, direct current, 2\u00a0kW generator.\nCurrently, the primary load of the aircraft is the Israeli Aircraft Industries POP300 Plug-in Optical Payload which consists of a forward-looking infrared camera, a daytime TV camera with a selectable near-infrared filter and a laser pointer. The aircraft has fixed tricycle landing gear. Takeoffs are assisted by a trailer-mounted pneumatic launcher which can accelerate the 170\u00a0kg (375 pound) aircraft to in .\nLandings are guided by a Tactical Automatic Landing System, developed by the Sierra Nevada Corporation, which consists of a ground-based micro-millimeter wavelength radar and a transponder carried on the aircraft. Once on the ground, a tailhook mounted on the aircraft catches an arresting wire connected to two disk brake drums which can stop the aircraft in less than .\nThe aircraft is part of a larger system which currently uses the M1152-series of Humvees for ground transport of all ground and air equipment. A Shadow 200 system consists of four aircraft, three of which are transported in the Air Vehicle Transporter (AVT). The fourth is transported in a specially designed storage container to be used as a spare. The AVT also tows the launcher.\nThe AVT Support Vehicle and trailer contain extra equipment to launch and recover the aircraft, such as the Tactical Automatic Landing System. Maintenance equipment for the aircraft is stored in the Maintenance Section Multifunctional (MSM) vehicle and trailer as well as the M1165 MSM Support Vehicle and its associated trailer.\nTwo Humvee-mounted Ground Control Stations (GCS), also part of the Shadow 200 system, control the aircraft in flight. Each station has an associated Ground Data Terminal (GDT), which takes commands generated by the GCS and modulates them into radio waves received by the aircraft in flight. The GDT receives video imagery from the payload, as well as telemetry from the aircraft, and sends this information to the GCS.\nA trailer, towed by the M1165 GCS support vehicle, carries the GDT and houses a 10\u00a0kW Tactical Quiet Generator to provide power for its associated GCS. The Shadow 200 system also includes a Portable Ground Control Station (PGCS) and Portable Ground Data Terminal (PGDT), which are stripped-down versions of the GCS and GDT designed as a backup to the two GCSs.\nA fielded Shadow 200 system requires 22 soldiers to operate it. Army modelling indicates that crew workload is highest at takeoff, and second-highest at landing.\nThe Shadow is restricted from operating in bad weather conditions, not being meant to fly through rain and with sensors that cannot see through clouds.\nOperational history.\nService with the United States.\nBy July 2007, the Shadow platform accumulated 200,000 flight hours, doubling its previous record of 100,000 hours in 13 months. The system then surpassed 300,000 flight hours in April 2008, and by May 2010, the Shadow system had accumulated over 500,000 flight hours. As of 2011, the Shadow had logged over 709,000 hours. The Shadow platform has flown over 37,000 sorties in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan by US Army and Army National Guard units.\nOn 6 August 2012, AAI announced that the Shadow had achieved 750,000 flight hours during more than 173,000 missions. More than 900,000 flight hours had been logged by Shadow UAVs by the end of June 2014.\nThe Shadow did not see service in the Afghanistan campaign of 2001\u20132002, but it did fly operational missions in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. The operating conditions in Iraq proved hard on the UAVs, with heat and sand leading to engine failures, resulting in a high-priority effort to find fixes with changes in system technology and operating procedures. Shadow UAS have since flown more than 600,000 combat hours in support of the Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.\nIn 2007, the United States Marine Corps began to transition from the RQ-2 Pioneer to the RQ-7 Shadow. VMU-1, VMU-2 completed their transition from the RQ-2 to the RQ-7 and ScanEagle while VMU-3 and VMU-4 were activated as Shadow and ScanEagle elements. VMU-3 was activated on 12 September 2008 and VMU-4 conducted its inaugural flight on 28 September 2010 in Yuma, Arizona. In October 2007, VMU-1 became the first Marine Corps squadron to see combat in Iraq. VMU-2 deployed a Shadow detachment to Afghanistan in 2009, with VMU-3 following in January 2010.\nThe Navy provided personnel for four Shadow platoons in support of army brigades deployed in Iraq. The first two platoons returned from 6-month tours in Iraq in January and February 2008. The Navy personnel went through the Army's training program at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.\nThe U.S. Army is implementing a plan to reform its aerial scout capabilities by scrapping its fleet of OH-58 Kiowa helicopters from 2015 to 2019 and replacing them with AH-64 Apache attack helicopters teamed with Shadow and MQ-1C Gray Eagle UAVs. Using unmanned assets to scout ahead would put the pilots of manned aircraft out of reach of potential harm. Reformed combat aviation brigades (CAB) would consist of a battalion of 24 Apaches for attack missions and an armed reconnaissance squadron of another 24 Apaches teamed with three Shadow platoons totaling 12 RQ-7s overall; it would also include a Gray Eagle company. The manned-unmanned teaming of Apaches and Unmanned Aircraft (UA) can meet 80 percent of aerial scout requirements.\nOn 16 March 2015, the 1st Battalion, 501st Aviation Regiment was reflagged the 3rd Squadron, 6th Cavalry Regiment, making it the first of 10 Apache battalions to be converted to a heavy attack reconnaissance squadron by eliminating the Kiowa scout helicopter and having three RQ-7 Shadow platoons organically assigned; the attack battalions will also be aligned with an MQ-1C Gray Eagle company assigned to each division. Moving Shadows from brigade combat team level to the battalions themselves reduces lines of communication, distance issues, and allows operators and pilots to better train and work together.\nIn early July 2014, the U.S. Army sent RQ-7 Shadows to Baghdad as part of efforts to protect embassy personnel against Islamic State militant attacks, along with Apache attack helicopters which could use them through manned and unmanned teaming to share information and designate targets.\nOn 29 July 2018, the U.S. Marine conducted its final launch of the RQ-7B during RIMPAC exercises before retiring it. Since first deploying with Marines to Iraq in October 2007, the aircraft eventually equipped four tactical UAS squadrons, flying some 39,000 hours during 11 operational deployments. The Shadow was replaced by the RQ-21 Blackjack, which was first deployed in 2014.\nIn March 2019, the U.S. Army selected Martin UAV and AAI Corporation to \"provide unmanned aircraft systems for platoons to try out as candidates to replace the Shadow tactical UAS.\" The Army seeks better acoustics and runway independence as compared to the old Shadow, as well as lower equipment requirements. Shortly after the selection of the first teams, L3Harris Technologies and Arcturus-UAV (later under AeroVironment) were also picked to submit candidates. The four aircraft were used to evaluate requirements and assess new capabilities, and in August 2021 the Army decided to proceed with a competition for the Future Tactical Unmanned Aircraft System (FTUAS); a fielding decision was planned for 2025. The Army chose the AeroVironment Jump 20 in August 2022. The procurement will inform requirements for a second program increment, which will rely on a separate competitive acquisition. Although the Army already planned to replace the Shadow in brigade combat teams, it was initially planned to continue to be used by combat aviation brigades and special forces units into the mid-2030s, but the Army revealed in February 2024 that it had decided to replace the entire Shadow fleet as part of an overhaul of its aviation assets. The U.S. Army decided not to continue pursuing the FTUAS in May 2025 after determining the aircraft being developed didn't meet their needs.\nService with Romania.\nThe first Shadow 600 UAVs entered service with the Romanian Air Force in 1998, and by 2007, nine drones were in service. The drones were used during the Romanian deployment to Iraq starting from 2003. These drones flew on IMINT missions as part of the General Directorate for Defense Intelligence in support of Multinational Division Central-South. Three drones crashed during this deployment.\nVariants.\nRQ-7A Shadow.\nThe RQ-7A was the initial version of the Shadow 200 UAS developed by AAI. The first low-rate initial-production systems were delivered to the US Army in 2002 with the first full-scale production systems being delivered in September 2003. The RQ-7A was long and had a wingspan of with a max takeoff weight. The aircraft's endurance ranged between 4 and 5.5 hours depending on mission. The \"A\" model aircraft also had the AR741-1100 engine which could use either 87 octane automotive gasoline or 100LL aviation fuel. The \"A\" model also featured IAI's POP200 payload.\nRQ-7B Shadow.\nProduction of Shadow aircraft shifted to a generally improved RQ-7B variant in the summer of 2004. The RQ-7B features new wings increased in length to . The new wings are not only more aerodynamically efficient, they are \"wet\" to increase fuel storage up to 44 liters for an endurance of up to 6 hours. The payload capability has been increased to .\nAfter reports from Iraq that engines were failing, in 2005, the Army's UAV project manager called for the use of 100LL, an aviation fuel, rather than the conventional 87 octane mogas. Avionics systems have been generally improved, and the new wing is designed to accommodate a communications relay package, which allows the aircraft to act as a relay station. This allows commanders or even the aircraft operators themselves to communicate via radio to the troops on ground in locations that would otherwise be \"dead\" to radio traffic.\nThe Shadow can operate up to from its brigade tactical operations center, and recognize tactical vehicles up to above the ground at more than slant range.\nOther incremental improvements to the system include replacing the AR741-1100 engine with the AR741-1101 which increases reliability through the use of dual spark plugs as well as limiting the fuel to 100LL. Also, the older POP200 payload was replaced with the newer POP300 system. In February 2010, AAI began a fleet update program to improve the Shadow system. The improvements include installing the wiring harnesses and software updates for IAI's POP300D payload which includes a designator for guiding laser-guided bombs.\nOther improvements in the program will include an electronic fuel injection engine and fuel system to replace the AR741-1101's carburetted engine. The most visible improvement to the system will be a wider wing of in span which is designed to increase fuel capacity and allow for mission endurance of almost 9 hours. The new wings will also include hardpoints for external munitions.\nA joint Army-Marine program is testing IED jamming on a Shadow at MCAS Yuma. Another joint effort is to view a ground area from 3,650 m (12,000 feet).\nThe Army is now proposing the upgraded Shadow 152A, which includes Soldier Radio Waveform software, which allows both the command post and their troops to see the images that the UAV is projecting, as long as they are on the same frequency. It also increases the distance and area of communication.\nPreliminary TCDL testing conducted at Dugway Proving Ground was a success. This led to an estimated fielding date of May 2010 for TCDL. In March 2015, the first Shadow unit was equipped with the upgraded RQ-7BV2 Shadow version. New capabilities for the BV2 include the TCDL, encryption of video and control data-links, software that allows interoperability between other UAS platforms, integration of a common control station and control terminal for all Army UAS platforms, an electronic fuel-injection engine, and increased endurance to nine hours through a lengthened wingspan of , with weight increased to . Shadow systems are being upgraded at a rate of 2-3 per month, with all Army Shadows planned to become BV2s by 2019.\nIn 2020, the Army introduced the Shadow Block III. The configuration allows the Shadow to fly in rainy conditions of up to 5 cm (2 inches) per hour, a four-fold increase over previous versions, carries the L3 Wescam MX-10 EO/IR camera with enhanced image collection, has a Joint Tactical Radio System to enable communications relay, and uses a more reliable and powerful engine configuration with reduced noise.\nArmed Shadow.\nOn 19 April 2010 the Army issued a \"solicitation for sources sought\" from defense contractors for a munition for the Shadow system with a deadline for proposals due no later than 10 May 2010. Although no specific munition has been chosen yet, some possible munitions include the Raytheon Pyros bomb, the General Dynamics 81\u00a0mm 4.5\u00a0kg (10-pound) air-dropped guided mortar, as well as the QuickMEDS system for delivering medical supplies to remote and stranded troops.\nThe Army subsequently slowed work, and the Marine Corps then took the lead on arming the RQ-7 Shadow. Raytheon has conducted successful flight tests with the Small Tactical Munition, and Lockheed Martin has tested the Shadow Hawk glide weapon from an RQ-7. On 1 November 2012, General Dynamics successfully demonstrated their guided 81\u00a0mm Air Dropped Mortar, with three launches at hitting within seven meters of the target grid.\nAs of August 2011, the Marine Corps has received official clearance to experiment with armed RQ-7s, and requires AAI to select a precision munition ready for deployment. AAI was awarded $10 million for this in December 2011, and claims a weapon has already been fielded by the Shadow. In 2014, Textron launched the Fury precision weapon from a Shadow 200.\nBy May 2015, the Marine Corps had run out of funding for weaponizing the RQ-7, and the Army had shown little interest in continuing the effort. The Army's stance is that the Shadow's primary capability is persistent surveillance, while there are many other ways to drop bombs on targets and adding that to the Shadow would add weight and decrease endurance.\nNightwarden.\nA test version called STTB flew in summer 2011. AAI is developing a bigger version called M2 with a blended wing to include a 3-cylinder Lycoming heavy fuel engine, and began flight testing in August 2012. The Shadow M2 has a conformal blended body that reduces drag, wingspan increased to , and is heavier. It can fly for 16 hours at altitudes up to . Its endurance and service ceiling are comparable to Group 4 UASs like the MQ-1 Predator, so the company is pitching the M2 as a budget-conscious alternative to larger unmanned aircraft.\nIt has a greater payload to carry synthetic aperture radar (SAR), wide-area surveillance, navigation, signals intelligence, and electronic warfare packages. It also has the ability to be controlled beyond line-of-sight through a SATCOM link. Although the M2 uses the same internal components as the RQ-7B Shadow 200 and is compatible with existing support equipment and ground infrastructure, its greater weight necessitates changes to the existing launcher. The Shadow M2 uses 80-85 percent of the components of the Shadow V2, while allowing for an additional of capability with total airframe weight increased to .\nIn June 2017, Textron introduced the Nightwarden TUAS as a production-ready model of the developmental Shadow M2, the change in name due to significant improvements and enhancements to the system such as greater flexibility and combat capability, SATCOM features, and enhanced command-and-control. The aircraft has a range of , maximum speed of , endurance of 15 hours, can fly at an altitude of , and has a maximum takeoff weight of with a dual-payload bay with a capacity of .\nShadow 600.\nAAI has also built a scaled-up Pioneer derivative known as the \"Shadow 600\". It also resembles a Pioneer, except that the outer panels of the wings are distinctively swept back, and it has a stronger Wankel engine, the UAV EL 801, with . A number of Shadow 600s are in service in several nations, including Romania.\nSR/C Shadow.\nAAI, in conjunction with Textron sister company Bell Helicopter, intends to modify two Shadows with a Carter rotor on top for vertical take-off and landing, eliminating the need for the recovery and pneumatic launcher systems, while increasing payload and endurance. As of August 2011[ [update]], it is expected to fly in 2012. AAI also expected to use the SR/C technology for the Shadow Knight, a powered-rotor two-propeller surveillance aircraft for the US Navy MRMUAS program; however, the MRMUAS program was cancelled in 2012.\nIncidents and accidents.\nOn 15 August 2011, a U.S. Air Force C-130 cargo plane collided with a RQ-7 while on approach to Forward Operating Base Sharana in Paktika Province, Afghanistan. The C-130 made an emergency landing with damage to two engines and one wing, while the RQ-7 was destroyed completely. The collision caused the cargo aircraft to be grounded for several months while being fixed, while the RQ-7 wreckage was never recovered.\nOn 3 April 2014, a Pennsylvanian Army National Guard RQ-7 participating in training exercises at Fort Indiantown Gap crashed near an elementary school in Pennsylvania and was then hit by a civilian vehicle destroying the drone. No injuries were reported.\nOn 10 July 2019, a U.S. Army RQ-7 operated by the 25th Infantry Division crashed in the Waianae mountains near the Schofield Barracks in Hawaii.\nOn 17 July 2019, a Wisconsin National Guard RQ-7 lost its link to its operator at Volk Field during a training exercise. The drone went down into trees south of Interstate 90/94 between Oakdale and Camp Douglas. No injuries or damage were reported. The drone suffered \"significant\" damage.\nSpecifications (200 Family).\n\"Data from\" General characteristics* Capacity: 45 kg (99 pounds) (RQ-7B)* Length: ()* Wingspan: ()* Width: ()* Height: ()* Airfoil: NACA 4415* Empty weight: ()* Gross weight: ()* Powerplant: 1 \u00d7 Wankel UAV Engine 741 used only with Silkolene Synthetic Oil\n , 38 hp (28.5 kW) \nPerformance* Maximum speed: (, )* Cruise speed: (, ) * Range: (, ) * Endurance: 6 h/ 9 h Increased Endurance (up to 4 hours at a range out to 50 km from the launch and recovery site)* Service ceiling: ELOS (Electronic Line Of Sight)\nNote: When outfitted with IE (Increased Endurance) Wings, the CRP (Communications Relay Package) and the 1102 engine, endurance time is increased to 9 hours, wing span is increased to approx. , and the service ceiling is 5,500\u00a0m (18,000\u00a0ft) (only with authorization).\nSee also.\nRelated development\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37441", "revid": "12406635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37441", "title": "Nitrous oxide", "text": "Colourless non-flammable greenhouse gas\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nNitrous oxide (dinitrogen oxide or dinitrogen monoxide), commonly known as laughing gas, nitrous, or factitious air, among others, is a chemical compound, an oxide of nitrogen with the formula N2O. At room temperature, it is a colourless non-flammable gas, and has a slightly sweet scent and taste. At elevated temperatures, nitrous oxide is a powerful oxidiser similar to molecular oxygen.\nNitrous oxide has significant medical uses, especially in surgery and dentistry, for its anaesthetic and pain-reducing effects, and it is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. Its colloquial name, \"laughing gas\", coined by Humphry Davy, describes the euphoric effects upon inhaling it, which cause it to be used as a recreational drug inducing a brief \"high\". When abused chronically, it may cause neurological damage through inactivation of vitamin B12. It is also used as an oxidiser in rocket propellants and motor racing fuels, and as a frothing gas for whipped cream.\nNitrous oxide is also an atmospheric pollutant, with a concentration of 333\u00a0parts per billion (ppb) in 2020, increasing at 1\u00a0ppb annually. It is a major scavenger of stratospheric ozone, with an impact comparable to that of CFCs. About 40% of human-caused emissions are from agriculture, as nitrogen fertilisers are digested into nitrous oxide by soil micro-organisms. As the third most important greenhouse gas, nitrous oxide substantially contributes to global warming. Reduction of emissions is an important goal in the politics of climate change.\nDiscovery and early use.\nThe gas was first synthesised in 1772 by English natural philosopher and chemist Joseph Priestley who called it \"dephlogisticated nitrous air\" (see phlogiston theory) or \"inflammable nitrous air\". Priestley published his discovery in the book \"Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1775)\", where he described how to produce the preparation of \"nitrous air diminished\", by heating iron filings dampened with nitric acid.\nThe first important use of nitrous oxide was made possible by Thomas Beddoes and James Watt, who worked together to publish the book \"Considerations on the Medical Use and on the Production of Factitious Airs (1794)\". This book was important for two reasons. First, James Watt had invented a novel machine to produce \"factitious airs\" (including nitrous oxide) and a novel \"breathing apparatus\" to inhale the gas. Second, the book also presented the new medical theories by Thomas Beddoes, that tuberculosis and other lung diseases could be treated by inhalation of \"Factitious Airs\".\nThe machine to produce \"Factitious Airs\" had three parts: a furnace to burn the needed material, a vessel with water where the produced gas passed through in a spiral pipe (for impurities to be \"washed off\"), and finally the gas cylinder with a gasometer where the gas produced, \"air\", could be tapped into portable air bags (made of airtight oily silk). The breathing apparatus consisted of one of the portable air bags connected with a tube to a mouthpiece. With this new equipment being engineered and produced by 1794, the way was paved for clinical trials, which began in 1798 when Thomas Beddoes established the \"Pneumatic Institution for Relieving Diseases by Medical Airs\" in Hotwells (Bristol). In the basement of the building, a large-scale machine was producing the gases under the supervision of a young Humphry Davy, who was encouraged to experiment with new gases for patients to inhale. The first important work of Davy was examination of the nitrous oxide, and the publication of his results in the book: \"Researches, Chemical and Philosophical (1800)\". In that publication, Davy notes the analgesic effect of nitrous oxide at page 465 and its potential to be used for surgical operations at page 556. Davy coined the name \"laughing gas\" for nitrous oxide.\nDespite Davy's discovery that inhalation of nitrous oxide could relieve a conscious person from pain, another 44 years elapsed before doctors attempted to use it for anaesthesia. The use of nitrous oxide as a recreational drug at \"laughing gas parties\", primarily arranged for the British upper class, became an immediate success beginning in 1799. While the effects of the gas generally make the user appear stuporous, dreamy and sedated, some people also \"get the giggles\" in a state of euphoria, and frequently erupt in laughter.\nOne of the earliest commercial producers in the U.S. was George Poe, cousin of the poet Edgar Allan Poe, who also was the first to liquefy the gas.\nThe first time nitrous oxide was used as an anaesthetic drug in the treatment of a patient was when dentist Horace Wells, with assistance by Gardner Quincy Colton and John Mankey Riggs, demonstrated insensitivity to pain from a dental extraction on 11 December 1844. In the following weeks, Wells treated the first 12 to 15 patients with nitrous oxide in Hartford, Connecticut, and, according to his own record, only failed in two cases. In spite of these convincing results having been reported by Wells to the medical society in Boston in December 1844, this new method was not immediately adopted by other dentists. The reason for this was most likely that Wells, in January 1845 at his first public demonstration to the medical faculty in Boston, had been partly unsuccessful, leaving his colleagues doubtful regarding its efficacy and safety. The method did not come into general use until 1863, when Gardner Quincy Colton successfully started to use it in all his \"Colton Dental Association\" clinics, that he had just established in New Haven and New York City. Over the following three years, Colton and his associates successfully administered nitrous oxide to more than 25,000 patients. Today, nitrous oxide is used in dentistry as an anxiolytic, as an adjunct to local anaesthetic.\nNitrous oxide was not found to be a strong enough anaesthetic for use in major surgery in hospital settings. Instead, diethyl ether, being a stronger and more potent anaesthetic, was demonstrated and accepted for use in October 1846, along with chloroform in 1847. When Joseph Thomas Clover invented the \"gas-ether inhaler\" in 1876, it became a common practice at hospitals to initiate all anaesthetic treatments with a mild flow of nitrous oxide, and then gradually increase the anaesthesia with the stronger ether or chloroform. Clover's gas-ether inhaler was designed to supply the patient with nitrous oxide and ether at the same time, with the exact mixture being controlled by the operator of the device. It remained in use by many hospitals until the 1930s. Although hospitals today use a more advanced anaesthetic machine, these machines still use the same principle launched with Clover's gas-ether inhaler, to initiate the anaesthesia with nitrous oxide, before the administration of a more powerful anaesthetic.\nColton's popularisation of nitrous oxide led to its adoption by a number of less than reputable quacksalvers, who touted it as a cure for consumption, scrofula, catarrh and other diseases of the blood, throat and lungs. Nitrous oxide treatment was administered and licensed as a patent medicine by the likes of C. L. Blood and Jerome Harris in Boston and Charles E. Barney of Chicago.\nChemical properties and reactions.\nNitrous oxide is a colourless gas with a faint, sweet odour.\nNitrous oxide supports combustion by releasing the dipolar bonded oxygen radical, and can thus relight a glowing splint.\nN2O is inert at room temperature and has few reactions. At elevated temperatures, its reactivity increases. For example, nitrous oxide reacts with NaNH2 at to give NaN3:\nThis reaction is the route adopted by the commercial chemical industry to produce azide salts, which are used as detonators.\nMechanism of action.\nThe pharmacological mechanism of action of inhaled N2O is not fully known. However, it has been shown to directly modulate a broad range of ligand-gated ion channels, which likely plays a major role. It moderately blocks NMDAR and \u03b22-subunit-containing nACh channels, weakly inhibits AMPA, kainate, GABAC and 5-HT3 receptors, and slightly potentiates GABAA and glycine receptors. It also has been shown to activate two-pore-domain K+ channels. While N2O affects several ion channels, its anaesthetic, hallucinogenic and euphoriant effects are likely caused mainly via inhibition of NMDA receptor-mediated currents. In addition to its effects on ion channels, N2O may act similarly to nitric oxide (NO) in the central nervous system. Nitrous oxide is 30 to 40 times more soluble than nitrogen.\nThe effects of inhaling sub-anaesthetic doses of nitrous oxide may vary unpredictably with settings and individual differences; however, Jay (2008) suggests that it reliably induces the following states and sensations:\nA minority of users also experience uncontrolled vocalisations and muscular spasms. These effects generally disappear minutes after removal of the nitrous oxide source.\nAnxiolytic effect.\nIn behavioural tests of anxiety, a low dose of N2O is an effective anxiolytic. This anti-anxiety effect is associated with enhanced activity of GABAA receptors, as it is partially reversed by benzodiazepine receptor antagonists. Mirroring this, animals that have developed tolerance to the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines are partially tolerant to N2O. Indeed, in humans given 30% N2O, benzodiazepine receptor antagonists reduced the subjective reports of feeling \"high\", but did not alter psychomotor performance.\nAnalgesic effect.\nThe analgesic effects of N2O are linked to the interaction between the endogenous opioid system and the descending noradrenergic system. When animals are given morphine chronically, they develop tolerance to its pain-killing effects, and this also renders the animals tolerant to the analgesic effects of N2O. Administration of antibodies that bind and block the activity of some endogenous opioids (not \u03b2-endorphin) also block the antinociceptive effects of N2O. Drugs that inhibit the breakdown of endogenous opioids also potentiate the antinociceptive effects of N2O. Several experiments have shown that opioid receptor antagonists applied directly to the brain block the antinociceptive effects of N2O, but these drugs have no effect when injected into the spinal cord.\nApart from an indirect action, nitrous oxide, like morphine also interacts directly with the endogenous opioid system by binding at opioid receptor binding sites.\nConversely, \u03b12-adrenoceptor antagonists block the pain-reducing effects of N2O when given directly to the spinal cord, but not when applied directly to the brain. Indeed, \u03b12B-adrenoceptor knockout mice or animals depleted in norepinephrine are nearly completely resistant to the antinociceptive effects of N2O. Apparently N2O-induced release of endogenous opioids causes disinhibition of brainstem noradrenergic neurons, which release norepinephrine into the spinal cord and inhibit pain signalling. Exactly how N2O causes the release of endogenous opioid peptides remains uncertain.\nProduction.\nVarious methods of producing nitrous oxide are used.\nIndustrial methods.\nNitrous oxide is prepared on an industrial scale by carefully heating ammonium nitrate at about 250\u00a0\u00b0C, which decomposes into nitrous oxide and water vapour.\nThe addition of various phosphate salts favours formation of a purer gas at slightly lower temperatures. This reaction may be difficult to control, resulting in detonation.\nLaboratory methods.\nThe decomposition of ammonium nitrate is also a common laboratory method for preparing the gas. Equivalently, it can be obtained by heating a mixture of sodium nitrate and ammonium sulfate:\nAnother method involves the reaction of urea, nitric acid and sulfuric acid:\nDirect oxidation of ammonia with a manganese dioxide-bismuth oxide catalyst has been reported: cf. Ostwald process.\nHydroxylammonium chloride reacts with sodium nitrite to give nitrous oxide. If the nitrite is added to the hydroxylamine solution, the only remaining by-product is salt water. If the hydroxylamine solution is added to the nitrite solution (nitrite is in excess), however, then toxic higher oxides of nitrogen also are formed:\nTreating HNO3 with SnCl2 and HCl also has been demonstrated:\nHyponitrous acid decomposes to N2O and water with a half-life of 16 days at 25\u00a0\u00b0C at pH 1\u20133.\nAtmospheric occurrence.\nNitrous oxide is a minor component of Earth's atmosphere and is an active part of the planetary nitrogen cycle. Based on analysis of air samples gathered from sites around the world, its concentration surpassed 330\u00a0ppb in 2017. The growth rate of about 1\u00a0ppb per year has also accelerated during recent decades. Nitrous oxide's atmospheric abundance has grown more than 20% from a base level of about 270\u00a0ppb in 1750.\nImportant atmospheric properties of N2O are summarized in the following table:\nIn 2022 the IPCC reported that: \"The human perturbation of the natural nitrogen cycle through the use of synthetic fertilizers and manure, as well as nitrogen deposition resulting from land-based agriculture and fossil fuel burning has been the largest driver of the increase in atmospheric N2O of 31.0 \u00b1 0.5 ppb (10%) between 1980 and 2019.\"\nEmissions by source.\n17.0 (12.2 to 23.5) million tonnes total annual average nitrogen in N2O was emitted in 2007\u20132016. About 40% of N2O emissions are from humans and the rest are part of the natural nitrogen cycle. The N2O emitted each year by humans has a greenhouse effect equivalent to about 3 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide: for comparison humans emitted 37 billion tonnes of actual carbon dioxide in 2019, and methane equivalent to 9 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide.\nMost of the N2O emitted into the atmosphere, from natural and anthropogenic sources, is produced by microorganisms such as denitrifying bacteria and fungi in soils and oceans. Soils under natural vegetation are an important source of nitrous oxide, accounting for 60% of all naturally produced emissions. Other natural sources include the oceans (35%) and atmospheric chemical reactions (5%). Wetlands can also be emitters of nitrous oxide. Emissions from thawing permafrost may be significant, but as of 2022 this is not certain.\nThe main components of anthropogenic emissions are fertilised agricultural soils and livestock manure (42%), runoff and leaching of fertilisers (25%), biomass burning (10%), fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes (10%), biological degradation of other nitrogen-containing atmospheric emissions (9%) and human sewage (5%). Agriculture enhances nitrous oxide production through soil cultivation, the use of nitrogen fertilisers and animal waste handling. These activities stimulate naturally occurring bacteria to produce more nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide emissions from soil can be challenging to measure as they vary markedly over time and space, and the majority of a year's emissions may occur when conditions are favorable during \"hot moments\" and/or at favorable locations known as \"hotspots\".\nAmong industrial emissions, the production of nitric acid and adipic acid are the largest sources of nitrous oxide emissions. The adipic acid emissions specifically arise from the degradation of the nitrolic acid intermediate derived from the nitration of cyclohexanone.\nBiological processes.\nMicrobial processes that generate nitrous oxide may be classified as nitrification and denitrification. Specifically, they include:\nThese processes are affected by soil chemical and physical properties such as the availability of mineral nitrogen and organic matter, acidity and soil type, as well as climate-related factors such as soil temperature and water content. \nThe emission of the gas to the atmosphere is limited greatly by its consumption inside the cells, by a process catalysed by the enzyme nitrous oxide reductase.\nUses.\nRocket motors.\nNitrous oxide may be used as an oxidiser in a rocket motor. Compared to other oxidisers, it is much less toxic and more stable at room temperature, making it easier to store and safer to carry on a flight. Its high density and low storage pressure (when maintained at low temperatures) make it highly competitive with stored high-pressure gas systems.\nIn a 1914 patent, American rocket pioneer Robert Goddard suggested nitrous oxide and gasoline as possible propellants for a liquid-fuelled rocket. Nitrous oxide has been the oxidiser of choice in several hybrid rocket designs (using solid fuel with a liquid or gaseous oxidiser). The combination of nitrous oxide with hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene fuel has been used by SpaceShipOne and others. It also is notably used in amateur and high power rocketry with various plastics as the fuel.\nNitrous oxide may also be used as a monopropellant. In the presence of a heated catalyst at a temperature of , N2O decomposes exothermically into nitrogen and oxygen. Because of the large heat release, the catalytic action rapidly becomes secondary, as thermal autodecomposition becomes dominant. In a vacuum thruster, this may provide a monopropellant specific impulse (\"I\"sp) up to 180 s. While noticeably less than the \"I\"sp available from hydrazine thrusters (monopropellant, or bipropellant with dinitrogen tetroxide), the decreased toxicity makes nitrous oxide a worthwhile option.\nThe ignition of nitrous oxide depends critically on pressure. It deflagrates at approximately at a pressure of 309\u00a0psi (21\u00a0atmospheres). At 600\u00a0psi, the required ignition energy is only 6\u00a0joules, whereas at 130\u00a0psi a 2,500-joule ignition energy input is insufficient.\nInternal combustion engine.\nIn vehicle racing, nitrous oxide (often called \"nitrous\" in this context) increases engine power by providing more oxygen during combustion, thus allowing the engine to burn more fuel. It is an oxidising agent roughly equivalent to hydrogen peroxide, and much stronger than molecular oxygen. Nitrous oxide is not flammable at low pressure/temperature, but at about , its breakdown delivers more oxygen than atmospheric air. It often is mixed with another fuel that is easier to deflagrate. \nNitrous oxide is stored as a compressed liquid. In an engine intake manifold, the evaporation and expansion of the liquid causes a large drop in intake charge temperature, resulting in a denser charge and allowing more air/fuel mixture to enter the cylinder. Sometimes nitrous oxide is injected into (or prior to) the intake manifold, whereas other systems directly inject it just before the cylinder (direct port injection).\nThe technique was used during World War II by Luftwaffe aircraft with the GM-1 system to boost the power output of aircraft engines. Originally meant to provide the Luftwaffe standard aircraft with superior high-altitude performance, technological considerations limited its use to extremely high altitudes. Accordingly, it was only used by specialised planes such as high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft, high-speed bombers and high-altitude interceptor aircraft. It sometimes could be found on Luftwaffe aircraft also fitted with another engine-boost system, MW 50, a form of water injection for aviation engines that used methanol for its boost capabilities.\nOne of the major problems of nitrous oxide oxidant in a reciprocating engine is excessive power: if the mechanical structure of the engine is not properly reinforced, it may be severely damaged or destroyed. It is important with nitrous oxide augmentation of petrol engines to maintain proper and evenly spread operating temperatures and fuel levels to prevent pre-ignition (also called detonation or spark knock). However, most problems associated with nitrous oxide come not from excessive power but from excessive pressure, since the gas builds up a much denser charge in the cylinder. The increased pressure and temperature can melt, crack, or warp the piston, valve, and cylinder head.\nAutomotive-grade liquid nitrous oxide differs slightly from medical-grade. A small amount of sulfur dioxide (SO2) is added to prevent substance abuse.\nAerosol propellant for food.\nThe gas is approved for use as a food additive (E\u00a0number: E942), specifically as an aerosol spray propellant. It is commonly used in aerosol whipped cream canisters and cooking sprays.\nThe gas is extremely soluble in fatty compounds. In pressurised aerosol whipped cream, it is dissolved in the fatty cream until it leaves the can, when it becomes gaseous and thus creates foam. This produces whipped cream four times the volume of the liquid, whereas whipping air into cream only produces twice the volume. Unlike air, nitrous oxide inhibits rancidification of the butterfat. Carbon dioxide cannot be used for whipped cream because it is acidic in water, which would curdle the cream and give it a seltzer-like \"sparkle\".\nExtra-frothed whipped cream produced with nitrous oxide is unstable, and will return to liquid within half an hour to one hour. Thus, it is not suitable for decorating food that will not be served immediately.\nIn December 2016, there was a shortage of aerosol whipped cream in the United States, with canned whipped cream use at its peak during the Christmas and holiday season, due to an explosion at the Air Liquide nitrous oxide facility in Florida in late August. The company prioritized the remaining supply of nitrous oxide to medical customers rather than to food manufacturing.\nAlso, cooking spray, made from various oils with lecithin emulsifier, may use nitrous oxide propellant, or alternatively food-grade alcohol or propane.\nMedical.\nNitrous oxide has been used in dentistry and surgery, as an anaesthetic and analgesic, since 1844. In the early days, the gas was administered through simple inhalers consisting of a breathing bag made of rubber cloth. Today, the gas is administered in hospitals by means of an automated relative analgesia machine, with an anaesthetic vaporiser and a medical ventilator, that delivers a precisely dosed and breath-actuated flow of nitrous oxide mixed with oxygen in a 2:1 ratio.\nNitrous oxide is a weak general anaesthetic, and so is generally not used alone in general anaesthesia, but used as a carrier gas (mixed with oxygen) for more powerful general anaesthetic drugs such as sevoflurane or desflurane. It has a minimum alveolar concentration of 105% and a blood/gas partition coefficient of 0.46. The use of nitrous oxide in anaesthesia can increase the risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting.\nDentists use a simpler machine which only delivers an N2O/O2 mixture for the patient to inhale while conscious but must still be a recognised purpose designed dedicated relative analgesic flowmeter with a minimum 30% of oxygen at all times and a maximum upper limit of 70% nitrous oxide. The patient is kept conscious throughout the procedure, and retains adequate mental faculties to respond to questions and instructions from the dentist.\nInhalation of nitrous oxide is used frequently to relieve pain associated with childbirth, trauma, oral surgery and acute coronary syndrome (including heart attacks). Its use during labour has been shown to be a safe and effective aid for birthing women. Its use for acute coronary syndrome is of unknown benefit.\nIn Canada and the UK, Entonox and Nitronox are used commonly by ambulance crews (including unregistered practitioners) as rapid and highly effective analgesic gas.\nFifty percent nitrous oxide can be considered for use by trained non-professional first aid responders in prehospital settings, given the relative ease and safety of administering 50% nitrous oxide as an analgesic. The rapid reversibility of its effect would also prevent it from precluding diagnosis.\nRecreational.\nRecreational inhalation of nitrous oxide, to induce euphoria and slight hallucinations, began with the British upper class in 1799 in gatherings known as \"laughing gas parties\".\nFrom the 19th century, the widespread availability of the gas for medical and culinary purposes allowed for recreational use to greatly expand globally. In the UK as of 2014, nitrous oxide was estimated to be used by almost half a million young people at nightspots, festivals and parties.\nWidespread recreational use of the drug throughout the UK was featured in the 2017 Vice documentary \"Inside The Laughing Gas Black Market\", in which journalist Matt Shea met with dealers of the drug who stole it from hospitals.\nA significant issue cited in London's press is the effect of nitrous oxide canister littering, which is highly visible and causes significant complaints from communities.\nPrior to 8 November 2023 in the UK, nitrous oxide was subject to the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016, making it illegal to produce, supply, import or export nitrous oxide for recreational use. The updated law prohibited possession of nitrous oxide, classifying it as a Class C drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.\nWhile nitrous oxide is understood by most recreational users to give a \"safe high\", many are unaware that excessive consumption may cause neurological harm which, if left untreated, can cause permanent neurological damage. In Australia, recreation use became a public health concern following a rise in reports of neurotoxicity and emergency room admissions. In the state of South Australia, legislation was passed in 2020 to restrict canister sales.\nIn 2024, under the street name \"Galaxy Gas\", nitrous oxide has exploded in popularity among young people for recreational use, partially driven by TikTok trends.\nSafety.\nNitrous oxide is a significant occupational hazard for surgeons, dentists and nurses. Because the gas is minimally metabolised in humans (with a rate of 0.004%), it retains its potency when exhaled into the room by the patient, and can intoxicate the clinic staff if the room is poorly ventilated, with potential chronic exposure. A continuous-flow fresh-air ventilation system or N2O scavenger system may be needed to prevent waste-gas buildup. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health recommends that workers' exposure to nitrous oxide should be controlled during the administration of anaesthetic gas in medical, dental and veterinary operators. It set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 25 ppm (46\u00a0mg/m3) to escaped anaesthetic.\nExposure to nitrous oxide causes short-term impairment of cognition, audiovisual acuity, and manual dexterity, as well as spatial and temporal disorientation, putting the user at risk of accidental injury.\nNitrous oxide is neurotoxic, and medium or long-term habitual consumption of significant quantities can cause neurological harm with the potential for permanent damage if left untreated. It is believed that, like other NMDA receptor antagonists, N2O produces Olney's lesions in rodents upon prolonged (several hour) exposure.\nHowever, because it is normally expelled from the body rapidly, it is less likely to be neurotoxic than other NMDAR antagonists. In rodents, short-term exposure results in only mild injury that is rapidly reversible, and neuronal death occurs only after constant and sustained exposure. Nitrous oxide may also cause neurotoxicity after extended exposure because of hypoxia. This is especially true of non-medical formulations such as whipped-cream chargers (\"whippits\" or \"nangs\"), which contain no oxygen gas.\nIn reports to poison control centers, heavy users (\u2265400 g or \u2265200 L of gas in one session) or frequent users (regular, i.e., daily or weekly) have developed signs of peripheral neuropathy: ataxia (gait abnormalities) or paresthesia (perception of sensations such as tingling, numbness, or prickling, mostly in the extremities). Such early signs of neurological damage indicate chronic toxicity.\nNitrous oxide might have therapeutic use in treating stroke. In a rodent model, nitrous oxide at 75% by volume reduced ischemia-induced neuronal death induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery, and decreased NMDA-induced Ca2+ influx in neuronal cell cultures, a cause of excitotoxicity.\nOccupational exposure to ambient nitrous oxide has been associated with DNA damage, due to interruptions in DNA synthesis. This correlation is dose-dependent and does not appear to extend to casual recreational use; however, further research is needed to confirm the level of exposure needed to cause damage.\nInhalation of pure nitrous oxide causes oxygen deprivation, resulting in low blood pressure, fainting, and even heart attacks. This can occur if the user inhales large quantities continuously, as with a strap-on mask connected to a gas canister or other inhalation system, or prolonged breath-holding.\nLong-term exposure to nitrous oxide may cause vitamin B12 deficiency. This can cause serious neurotoxicity if the user has preexisting vitamin B12 deficiency. It inactivates the cobalamin form of vitamin B12 by oxidation. Symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency, including sensory neuropathy, myelopathy and encephalopathy, may occur within days or weeks of exposure to nitrous oxide anaesthesia in people with subclinical vitamin B12 deficiency. Symptoms are treated with high doses of vitamin B12, but recovery can be slow and incomplete. People with normal vitamin B12 levels have stores to make the effects of nitrous oxide insignificant, unless exposure is repeated and prolonged (nitrous oxide abuse). Vitamin B12 levels should be checked in people with risk factors for vitamin B12 deficiency prior to using nitrous oxide anaesthesia.\nSeveral experimental studies in rats indicate that chronic exposure of pregnant females to nitrous oxide may have adverse effects on the developing fetus.\nAt room temperature () the saturated vapour pressure is 50.525 bar, rising up to 72.45\u00a0bar at \u2014the critical temperature. The pressure curve is thus unusually sensitive to temperature. As with many strong oxidisers, contamination of parts with fuels have been implicated in rocketry accidents, where small quantities of nitrous/fuel mixtures explode due to \"water hammer\"-like effects (sometimes called \"dieseling\"\u2014heating due to adiabatic compression of gases can reach decomposition temperatures). Some common building materials such as stainless steel and aluminium can act as fuels with strong oxidisers such as nitrous oxide, as can contaminants that may ignite due to adiabatic compression. There also have been incidents where nitrous oxide decomposition in plumbing has led to the explosion of large tanks.\nEnvironmental impact.\nGlobal accounting of N2O sources and sinks over the decade ending 2016 indicates that about 40% of the average 17\u00a0TgN/yr (teragrams, or million metric tons, of nitrogen per year) of emissions originated from human activity, and shows that emissions growth chiefly came from expanding agriculture.\nNitrous oxide has significant global warming potential as a greenhouse gas. On a per-molecule basis, considered over a 100-year period, nitrous oxide has 265 times the atmospheric heat-trapping ability of carbon dioxide (CO2). However, because of its low concentration (less than 1/1,000 of that of CO2), its contribution to the greenhouse effect is less than one third that of carbon dioxide, and also less than methane. On the other hand, since about 40% of the N2O entering the atmosphere is the result of human activity, control of nitrous oxide is part of efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions.\nMost human caused nitrous oxide released into the atmosphere is a greenhouse gas emission from agriculture, when farmers add nitrogen-based fertilizers onto the fields, and through the breakdown of animal manure. Reduction of emissions can be a hot topic in the politics of climate change.\nNitrous oxide is also released as a by-product of burning fossil fuel, though the amount released depends on which fuel was used. It is also emitted through the manufacture of nitric acid, which is used in the synthesis of nitrogen fertilizers. The production of adipic acid, a precursor to nylon and other synthetic clothing fibres, also releases nitrous oxide.\nA rise in atmospheric nitrous oxide concentrations has been implicated as a possible contributor to the extremely intense global warming during the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event.\nNitrous oxide has also been implicated in thinning the ozone layer. A 2009 study suggested that N2O emission was the single most important ozone-depleting emission and it was expected to remain the largest throughout the 21st century.\nLegality.\nIn India transfer of nitrous oxide from bulk cylinders to smaller, more transportable E-type, 1,590-litre-capacity tanks is legal when intended for medical anaesthesia.\nThe New Zealand Ministry of Health has warned that nitrous oxide is a prescription medicine whose sale or possession without a prescription is an offense under the Medicines Act. This would seemingly prohibit all non-medicinal uses of nitrous oxide, although it is implied that only recreational use will be targeted.\nIn August 2015, the Council of the London Borough of Lambeth (UK) banned the use of the drug for recreational purposes, making offenders liable to an on-the-spot fine of up to \u00a31,000. In September 2023, the UK Government announced that nitrous oxide would be made illegal by the end of the year as a class C drug, with possession potentially carrying up to a two-year prison sentence or an unlimited fine.\nPossession of nitrous oxide is legal under United States federal law and is not subject to DEA purview. It is, however, regulated by the Food and Drug Administration under the Food Drug and Cosmetics Act; prosecution is possible under its \"misbranding\" clauses, prohibiting the sale or distribution of nitrous oxide for the purpose of human consumption without a proper medical license. Many states have laws regulating the possession, sale and distribution of nitrous oxide. Such laws usually ban distribution to minors or limit the amount that may be sold without special license. For example, in California, possession for recreational use is prohibited and qualifies as a misdemeanor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "37442", "revid": "30035619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37442", "title": "Alliant RQ-6 Outrider", "text": "The Alliant RQ-6 Outrider unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was designed to provide near-real-time reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition information to United States Marine Corps air/ground task forces, United States Army brigades, and deployed United States Navy units that was small enough for an entire system to be contained on two Humvees and trailer and transported on a single C-130 Hercules cargo aircraft.\nThe project began in 1996 and was canceled in 1999.\nThe \"R\" is the Department of Defense designation for reconnaissance; \"Q\" means unmanned aircraft system. The \"6\" refers to its being the sixth of a series of purpose-built unmanned aircraft systems.\nSpecifications.\n\"Data from\" GlobalSecurity.org, UAV Annual Report FY 1996General characteristics* Capacity: payload* Aspect ratio: * Propellers: 2-bladed fixed-pitch pusher propeller\nPerformance* Endurance: 4.9 hours loitering at 7.2 hours loitering at&lt;br&gt;\nSee also.\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37443", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37443", "title": "Jesus of Nazareth", "text": ""}
{"id": "37445", "revid": "1456683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37445", "title": "Kannada", "text": "Dravidian language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nKannada () is a Dravidian language spoken predominantly in the state of Karnataka in southwestern India, and spoken by a minority of the population in all neighbouring states. It has 44\u00a0million native speakers, and is additionally a second or third language for 15\u00a0million speakers in Karnataka. It is the official and administrative language of Karnataka. It also has scheduled status in India and has been included among the country's designated classical languages.\nKannada was the court language of a number of dynasties and empires of South India, Central India and the Deccan Plateau, namely the Kadamba dynasty, Western Ganga dynasty, Nolamba dynasty, Chalukya dynasty, Rashtrakutas, Western Chalukya Empire, Seuna dynasty, Kingdom of Mysore, Nayakas of Keladi, Hoysala dynasty and the Vijayanagara Empire.\nThe Kannada language is written using the Kannada script, which evolved from the 5th-century Kadamba script. Kannada is attested epigraphically for about one and a half millennia and literary Old Kannada flourished during the 9th-century Rashtrakuta Empire. Kannada has an unbroken literary history of around 1200 years. Kannada literature has been presented with eight Jnanpith Awards, the most for any Dravidian language and the second highest for any Indian language, and one International Booker Prize. In July 2011, a center for the study of classical Kannada was established as part of the Central Institute of Indian Languages in Mysore to facilitate research related to the language.\nGeographic distribution.\nKannada had 43.7\u00a0million native speakers in India at the time of the 2011 census. It is the main language of the state of Karnataka, where it is spoken natively by million people, or about two-thirds of the state's population. There are native Kannada speakers in the neighbouring states of Tamil Nadu ( speakers), Maharashtra (), Andhra Pradesh and Telangana (), Kerala () and Goa (). It is also spoken as a second and third language by over 12.9\u00a0million non-native speakers in Karnataka.\nKannadigas form Tamil Nadu's third biggest linguistic group; their population is roughly 1.23\u00a0million, which is 2.2% of Tamil Nadu's total population.\nThe Malayalam spoken by people of Lakshadweep has many Kannada words.\nIn the United States, there were 35,900 speakers in 2006\u20132008, a number that had risen to 48,600 by the time of the 2015 census. There are speakers in Canada (according to the 2016 census), 9,700 in Australia (2016 census), 22,000 in Singapore (2018 estimate), and 59,000 in Malaysia (2021 estimate).\nDevelopment.\nKannada, like Malayalam and Tamil, is a South Dravidian language and a descendant of Tamil-Kannada, from which it derives its grammar and core vocabulary. Its history can be divided into three stages: Old Kannada, or \"Ha\u1e37eganna\u1e0da\" from 450 to 1200\u00a0AD, Middle Kannada (\"Na\u1e0duganna\u1e0da\") from 1200 to 1700 and Modern Kannada (\"Hosaganna\u1e0da\") from 1700 to the present.\nKannada has been considerably influenced by Sanskrit and Prakrit\u2014in morphology, phonetics, vocabulary, grammar, and syntax. The three principal sources of influence on literary Kannada grammar appear to be P\u0101\u1e47ini's grammar, non-P\u0101\u1e47inian schools of Sanskrit grammar, particularly \"Katantra\" and \"Sakatayana\" schools, and Prakrit grammar. Literary Prakrit seems to have prevailed in Karnataka since ancient times. Speakers of vernacular Prakrit may have come into contact with Kannada speakers, thus influencing their language, even before Kannada was used for administrative or liturgical purposes. The scholar K. V. Narayana claims that many tribal languages now designated as Kannada dialects could be nearer to the earlier form of the language, with lesser influence from other languages.\nThe work of the scholar Iravatham Mahadevan indicates that Kannada was already a language of rich spoken tradition by the 3rd century BC. Based on native Kannada words in Prakrit inscriptions of that period, Kannada must have been spoken by a broad and stable population.\nKannada includes many loan words from Sanskrit. Some unaltered loan words () include , , , , and . Some examples of naturalised Sanskrit words () in Kannada are , , and from . Some naturalised words of Prakrit origin in Kannada are derived from , from .\nHistory.\nEarly traces.\nThe earliest Kannada inscriptions are from the middle of the 5th century AD, but there are a number of earlier texts that may have been influenced by the ancestor language of Old Kannada.\nIravatam Mahadevan, author of a work on early Tamil epigraphy, argued that oral traditions in Kannada and Telugu existed much before written documents were produced. Although the rock inscriptions of Ashoka were written in Prakrit, the spoken language in those regions was Kannada as the case may be. He can be quoted as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If proof were needed to show that Kannada was the spoken language of the region during the early period, one needs only to study the large number of Kannada personal names and place names in the early Prakrit inscriptions on stone and copper in Upper South India [...] Kannada was spoken by relatively large and well-settled populations, living in well-organised states ruled by able dynasties like the Satavahanas, with a high degree of civilisation [...] There is, therefore, no reason to believe that these languages had less rich or less expressive oral traditions than Tamil had towards the end of its pre-literate period.\nKannada linguist, historian and researcher B. A. Viveka Rai and Kannada writer, lyricist, and linguist Doddarangegowda assert that due to the extensive trade relations that existed between the ancient Kannada lands (Kuntalas, Mahishakas, Punnatas, Mahabanas, Asmakas, etc.) and Greece, Egypt, the Hellenistic and Roman empires and others, there was exchange of people, ideas, literature, etc. and a Kannada book existed in the form of a palm-leaf manuscript in the old Alexandria library which was subsequently lost in the fire. They state that this also proves that the Kannada language and literature must have flourished much before the library was established in between c. 285-48\u00a0BC. This document played a vital role in getting the classical status to Kannada from the Indian Central Government. The Ashoka rock edict found at Brahmagiri (dated to 250\u00a0BC) has been suggested to contain words (\"Isila\", meaning to throw, viz. an arrow, etc.) in identifiable Kannada.\nIn some 3rd\u20131st century BC Tamil inscriptions, words of Kannada influence such as \"Naliyura\", \"kavuDi\" and \"posil\" were found. In a 3rd-century AD Tamil inscription there is usage of \"oppanappa vIran\". Here the honorific \"appa\" to a person's name is an influence from Kannada. Another word of Kannada origin is \"taayviru\" and is found in a 4th-century AD Tamil inscription. S. Settar studied the \"sittanavAsal\" inscription of first century AD as also the inscriptions at \"tirupparamkunram\", \"adakala\" and \"neDanUpatti\". The later inscriptions were studied in detail by Iravatham Mahadevan also. Mahadevan argues that the words \"erumi\", \"kavuDi\", and \"tAyiyar\" have their origin in Kannada because Tamil cognates are not available. Settar adds the words \"nADu\" and \"iLayar\" to this list. Mahadevan feels that some grammatical categories found in these inscriptions are also unique to Kannada rather than Tamil. Both these scholars attribute these influences to the movements and spread of Jainas in these regions. These inscriptions belong to the period between the first century BC and fourth century AD. These are some examples that are proof of the early usage of a few Kannada origin words in early Tamil inscriptions before the common era and in the early centuries of the common era.\nPliny the Elder, a Roman historian, wrote about pirates between Muziris and Nitrias (Netravati River), called Nitran by Ptolemy. He also mentions Barace (Barcelore), referring to the modern port city of Mangaluru, upon its mouth. Many of these are Kannada origin names of places and rivers of the Karnataka coast of the 1st century AD.\nThe Greek geographer Ptolemy (150\u00a0AD) mentions places such as Badiamaioi (Badami), Inde (Indi), Kalligeris (Kalkeri), Modogoulla (Mudagal), Petrigala (Pattadakal), Hippokoura (Huvina Hipparagi), Nagarouris (Nagur), Tabaso (Tavasi), Tiripangalida (Gadahinglai), Soubouttou or Sabatha (Savadi), Banaouase (Banavasi), Thogorum (Tagara), Biathana (Paithan), Sirimalaga (Malkhed), Aloe (Ellapur) and Pasage (Palasige). He mentions a Satavahana king Sire Polemaios, who is identified with Sri Pulumayi (or Pulumavi), whose name is derived from the Kannada word for \"Puli\", meaning tiger. Some scholars indicate that the name Pulumayi is actually Kannada's \"Puli Maiyi\" or \"One with the body of a tiger\" indicating native Kannada origin for the Satavahanas. Pai identifies all the 10 cities mentioned by Ptolemy (100\u2013170\u00a0AD) as lying between the river Benda (or Binda) or Bhima river in the north and Banaouasei (Banavasi) in the south, viz. Nagarouris (Nagur), Tabaso (Tavasi), Inde (Indi), Tiripangalida (Gadhinglaj), Hippokoura (Huvina Hipparagi), Soubouttou (Savadi), Sirimalaga (Malkhed), Kalligeris (Kalkeri), Modogoulla (Mudgal), and Petirgala (Pattadakal)\u2014as being located in Northern Karnataka, which explain the existence of Kannada place names (and the language and culture) in the southern Kuntala region during the reign of Vasishtiputra Pulumayi (c.\u200985\u2013125\u00a0AD, i.e., late 1st century \u2013 early 2nd century AD) who was ruling from Paithan in the north and his son, prince Vilivaya-kura or Pulumayi Kumara was ruling from Huvina Hipparagi in present Karnataka in the south.\nAn early ancestor of Kannada (or a related language) may have been spoken by Indian traders in Roman-era Egypt and it may account for the Indian-language passages in the ancient Greek play known as the Charition mime.\nEpigraphy.\nThe earliest examples of a full-length Kannada language stone inscription (\"\u015bil\u0101\u015b\u0101sana\") containing Brahmi characters with characteristics attributed to those of proto-Kannada in \"Ha\u1e37e Kanna\u1e0da\" (\"lit\" Old Kannada) script can be found in the Halmidi inscription, usually dated c.\u2009450\u00a0AD, indicating that Kannada had become an administrative language at that time. The Halmidi inscription provides invaluable information about the history and culture of Karnataka. A set of five copper plate inscriptions discovered in Mudiyanur, though in the Sanskrit language, is in the Pre-Old Kannada script older than the Halmidi edict date of 450\u00a0AD, as per palaeographers.\nFollowed by B. L. Rice, leading epigrapher and historian, K. R. Narasimhan following a detailed study and comparison, declared that the plates belong to the 4th century, i.e., 338\u00a0AD. The Kannada Lion balustrade inscription excavated at the Pranaveshwara temple complex at Talagunda near Shiralakoppa of Shivamogga district, dated to 370\u00a0AD is now considered the earliest Kannada inscriptions replacing the Halmidi inscription of 450\u00a0AD. The 5th century poetic Tamatekallu inscription of Chitradurga and the Siragunda inscription from Chikkamagaluru Taluk of 500\u00a0AD are further examples. Recent reports indicate that the Old Kannada \"Gunabhushitana\" \"Nishadi\" inscription discovered on the Chandragiri hill, Shravanabelagola, is older than Halmidi inscription by about fifty to hundred years and may belong to the period AD 350\u2013400.\nThe noted archaeologist and art historian S. Shettar is of the opinion that an inscription of the Western Ganga King Kongunivarma Madhava (c.\u2009350\u2013370) found at Tagarthi (Tyagarthi) in Shikaripura taluk of Shimoga district is of 350\u00a0AD and is also older than the Halmidi inscription.\nCurrent estimates of the total number of existing epigraphs written in Kannada range from 30,000 by the scholar Sheldon Pollock to over 35,000 by Amaresh Datta of the Sahitya Akademi. Prior to the Halmidi inscription, there is an abundance of inscriptions containing Kannada words, phrases and sentences, proving its antiquity. The 543\u00a0AD Badami cliff inscription of Pulakesi I is an example of a Sanskrit inscription in old Kannada script.\nKannada inscriptions are discovered in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat in addition to Karnataka. This indicates the spread of the influence of the language over the ages, especially during the rule of large Kannada empires.\nThe earliest copper plates inscribed in Old Kannada script and language, dated to the early 8th century AD, are associated with Alupa King Aluvarasa II from Belmannu (the Dakshina Kannada district), and display the double crested fish, his royal emblem. The oldest well-preserved palm leaf manuscript in \"Old Kannada\" is that of \"Dhavala\". It dates to around the 9th century and is preserved in the Jain Bhandar, Mudbidri, Dakshina Kannada district. The manuscript contains 1478 leaves written using ink.\nCoins.\nSome early Kadamba Dynasty coins bearing the Kannada inscription \"Vira\" and \"Skandha\" were found in Satara collectorate. A gold coin bearing three inscriptions of \"Sri\" and an abbreviated inscription of king Bhagiratha's name called \"bhagi\" (c. 390\u2013420\u00a0AD) in old Kannada exists. A Kadamba copper coin dated to the 5th century AD with the inscription \"Srimanaragi\" in Kannada script was discovered in Banavasi, Uttara Kannada district. Coins with Kannada legends have been discovered spanning the rule of the Western Ganga Dynasty, the Badami Chalukyas, the Alupas, the Western Chalukyas, the Rashtrakutas, the Hoysalas, the Vijayanagar Empire, the Kadamba Dynasty of Banavasi, the Keladi Nayakas and the Mysore kingdom, the Badami Chalukya coins being a recent discovery. The coins of the Kadambas of Goa are unique in that they have alternate inscription of the king's name in Kannada and Devanagari in triplicate, a few coins of the Kadambas of Hangal are also available.\nLiterature.\nOld Kannada.\nThe oldest known existing record of Kannada poetry in \"Tripadi\" metre is the Kappe Arabhatta record of the 7th century AD. \"Kavirajamarga\" by King Nripatunga Amoghavarsha I (850\u00a0AD) is the earliest existing literary work in Kannada. It is a writing on literary criticism and poetics meant to standardise various written Kannada dialects used in literature in previous centuries. The book makes reference to Kannada works by early writers such as King Durvinita of the 6th century and Ravikirti, the author of the Aihole record of 636\u00a0AD. Since the earliest available Kannada work is one on grammar and a guide of sorts to unify existing variants of Kannada grammar and literary styles, it can be safely assumed that literature in Kannada must have started several centuries earlier. An early extant prose work, the \"Va\u1e0d\u1e0d\u0101r\u0101dhane\" (\u0cb5\u0ca1\u0ccd\u0ca1\u0cbe\u0cb0\u0cbe\u0ca7\u0ca8\u0cc6) by Shivakotiacharya of 900\u00a0AD provides an elaborate description of the life of Bhadrabahu of Shravanabelagola.\nSome early writers of prose and verse mentioned in the \"Kavirajamarga,\" numbering 8\u201310, stating these are but a few of many, but whose works are lost, are Vimala or Vimalachandra (c. 777), Udaya, Nagarjuna, Jayabodhi, Durvinita (6th century), and poets including Kavisvara, Srivijaya, Pandita Chandra, Ravikirti (c. 634) and Lokapala. For fragmentary information on these writers, we can refer the work \"Karnataka Kavi Charite\". Ancient indigenous Kannada literary compositions of (folk) poetry like the \"Chattana\" and \"Bedande\", which preferred to use the \"Desi\" metre, are said to have survived at least until the date of the Kavirajamarga in 850\u00a0AD and had their roots in the early Kannada folk literature. These Kannada verse-compositions might have been representative of folk songs containing influence of Sanskrit and Prakrit metrical patterns to some extent. \"Kavirajamarga\" also discusses earlier composition forms peculiar to Kannada, the \"gadyakatha\", a mixture of prose and poetry, the \"\"chattana\" and the \"bedande\"\", poems of several stanzas that were meant to be sung with the optional use of a musical instrument. Amoghavarsha Nripatunga compares the \"puratana-kavigal\" (old Kannada poets) who wrote the great \"Chattana\" poems in Kannada to the likes of the great Sanskrit poets like Gunasuri, Narayana, Bharavi, Kalidasa, Magha, etc. This Old Kannada work, \"Kavirajamarga\", itself in turn refers to a \"Palagannada\" (Old Kannada) of much ancient times, which is nothing but the Pre-Old Kannada and also warns aspiring Kannada writers to avoid its archaisms, as per R. S. Hukkerikar. Regarding earlier poems in Kannada, the author of \"Kavirajamarga\" states that old Kannada is appropriate in ancient poems but insipid in contemporaneous works as per R. Narasimhacharya. Gunanandi (900\u00a0AD), quoted by the grammarian Bhattakalanka and always addressed as \"Bhagawan\" (the adorable), was the author of a logic, grammar and \"sahitya\". Durvinita (529\u2013579\u00a0AD), the Ganga king, was the pupil of the author of Sabdavatara, i.e., Devanandi Pujyapada. Durvinita is said to have written a commentary on the difficult 15th \"sarga\" of Bharavi's \"Kiratarjuniya\" in Kannada. Early Kannada writers regularly mention three poets as of especial eminence among their predecessors \u2013 Samanta-bhadra, Kavi Parameshthi and Pujyapada. Since later Kannada poets so uniformly name these three as eminent poets, it is probable that they wrote in Kannada also. Samantabhadra is placed in the 2nd century AD by Jain tradition. Old Kannada commentaries on some of his works exist. He was said to have been born in Utkalikagrama and while performing penance in Manuvakahalli, he was attacked by a disease called \"Bhasmaka\". Pujyapada also called Devanandi, was the preceptor of Ganga king Durvinita and belonged to the late 5th to early 6th century AD. Kaviparameshthi probably lived in the 4th century AD. He may possibly be the same as the \"Kaviswara\" referred to in the Kavirajamarga, and the \"Kaviparameswara\" praised by Chavunda Raya (978\u00a0AD) and his spiritual teacher, Nemichandra (10th century AD), all the names possibly being only epithets.\nKannada works from earlier centuries mentioned in the Kavirajamarga are not yet traced. Some ancient Kannada texts now considered extinct but referenced in later centuries are \"Prabhrita\" (650\u00a0AD) by Syamakundacharya, \"Chudamani\" (Crest Jewel\u2014650\u00a0AD or earlier) by Srivaradhadeva, also known as Tumbuluracharya, which is a work of 96,000 verse-measures and a commentary on logic (\"Tatwartha-mahashastra\"). Other sources date \"Chudamani\" to the 6th century or earlier. An inscription of 1128\u00a0AD quotes a couplet by the famous Sanskrit poet Dandin (active 680\u2013720\u00a0AD), highly praising Srivaradhadeva, for his Kannada work Chudamani, as having \"produced Saraswati (i.e., learning and eloquence) from the tip of his tongue, as Siva produced the Ganges from the tip of his top-knot.\" Bhattakalanka (1604\u00a0CE), the great Kannada grammarian, refers to Srivaradhadeva's Chudamani as the greatest work in Kannada, and as incontestable proof of the scholarly character and value of Kannada literature. This makes Srivaradhadeva's time earlier than the 6th\u20137th century AD. Other writers, whose works are not extant now but titles of which are known from independent references such as Indranandi's \"Srutavatara\", Devachandra's \"Rajavalikathe\", Bhattakalanka's \"Sabdanusasana\" of 1604, writings of Jayakirthi are Syamakundacharya (650), who authored the \"Prabhrita\", and Srivaradhadeva (also called Tumubuluracharya, 650 or earlier), who wrote the \"Chudamani\" (\"Crest Jewel\"), a 96,000-verse commentary on logic. The \"Karnateshwara Katha\", a eulogy for King Pulakesi II, is said to have belonged to the 7th century; the \"Gajastaka\", a lost \"ashtaka\" (eight line verse) composition and a work on elephant management by King Shivamara II, belonged to the 8th century, this served as the basis for 2 popular folk songs \"Ovanige\" and \"Onakevadu,\" which were sung either while pounding corn or to entice wild elephants into a pit (\"Ovam\"). The \"Chandraprabha-purana\" by Sri Vijaya, a court poet of emperor Amoghavarsha I, is ascribed to the early 9th century. His writing has been mentioned by Vijayanagara poets Mangarasa III and Doddiah (also spelt Doddayya, c. 1550\u00a0AD) and praised by Durgasimha (c. 1025\u00a0AD). During the 9th century period, the Digambara Jain poet Asaga (or Asoka) authored, among other writings, \"Karnata Kumarasambhava Kavya\" and \"Varadamana Charitra\". His works have been praised by later poets, although none of his works are available today. \"Gunagankiyam\", the earliest known prosody in Kannada, was referenced in a Tamil work dated to the 10th century or earlier (\"Yapparungalakkarigai\" by Amritasagara). Gunanandi, an expert in logic, Kannada grammar and prose, flourished in the 9th century AD. Around 900\u00a0AD, Gunavarma I wrote \"Sudraka\" and \"Harivamsa\" (also known as \"Neminatha Purana\"). In \"Sudraka\" he compared his patron, Ganga king Ereganga Neetimarga II (c. 907\u2013921\u00a0AD), to a noted king called Sudraka. Jinachandra, who is referred to by Sri Ponna (c. 950\u00a0AD) as the author of \"Pujyapada Charita\", had earned the honorific \"modern Samantha Bhadra\". Tamil Buddhist commentators of the 10th century AD (in the commentary on \"Neminatham\", a Tamil grammatical work) make references that show that Kannada literature must have flourished as early as the BC 4th century.\nAround the beginning of the 9th century, Old Kannada was spoken from Kaveri to Godavari. The Kannada spoken between the rivers Varada and Malaprabha was the pure well of Kannada undefiled.\nThe late classical period gave birth to several genres of Kannada literature, with new forms of composition coming into use, including \"Ragale\" (a form of blank verse) and meters like \"Sangatya\" and \"Shatpadi\". The works of this period are based on Jain and Hindu principles. Two of the early writers of this period are Harihara and Raghavanka, trailblazers in their own right. Harihara established the \"Ragale\" form of composition while Raghavanka popularised the \"Shatpadi\" (six-lined stanza) meter. A famous Jaina writer of the same period is Janna, who expressed Jain religious teachings through his works.\nThe Vachana Sahitya tradition of the 12th century is purely native and unique in world literature, and the sum of contributions by all sections of society. Vachanas were pithy poems on that period's social, religious and economic conditions. More importantly, they held a mirror to the seed of social revolution, which caused a radical re-examination of the ideas of caste, creed and religion. Some of the important writers of Vachana literature include Basavanna, Allama Prabhu and Akka Mahadevi.\nEmperor Nripatunga Amoghavarsha I of 850\u00a0AD recognised that the Sanskrit style of Kannada literature was \"Margi\" (formal or written form of language) and \"Desi\" (folk or spoken form of language) style was popular and made his people aware of the strength and beauty of their native language Kannada. In 1112\u00a0AD, Jain poet Nayasena of Mulugunda, Dharwad district, in his Champu work \"Dharmamrita\" (\u0ca7\u0cb0\u0ccd\u0cae\u0cbe\u0cae\u0cc3\u0ca4), a book on morals, warns writers from mixing Kannada with Sanskrit by comparing it with mixing of clarified butter and oil. He has written it using very limited Sanskrit words that fit with idiomatic Kannada. In 1235\u00a0AD, Jain poet Andayya, wrote \"Kabbigara Kava\"- \u0c95\u0cac\u0ccd\u0cac\u0cbf\u0c97\u0cb0 \u0c95\u0cbe\u0cb5 (Poet's Defender), also called \"Sobagina Suggi\" (Harvest of Beauty) or \"Madana-Vijaya and\" \"Kavana-Gella\" (Cupid's Conquest)\",\" a \"Champu\" work in pure Kannada using only indigenous (\"desya\") Kannada words and the derived form of Sanskrit words \u2013 \"tadbhavas\", without the admixture of Sanskrit words. He succeeded in his challenge and proved wrong those who had advocated that it was impossible to write a work in Kannada without using Sanskrit words. Andayya may be considered as a protector of Kannada poets who were ridiculed by Sanskrit advocates. Thus Kannada is the only Dravidian language that is not only capable of using only native Kannada words and grammar in its literature (like Tamil), but also use Sanskrit grammar and vocabulary (like Telugu, Malayalam, Tulu, etc.) The Champu style of literature of mixing poetry with prose owes its origins to the Kannada language and was later incorporated by poets into Sanskrit and other Indian languages.\nMiddle Kannada.\nDuring the period between the 15th and 18th centuries, Hinduism had a great influence on Middle Kannada (\"Na\u1e0duganna\u1e0da\"- \u0ca8\u0ca1\u0cc1\u0c97\u0ca8\u0ccd\u0ca8\u0ca1) language and literature. Kumara Vyasa, who wrote the \"Kar\u1e47\u0101\u1e6da Bh\u0101rata Kath\u0101man\u0304jari\" (\u0c95\u0cb0\u0ccd\u0ca3\u0cbe\u0c9f \u0cad\u0cbe\u0cb0\u0ca4 \u0c95\u0ca5\u0cbe\u0cae\u0c82\u0c9c\u0cb0\u0cbf), was arguably the most influential Kannada writer of this period. His work, entirely composed in the native \"Bhamini Shatpadi\" (hexa-meter), is a sublime adaptation of the first ten books of the Mahabharata.\nDuring this period, the Sanskritic influence is present in most abstract, religious, scientific and rhetorical terms. During this period, several Hindi and Marathi words came into Kannada, chiefly relating to feudalism and militia.\nHindu saints of the Vaishnava sect such as Kanakadasa, Purandaradasa, Naraharitirtha, Vyasatirtha, Sripadaraya, Vadirajatirtha, Vijaya Dasa, Gopala Dasa, Jagannatha Dasa, Prasanna Venkatadasa produced devotional poems in this period. Kanakadasa's \"R\u0101madh\u0101nya Charite\" (\u0cb0\u0cbe\u0cae\u0ca7\u0cbe\u0ca8\u0ccd\u0caf \u0c9a\u0cb0\u0cbf\u0ca4\u0cc6) is a rare work, concerning with the issue of class struggle. This period saw the advent of \"Haridasa Sahitya\" (\"lit\" Dasa literature), which made rich contributions to \"Bhakti\" literature and sowed the seeds of Carnatic music. Purandara Dasa is widely considered the \"Father of Carnatic music\".\nModern Kannada.\nThe Kannada works produced from the 19th century make a gradual transition and are classified as \"Hosaganna\u1e0da\" or Modern Kannada. Most notable among the modernists was the poet Nandalike Muddana whose writing may be described as the \"Dawn of Modern Kannada\", though generally, linguists treat \"Indira Bai\" or \"Saddharma Vijayavu\" by Gulvadi Venkata Raya as the first literary works in Modern Kannada. The first modern movable type printing of \"Canarese\" appears to be the \"Canarese Grammar\" of Carey printed at Serampore in 1817, and the \"Bible in Canarese\" of John Hands in 1820. The first novel printed was John Bunyan's \"Pilgrim's Progress\", along with other texts including \"Canarese Proverbs\", \"The History of Little Henry and his Bearer\" by Mary Martha Sherwood, Christian Gottlob Barth's \"Bible Stories\" and \"a Canarese hymn book.\"\nModern Kannada in the 20th century has been influenced by many movements, notably \"Navodaya\", \"Navya\", \"Navyottara\", \"Dalita\" and \"Bandaya\". Contemporary Kannada literature has been highly successful in reaching people of all classes in society. Further, Kannada has produced a number of prolific and renowned poets and writers such as Kuvempu, Bendre, and V K Gokak. Works of Kannada literature have received eight Jnanpith awards, the highest number awarded to any Indian language.\nDictionaries.\nKannada\u2013Kannada dictionary has existed in Kannada along with ancient works of Kannada grammar. The oldest available Kannada dictionary was composed by the poet 'Ranna' called 'Ranna Kanda' (\u0cb0\u0ca8\u0ccd\u0ca8 \u0c95\u0c82\u0ca6) in 996\u00a0AD. Other dictionaries are 'Abhidhana Vastukosha' (\u0c85\u0cad\u0cbf\u0ca6\u0cbe\u0ca8 \u0cb5\u0cbe\u0cb8\u0ccd\u0ca4\u0cc1\u0c95\u0ccb\u0cb6) by Nagavarma (1045\u00a0AD), 'Amarakoshada Teeku' (\u0c85\u0cae\u0cb0\u0c95\u0ccb\u0cb6\u0ca6 \u0ca4\u0cc0\u0c95\u0cc1) by Vittala (1300), 'Abhinavaabhidaana' (\u0c85\u0cad\u0cbf\u0ca8\u0cb5\u0cbe\u0cad\u0cbf\u0ca6\u0cbe\u0ca8) by Abhinava Mangaraja (1398\u00a0AD) and many more. A Kannada\u2013English dictionary consisting of more than 70,000 words was composed by Ferdinand Kittel.\nG. Venkatasubbaiah edited the first modern Kannada\u2013Kannada dictionary, a 9,000-page, 8-volume series published by the Kannada Sahitya Parishat. He also wrote a Kannada\u2013English dictionary and a \"kli\u1e63tapadak\u014d\u015ba\" (\u0c95\u0ccd\u0cb2\u0cbf\u0cb7\u0ccd\u0c9f\u0caa\u0cbe\u0ca6\u0c95\u0ccb\u0cb6), a dictionary of difficult words.\nDialects.\nThere is considerable difference between the spoken and written forms of the language. Modern standard Kannada and its written form, primarily based on the Mysore\u2013Bangalore variety, is more or less consistent throughout Karnataka. Spoken Kannada tends to vary from region to region, though most dialects remain mutually intelligible. Linguists broadly group Kannada dialects into Southern, Northern, Central, and Coastal varieties, though the boundaries between them often overlap.. Northern Kannada dialects preserve older phonological features not found in southern dialects. Coastal dialects show lexical influence from Tulu and Konkani due to prolonged language contact.\nDialects of Kannada language fall into include:\nWriting system.\nThe language uses forty-nine phonemic letters, divided into three groups: \"swaragalu\" (vowels \u2013 thirteen letters); \"vyanjanagalu\" (consonants \u2013 thirty-four letters); and \"yogavaahakagalu\" (neither vowel nor consonant \u2013 two letters: \"anusvara\" and \"visarga\" ). The character set is almost identical to that of other Indian languages. The Kannada script is almost entirely phonetic, but for the sound of a \"half n\" (which becomes a half m). The number of written symbols, however, is far more than the forty-nine characters in the alphabet, because different characters can be combined to form \"compound\" characters \"(ottakshara)\". Each written symbol in the Kannada script corresponds with one syllable, as opposed to one phoneme in languages like English\u2014the Kannada script is syllabic.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nAdditionally, Kannada included the following phonemes, which dropped out of common usage in the 12th and 18th century respectively:\nOld Kannada had an archaic phoneme /\u027b/ under retroflexes in early inscriptions that merged with /\u026d/ intervocalically or /r/ in clusters and it maintained the contrast between /r/ (&lt; PD \u2217\u1e6f) and /\u027e/ from (&lt; PD \u2217r). Both merged in Medieval Kannada.\nIn old Kannada at around 10th-14th century, most of the initial /p/ debuccalised into a /h/ e.g. OKn. pa\u1e0dagu, Kn. ha\u1e0dahu \"ship\".\nHistorically, the Tamil-Malayalam languages and, independently, Telugu, phonemically palatalised /k/ before a front vowel; Kannada never developed such phonemic palatalisation (cf. Kn. , Ta. , Te. \"ear\"); however, \"phonetically\", Kannada speakers frequently palatalise velar consonants before front vowels, for example, realising \"ear\" as and \"parrot\" as .\nVowels.\nAt around the 8th century, Kannada raised the vowels e, o to i, u when before a short consonant and a high vowel, before written literature emerged in the language, e.g. Kn. kivi, Ta. cevi, Te. cevi \"ear\".\nColloquial speech.\nSources:\nGrammar.\nThe canonical word order of Kannada is SOV (subject\u2013object\u2013verb), typical of Indian languages.\nKannada is a highly inflected language with three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter or common) and two numbers (singular and plural). It is inflected for gender, number and tense, among other things. The first available Kannada book, a treatise on poetics, rhetoric and basic grammar is the \"Kavirajamarga\" from 850\u00a0AD.\nThe most influential account of Kannada grammar is Keshiraja's \"Shabdamanidarpana\" (c. 1260\u00a0AD). The earlier grammatical works include portions of \"Kavirajamarga\" (a treatise on \"ala\u0144k\u0101ra\") of the 9th century, and \"Kavyavalokana\" and \"Karnatakabhashabhushana\" (both authored by Nagavarma II in the first half of the 12th century).\nCompound bases.\nCompound bases, called \"sam\u0101sa\" in Kannada, are a set of two or more words compounded together. There are several types of compound bases, based on the rules followed for compounding. The types of compound bases or sam\u0101sas: tatpurusha, karmadh\u0101raya, dvigu, bahuvreehi, anshi, dvandva, kriya and gamaka sam\u0101sa. Examples: \"ta\u1e45g\u0101\u1e37i\", \"hemmara\", \"kannusanne\".\nPronouns.\nIn many ways the third-person pronouns are more like demonstratives than like the other pronouns. They are pluralised like nouns and the first- and second-person pronouns have different ways to distinguish number.\nSignificance to modern linguistics.\nWhile an early account of Kannada's grammar is available in \"Shabdamanidarpana,\" it has played a central role in the modern linguistics thanks to its unique semantic and syntactic properties that have been significant to studies of language acquisition and innateness. Jeff Lidz is a significant Western linguist to have studied Kannada. His investigations found at least two properties of Kannada to be very impactful in developing contemporary understandings of language acquisition. The first observation was that Kannada has a causative morpheme (like -\"ify\" for English, in \"personify\" or \"deify\"), which appears whenever a verb with causative meaning is expressed. This was significant, because it allowed him to test whether an observation of English-learning infants, that they worked out novel verb meanings based on the number of overt NPs they took, applied cross-linguistically. Given that the presence of the aforementioned causative morpheme would be a more obvious and reliable indicator for differentiating meanings, Kannada was a perfect language to test this observation; Lidz et al. (2003) found that Kannada-learning infants relied \"more heavily\" on the number of overt NPs than the presence of the causative morpheme. This has been used by generativists and UG nativists to argue that verb meaning acquisition based on syntactic bootstrapping is language universal and innate. \nThe second property of major significance to develop in modern linguistic understandings lies in the fact that in Kannada, negation comes at the end of the sentence and the quantified object linearly precedes it. This means there is no capacity for confounding linear order and hierarchical relations, as there is in English. This can be used to test whether the observation for English-speaking infants of considering hierarchical organisation more than linear order when deciding scope ambiguity is cross-linguistic, or just a product of English's confounded linear order. Specifically, analysing the sentence \"I didn't read two books\" (in Kannada), if what matters is linear order, Kannada speaking children's preferred interpretation would be one where 'two books' has wider scope than negation (i.e., there are two books I did not read), and if what matters is hierarchical organisation, their preferred interpretation would be the opposite (i.e., that it is not the case that I read two books). Lidz and Musolino (2002) found that they prefer the second, hierarchical interpretation, just like English-speaking children. This has been used to argue that infants universally represent sentences not as mere strings of adjacent words, but as hierarchical objects, a regular talking point among Chomskyans and nativists.\nSample text.\nThe given sample text is Article 1 from the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nEnglish.\nAll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nRomanisation (ISO 15919).\nEll\u0101 m\u0101navaru svatantrar\u0101giy\u0113 hu\u1e6d\u1e6didd\u0101re h\u0101gu ghanate mattu adhik\u0101raga\u1e37alli sam\u0101nar\u0101gidd\u0101re. Ti\u1e37ivu mattu anta\u1e25s\u0101k\u1e63\u012byannu pa\u1e0dedavar\u0101ddarinda avaru obbarigobbaru sah\u014ddara bh\u0101vadinda na\u1e0deduko\u1e37\u1e37ab\u0113ku.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37446", "revid": "70", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37446", "title": "Turin Shroud", "text": ""}
{"id": "37447", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37447", "title": "Latin square", "text": "Square array with symbols that each occur once per row and column\nIn combinatorics and in experimental design, a Latin square is an\u00a0\"n\"\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\"n\" array filled with\u00a0\"n\" different symbols, each occurring exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column. An example of a 3\u00d73 Latin square is\nThe name \"Latin square\" was inspired by mathematical papers by Leonhard Euler (1707\u20131783), who used Latin characters as symbols, but any set of symbols can be used: in the above example, the alphabetic sequence A,\u00a0B,\u00a0C can be replaced by the integer sequence 1,\u00a02,\u00a03. Euler began the general theory of Latin squares.\nHistory.\nThe Korean mathematician Choi Seok-jeong was the first to publish an example of Latin squares of order nine, in order to construct a magic square in 1700, predating Leonhard Euler by 67 years.\nCounting.\nThis account follows .\nThe counting of Latin squares has a long history, but the published accounts contain many errors. Euler in 1782, and Cayley in 1890, both knew the number of reduced Latin squares up to order five. In 1915, MacMahon approached the problem in a different way, but initially obtained the wrong value for order five. M.Frolov in 1890, and Tarry in 1901, found the number of reduced squares of order six. M. Frolov gave an incorrect count of reduced squares of order seven. R.A. Fisher and F. Yates, unaware of earlier work of E. Sch\u00f6nhardt, gave the number of isotopy classes of orders up to six. In 1939, H. W. Norton found 562 isotopy classes of order seven, but acknowledged that his method was incomplete. A. Sade, in 1951, but privately published earlier in 1948, and P. N. Saxena found more classes and, in 1966, D. A. Preece noted that this corrected Norton's result to 564 isotopy classes. However, in 1968, J. W. Brown announced an incorrect value of 563, which has often been repeated. He also gave the wrong number of isotopy classes of order eight. The correct number of reduced squares of order eight had already been found by M. B. Wells in 1967, and the numbers of isotopy classes, in 1990, by G. Kolesova, C.W.H. Lam and L. Thiel. The number of reduced squares for order nine was obtained by S. E. Bammel and J. Rothstein, for order 10 by B. D. McKay and E. Rogoyski, and for order 11 by B. D. McKay and I. M. Wanless.\nReduced form.\nA Latin square is said to be \"reduced\" (also, \"normalized\" or \"in standard form\") if both its first row and its first column are in their natural order. For example, the Latin square above is not reduced because its first column is A,\u00a0C,\u00a0B rather than A,\u00a0B,\u00a0C.\nAny Latin square can be reduced by permuting (that is, reordering) the rows and columns. Here switching the above matrix's second and third rows yields the following square:\nThis Latin square is reduced; both its first row and its first column are alphabetically ordered A,\u00a0B,\u00a0C.\nProperties.\nOrthogonal array representation.\nIf each entry of an \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" Latin square is written as a triple (\"r\",\"c\",\"s\"), where \"r\" is the row, \"c\" is the column, and \"s\" is the symbol, we obtain a set of \"n\"2 triples called the orthogonal array representation of the square. For example, the orthogonal array representation of the Latin square\nis\n { (1, 1, 1), (1, 2, 2), (1, 3, 3), (2, 1, 2), (2, 2, 3), (2, 3, 1), (3, 1, 3), (3, 2, 1), (3, 3, 2) },\nwhere for example the triple (2, 3, 1) means that in row 2 and column 3 there is the symbol 1. Orthogonal arrays are usually written in array form where the triples are the rows, such as\nThe definition of a Latin square can be written in terms of orthogonal arrays: \nThis means that the \"n\"2 ordered pairs (\"r\", \"c\") are all the pairs (\"i\", \"j\") with 1 \u2264 \"i\", \"j\" \u2264 \"n\", once each. The same is true of the ordered pairs (\"r\", \"s\") and the ordered pairs (\"c\", \"s\").\nThe orthogonal array representation shows that rows, columns and symbols play rather similar roles, as will be made clear below.\nEquivalence classes of Latin squares.\nMany operations on a Latin square produce another Latin square (for example, turning it upside down).\nIf we permute the rows, permute the columns, or permute the names of the symbols of a Latin square, we obtain a new Latin square said to be \"isotopic\" to the first. Isotopism is an equivalence relation, so the set of all Latin squares is divided into subsets, called \"isotopy classes\", such that two squares in the same class are isotopic and two squares in different classes are not isotopic.\nA stronger form of equivalence exists. Two Latin squares \"L\"1 and \"L\"2 of side n with common symbol set S that is also the index set for the rows and columns of each square are \"isomorphic\" if there is a bijection \"g\": \"S\" \u2192 \"S\" such that \"g\"(\"L\"1(\"i\", \"j\")) = \"L\"2(\"g\"(\"i\"), \"g\"(\"j\")) for all i, j in S. An alternate way to define isomorphic Latin squares is to say that a pair of isotopic Latin squares are isomorphic if the three bijections used to show that they are isotopic are, in fact, equal. Isomorphism is also an equivalence relation and its equivalence classes are called \"isomorphism classes\".\nAnother type of operation is easiest to explain using the orthogonal array representation of the Latin square. If we systematically and consistently reorder the three items in each triple (that is, permute the three columns in the array form), another orthogonal array (and, thus, another Latin square) is obtained. For example, we can replace each triple (\"r\",\"c\",\"s\") by (\"c\",\"r\",\"s\") which corresponds to transposing the square (reflecting about its main diagonal), or we could replace each triple (\"r\",\"c\",\"s\") by (\"c\",\"s\",\"r\"), which is a more complicated operation. Altogether there are 6 possibilities including \"do nothing\", giving us 6 Latin squares called the conjugates (also parastrophes) of the original square.\nFinally, we can combine these two equivalence operations: two Latin squares are said to be \"paratopic\", also \"main class isotopic\", if one of them is isotopic to a conjugate of the other. This is again an equivalence relation, with the equivalence classes called \"main classes\", \"species\", or \"paratopy classes\". Each main class contains up to six isotopy classes.\nNumber of \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" Latin squares.\nThere is no known easily computable formula for the number \"Ln\" of \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" Latin squares with symbols 1, 2, ..., \"n\". The most accurate upper and lower bounds known for large n are far apart. One classic result is that\nformula_1\nA simple and explicit formula for the number of Latin squares was published in 1992, but it is still not easily computable due to the exponential increase in the number of terms. This formula for the number \"Ln\" of \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" Latin squares is\nformula_2\nwhere \"B\"\"n\" is the set of all \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" {0, 1}-matrices, \u03c30(\"A\") is the number of zero entries in matrix A, and per(\"A\") is the permanent of matrix A.\nThe table below contains all known exact values. It can be seen that the numbers grow exceedingly quickly. For each n, the number of Latin squares altogether (sequence in the OEIS) is \"n\"! (\"n\" \u2212 1)! times the number of reduced Latin squares (sequence in the OEIS).\nFor each n, each isotopy class (sequence in the OEIS) contains up to (\"n\"!)3 Latin squares (the exact number varies), while each main class (sequence in the OEIS) contains either 1, 2, 3 or 6 isotopy classes.\nThe number of structurally distinct Latin squares (i.e. the squares cannot be made identical by means of rotation, reflection, and permutation of the symbols) for n = 1 up to 7 is 1, 1, 1, 12, 192, 145164, 1524901344 respectively (sequence in the OEIS).\nExamples.\nWe give one example of a Latin square from each main class up to order five.\nformula_3\nformula_4\nformula_5\nThey present, respectively, the multiplication tables of the following groups:\nOrthogonal pairs.\nTwo Latin squares of the same order \"n\" are called orthogonal if, by overlaying them, one gets every ordered pair (\"a\",\"b\") of symbols where \"a\" is a symbol in the first square and \"b\" is one in the second square. Orthogonal pairs and more generally sets of pairwise orthogonal Latin squares are important in design theory and finite geometry.\nTransversals and rainbow matchings.\nA transversal in a Latin square is a choice of \"n\" cells, where each row contains one cell, each column contains one cell, and there is one cell containing each symbol.\nOne can consider a Latin square as a complete bipartite graph in which the rows are vertices of one part, the columns are vertices of the other part, each cell is an edge (between its row and its column), and the symbols are colors. The rules of the Latin squares imply that this is a proper edge coloring. With this definition, a Latin transversal is a matching in which each edge has a different color; such a matching is called a rainbow matching.\nTherefore, many results on Latin squares/rectangles are contained in papers with the term \"rainbow matching\" in their title, and vice versa.\nSome Latin squares have no transversal. For example, when \"n\" is even, an \"n\"-by-\"n\" Latin square in which the value of cell \"i\",\"j\" is (\"i\"+\"j\") mod \"n\" has no transversal. Here are two examples:formula_11In 1967, H. J. Ryser conjectured that, when \"n\" is odd, every \"n\"-by-\"n\" Latin square has a transversal.\nIn 1975, S. K. Stein and Brualdi conjectured that, when \"n\" is even, every \"n\"-by-\"n\" Latin square has a partial transversal of size \"n\"\u22121.\nA more general conjecture of Stein is that a transversal of size \"n\"\u22121 exists not only in Latin squares but also in any \"n\"-by-\"n\" array of \"n\" symbols, as long as each symbol appears exactly \"n\" times.\nSome weaker versions of these conjectures have been proved:\nAlgorithms.\nFor small squares it is possible to generate permutations and test whether the Latin square property is met. For larger squares, Jacobson and Matthews' algorithm allows sampling from a uniform distribution over the space of \"n\"\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\"n\" Latin squares.\nApplications.\nError correcting codes.\nSets of Latin squares that are orthogonal to each other have found an application as error correcting codes in situations where communication is disturbed by more types of noise than simple white noise, such as when attempting to transmit broadband Internet over powerlines.\nFirstly, the message is sent by using several frequencies, or channels, a common method that makes the signal less vulnerable to noise at any one specific frequency. A letter in the message to be sent is encoded by sending a series of signals at different frequencies at successive time intervals. In the example below, the letters A to L are encoded by sending signals at four different frequencies, in four time slots. The letter C, for instance, is encoded by first sending at frequency 3, then 4, 1 and 2.\nformula_12\nThe encoding of the twelve letters are formed from three Latin squares that are orthogonal to each other. Now imagine that there's added noise in channels 1 and 2 during the whole transmission. The letter A would then be picked up as\nformula_13\nIn other words, in the first slot we receive signals from both frequency 1 and frequency 2; while the third slot has signals from frequencies 1, 2 and 3. Because of the noise, we can no longer tell if the first two slots were 1,1 or 1,2 or 2,1 or 2,2. But the 1,2 case is the only one that yields a sequence matching a letter in the above table, the letter A. \nSimilarly, we may imagine a burst of static over all frequencies in the third slot:\nformula_14\nAgain, we are able to infer from the table of encodings that it must have been the letter A being transmitted. The number of errors this code can spot is one less than the number of time slots. It has also been proven that if the number of frequencies is a prime or a power of a prime, the orthogonal Latin squares produce error detecting codes that are as efficient as possible.\nMathematical puzzles.\nThe problem of determining if a partially filled square can be completed to form a Latin square is NP-complete.\nThe popular Sudoku puzzles are a special case of Latin squares; any solution to a Sudoku puzzle is a Latin square. Sudoku imposes the additional restriction that nine particular 3\u00d73 adjacent subsquares must also contain the digits 1\u20139 (in the standard version). See also Mathematics of Sudoku.\nThe more recent KenKen and Strimko puzzles are also examples of Latin squares.\nBoard games.\nLatin squares have been used as the basis for several board games, notably the popular abstract strategy game Kamisado.\nAgronomic research.\nLatin squares are used in the design of agronomic research experiments to minimise experimental errors.\nHeraldry.\nThe Latin square also figures in the arms of the Statistical Society of Canada, being specifically mentioned in its blazon. Also, it appears in the logo of the International Biometric Society.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37448", "revid": "8164021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37448", "title": "Overhand", "text": "Overhand may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37449", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37449", "title": "Mariner 9", "text": "First spacecraft to enter orbit around Mars (1971\u20131972)\nMariner 9 (Mariner Mars '71 / Mariner-I) was a robotic spacecraft that contributed greatly to the exploration of Mars and was part of the NASA Mariner program. Mariner 9 was launched toward Mars on May 30, 1971, from LC-36B at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, and reached the planet on November 14 of the same year, becoming the first spacecraft to orbit another planet \u2013 only narrowly beating the Soviet probes \"Mars 2\" (launched May 19) and \"Mars 3\" (launched May 28), both of which arrived at Mars only weeks later.\nAfter the occurrence of dust storms on the planet for several months following its arrival, the orbiter managed to send back clear pictures of the surface. Mariner 9 successfully returned 7,329 images, covering 85% of Mars's surface, over the course of its mission, which concluded in October 1972.\nObjectives.\nMariner 9 was designed to continue the atmospheric studies begun by Mariner 6 and 7, and to map over 70% of the Martian surface from the lowest altitude () and at the highest resolutions (from 1\u00a0kilometer to 100\u00a0meters (1,100 to 110\u00a0yards) per pixel) of any Mars mission up to that point. An infrared radiometer was included to detect heat sources in search of evidence of volcanic activity. It was to study temporal changes in the Martian atmosphere and surface. Mars's two moons, Deimos and Phobos, were also to be analyzed. Mariner 9 more than met its objectives.\nUnder original plans, a dual mission was to be flown like Mariners 6\u20137, however the launch failure of Mariner 8 ruined this scheme and forced NASA planners to fall back on a simpler one-probe mission. NASA still held out hope that another Mariner probe and Atlas-Centaur could be readied before the 1971 Mars launch window closed. A few logistical problems emerged, including the lack of an available Centaur payload shroud of the correct configuration for the Mariner probes, however there was a shroud in NASA's inventory which could be modified. Convair also had an available Centaur stage on hand and could have an Atlas readied in time, but the idea was ultimately abandoned for lack of funding.\nMariner 9 was mated to Atlas-Centaur AC-23 on May 9 with investigation into Mariner 8's failure ongoing. The malfunction was traced to a problem in the Centaur's pitch control servo amplifier and because it was not clear if the spacecraft itself had been responsible, RFI testing was conducted on Mariner 9 to ensure the probe was not releasing interference that could cause problems with the Centaur's electronics. All testing came back negative and on May 22, a tested and verified rate gyro package arrived from Convair and was installed in the Centaur.\nLiftoff took place on May 30 at 22:23:04 UT. All launch vehicle systems performed normally and the Mariner separated from the Centaur at 13 minutes and 18 seconds after launch.\nCitations.\nSeveral credible sources provide valuable insights about the Mariner 9 mission. According to NASA's official mission overview, Mariner 9 successfully mapped over 70% of the Martian surface with high-resolution imaging systems. \nResearch conducted by Smith (1972) detailed the findings of the Mariner 9 infrared radiometer, which aimed to detect heat sources indicating volcanic activity. \nAdditional studies outlined in the book *Exploration of Mars* by Tom Jones emphasize Mariner 9's analysis of Mars's moons, Deimos and Phobos. \nThe mission planning and design aspects related to the failure of Mariner 8 and the successful launch of Mariner 9 were thoroughly covered in the book *Spacecraft Design and Mission Planning* by H. Smith. \nFurthermore, NASA's official documentation provides details about the launch process of Mariner 9 and the testing conducted to ensure its success.\nInstruments and experiments.\nUltraviolet Spectrometer (UVS).\nThe Ultraviolet Spectrometer (UVS) studied the composition and density of Mars's upper atmosphere, detecting hydrogen, oxygen, and ozone. It worked on a wavelength range of 110\u2013340 nm with a spectral resolution of 2.5 nm.\nThe instrument identified atomic hydrogen and oxygen in the upper atmosphere; provided data on the escape rates of these elements, influencing Mars's atmospheric evolution and mapped ozone distribution, showing seasonal variations.\nInfrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS).\nThe Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS) measured thermal radiation emitted by Mars to analyze atmospheric composition, surface temperature, and dust properties. It worked on a wavelength range of 6\u201350 \u03bcm with a spectral resolution of 2.4 cm-1.\nThe instrument confirmed the presence of CO2 as the dominant atmospheric gas; detected water vapor in the Martian atmosphere; measured surface and atmospheric temperatures and provided insights into dust storms' thermal properties.\nCelestial Mechanics.\nThe Celestial Mechanics Experiment was not a separate instrument. It used radio tracking to determine Mars's gravitational field and refine its mass estimates. It was based on analysis of Doppler shifts in the spacecraft's radio signals and measuring range and range rate to track Mariner 9's precise motion. \nThe experiment improved the understanding of Mars's gravitational field, provided more accurate estimates of Mars's mass and shape and helped refine the planet's rotational parameters.\nS-Band Occultation.\nThe S-Band Occultation Experiment was not a separate instrument. It used Mariner 9's radio signal at 2.295 GHz (S-band) passing through Mars's atmosphere to study its density, pressure, and temperature profiles. \nThe experiment measured vertical profiles of temperature and pressure in the Martian atmosphere, detected variations in the ionosphere and confirmed the presence of CO2 as the main atmospheric component.\nInfrared Radiometer (IRR).\nThe Infrared Radiometer (IRR) measured surface and atmospheric temperatures using infrared radiation. It worked on a wavelength range of 10\u201312 \u03bcm with a field of view of 1.7\u00b0 \u00d7 1.7\u00b0. \nThe instrument provided surface temperature maps of Mars, monitored thermal properties of dust storms and identified temperature variations between day and night cycles.\nVisual Imaging System.\nThe Visual Imaging System captured high-resolution images of Mars's surface, weather patterns, and moons. In a lower orbit, half that of Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 flyby missions, and with a vastly improved imaging system, Mariner 9 achieved a resolution of per pixel, whereas previous Martian probes had achieved only approximately per pixel. It used broadband filters of various wavelengths optimized for surface and atmospheric studies. \nThe instrument provided the first global mapping of Mars's surface; discovered volcanoes, valleys, and dried riverbeds, suggesting past water activity; captured dust storms covering the entire planet and mapped Phobos and Deimos, Mars's two moons.\nSpacecraft and subsystems.\nThe power for the spacecraft was provided by a total of 14,742 solar cells, being distributed between 4 solar panels, which in total resulted in 7.7 meters of solar panels being present in the spacecraft. The solar panels produced 500 watts in the orbit of Mars. The energy was stored in a 20 amp-hour (Ah) nickel-cadmium battery.\nPropulsion was provided by the RS-2101a engine, which could produce 1340 N thrust, and in total could have 5 restarts. The engine was fueled by monomethyl hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide. For attitude control, the spacecraft contained 2 sets of 6 nitrogen jets on the tip of the solar panels. Attitude knowledge was provided by a Sun sensor, a Canopus star tracker, gyroscopes, an inertial reference unit, and an accelerometer. The thermal control was achieved by the use of louvers on the eight sides of the frame and thermal blankets.\nAchievements.\nMariner 9 was the first spacecraft to orbit another planet. It carried an instrument payload similar to Mariners 6 and 7, but because of the need for a larger propulsion system to control the spacecraft in Martian orbit, it weighed more than Mariners 6 and 7 combined (Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 weighed 413 kilograms while Mariner 9 weighed 997.9 kilograms). When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars on November 10, 1971, planetary scientists were surprised (although had anticipated during perihelic opposition) to find the atmosphere was thick with \"a planet-wide robe of dust, the largest storm ever observed.\" The surface was totally obscured. On November 14 1971 after slowing down, Mariner 9's computer was thus reprogrammed from Earth to delay imaging of the surface for a couple of months until the dust settled. Closing down the camera in order to save energy. The main surface imaging did not get underway until mid-January 1972. However, surface-obscured images did contribute to the collection of Mars science, including understanding of the existence of several huge high-altitude volcanoes of the Tharsis Bulge that gradually became visible as the dust storm abated. This unexpected situation made a strong case for the desirability of studying a planet from orbit rather than merely flying past. It also highlighted the importance of flexible mission software. The Soviet Union's Mars 2 and Mars 3 probes, which arrived during the same dust storm, were unable to adapt to the unexpected conditions having been preprogrammed, which severely limited the amount of data that they were able to collect.\nAfter 349 days in orbit, Mariner 9 had transmitted 7,329 images, covering 85% of Mars's surface, whereas previous flyby missions had returned less than one thousand images covering only a small portion of the planetary surface. \nThe images revealed river beds, craters, massive extinct volcanoes (such as Olympus Mons, the largest known volcano in the Solar System; Mariner 9 led directly to its reclassification from Nix Olympica), canyons (including the Valles Marineris, a system of canyons over about long), evidence of wind erosion and deposition, weather fronts, fogs, and more. Mars's small moons, Phobos and Deimos, were also photographed.\nThe findings from the Mariner 9 mission underpinned the later Viking program.\nThe enormous Valles Marineris canyon system is named after Mariner 9 in honor of its achievements.\nAfter depleting its supply of attitude control gas, the spacecraft was turned off on October 27, 1972.\nConstruction.\nThe ultraviolet spectrometer (UVS) aboard Mariner 9 was constructed by the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado. The ultraviolet spectrometer team was led by Professor Charles Barth.\nThe Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS) team was led by Dr. Rudolf A. Hanel from NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center (GSFC). The IRIS instrument was built by Texas Instruments, Dallas, Texas.\nThe Infrared Radiometer (IRR) team was led by Professor Gerald Neugebauer from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech).\nError-correction codes achievements.\nTo control for errors in the reception of the grayscale image data sent by Mariner 9 (caused by a low signal-to-noise ratio), the data had to be encoded before transmission using a so-called forward error-correcting code (FEC). Without FEC, noise would have made up roughly a quarter of a received image, while the FEC encoded the data in a redundant way which allowed for the reconstruction of most of the sent image data at reception.\nSince the flown hardware was constrained with regards to weight, power consumption, storage, and computing power, some considerations had to be put into choosing an FEC, and it was decided to use a Hadamard code for Mariner 9. Each image pixel was represented as a six-bit binary value, which had 64 possible grayscale levels. Because of limitations of the transmitter, the maximum useful data length was about 30 bits. Instead of using a repetition code, a [32, 6, 16] Hadamard code was used, which is also a 1st-order Reed-Muller code. Errors of up to seven bits per each 32-bit word could be corrected using this scheme. Compared to a five-repetition code, the error correcting properties of this Hadamard code were much better, yet its data rate was comparable. The efficient decoding algorithm was an important factor in the decision to use this code. The circuitry used was called the \"Green Machine\", which employed the fast Fourier transform, increasing the decoding speed by a factor of three.\nPresent location.\nMariner 9 remained in orbit around Mars after its operational use. Today it is thought Mariner 9 either burnt up on entry of the Martian atmosphere or impacted the surface. \nNASA had provided multiple dates for when Mariner 9 could enter the Martian atmosphere. At the time of the mission, Mariner 9 was left in an orbit that would not decay for at least 50 years. In 2011, NASA predicted that Mariner 9 would burn up or crash into Mars around 2022. However, a 2018 revision to the Mariner 9 mission page by NASA expected Mariner 9 would crash into Mars \"sometime around 2020\". \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37450", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37450", "title": "Fast food restaurant", "text": ""}
{"id": "37452", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37452", "title": "Thumb knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37453", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37453", "title": "Funeral home", "text": "Death care business\nA funeral home, funeral parlor (funeral parlour in the UK) or mortuary is a business that provides burial, entombment and cremation services for the dead and their families. These services may include a prepared visitation and funeral, and the provision of a chapel for the funeral, memorial service/service of remembrance or celebration of life.\nServices.\nFuneral homes arrange services in accordance with the wishes of surviving friends and family, whether immediate next of kin or an executor so named in a legal will. The funeral home often takes care of the necessary paperwork, permits, and other details, such as making arrangements with the cemetery, and providing obituaries to the news media. Its pews do not feature racks behind them like in synagogues and churches. The funeral business has a history that dates to the age of the Egyptians who mastered the science of preservation.\nIn recent years many funeral homes have started posting obituaries online and use materials submitted by families to create memorial websites.\nThere are certain common types of services in North America.\nA traditional funeral service consists of a viewing (sometimes referred to as a visitation), a funeral service in a place of worship or the funeral home chapel and a graveside committal service. \nDirect cremation consists of the funeral home receiving the body, preparing it for the crematory and filing the necessary legal paperwork.\nDirect/immediate burial is the forgoing of a funeral ceremony for a prompt, simple burial.\nMoving a body between mortuaries involves preparing it for shipment in a coffin strapped into an arbitrary or a combination unit (mac pac / airtray). This is common when it is to be buried in a different locality than where the person died.\nWhen a body is brought to a funeral home, it is sometimes embalmed to delay decomposition or to make the viewing of the body more pleasant. The procedure typically involves removing sufficient blood material to accommodate the preservative chemicals and dyes, aspirating the internal organs and setting the facial features. Cosmetics are used with the consent of the family to improve the appearance of face and hands for a more natural look. If the face or hands are disfigured by accident, illness or decomposition, the embalmer may utilize restorative techniques to make them presentable for an \"open casket\" service. If this is not possible, or the family wishes, the funeral home can perform a \"closed casket\" service.\nThe funeral home often sets aside one or more large areas for people to gather at a visitation. This area may contain a space to display the body in a casket to visitors who may pay their respects. Funeral and memorial services may also take place at the funeral home. Many funeral homes offer prearrangement options for those who wish to plan their own funerals.\nSeveral large multi-national corporations in this service field have received exposure from high-profile litigation. The Loewen Group, Inc., received a particularly large jury verdict in Mississippi, which was later found to be in error, as the allegations against Loewen Group proved false. The Canada based company then brought suit against the United States alleging violations under NAFTA in 1998.\nHouston based Service Corporation International has also had its share of legal troubles in its operations of both funeral homes and cemeteries. In 2009, a class-action lawsuit was filed against SCI and Eden Memorial Park, one of the cemeteries the corporation manages, based on allegations that remains were being moved around to create additional space for future interments. A settlement of $80 million was reached in 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37454", "revid": "31799779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37454", "title": "Overhand knot", "text": "Type of knot\nThe overhand knot is one of the most fundamental knots, and it forms the basis of many others, including the simple noose, overhand loop, angler's loop, reef knot, fisherman's knot, half hitch, and water knot. The overhand knot is a stopper, especially when used alone, and hence it is very secure, to the point of jamming badly. It should be used if the knot is intended to be permanent. It is often used to prevent the end of a rope from unraveling. An overhand knot becomes a trefoil knot, a true knot in the mathematical sense, by joining the ends. It can also be adjusted, faired, or mis-tied as a half hitch.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nTying.\nThere are a number of ways to tie the Overhand knot.\nHeraldry.\nIn heraldry, the overhand knot is known as a \"Stafford knot\", owing to a representation of it being used first as a heraldic badge by the Earls of Stafford, and later as a general symbol of Staffordshire.\nIn nature.\nAs a defensive measure, hagfishes, which resemble eels, produce large volumes of thick slime when disturbed. A hagfish can dislodge large quantities of slime on its skin, which it uses to evade predation, by tying its own body into an overhand knot, then sliding the knot from its head down to the tail. This action scrapes the slime off the fish's body. Hagfish also tie their bodies into overhand knots in order to create leverage to rip off chunks of their prey's flesh, but do so \"in reverse\" (starting at the tail, and sliding the knot towards the head for mechanical advantage).\nKnot theory.\nIf the two loose ends of an overhand knot are joined together (without creating additional crossings), this becomes equivalent to the trefoil knot of mathematical knot theory.\nIn paper-folding.\nIf a flat ribbon or strip is tightly folded into a flattened overhand knot, it assumes a regular pentagonal shape."}
{"id": "37457", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37457", "title": "Granny knot", "text": "Type of knot\nThe granny knot is a binding knot, used to secure a rope or line around an object. It is considered inferior to the reef knot (square knot), which it superficially resembles. Neither of these knots should be used as a bend knot for attaching two ropes together.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The granny knot is also called the false, lubber's, calf, and booby knot. Patterson's \"Nautical Encyclopedia\" calls it \"old granny knot\" and Sir Edwin Arnold calls it the \"common or garden knot.\" The name granny is given in \"Vocabulary of Sea Phrases\" (Anonymous, 1799) and Roding pictures the knot in 1795.\nThe granny consists of two identical half knots, one tied on top of the other. It has but one practical purpose that I know of and that is to serve as a surgeon's knot. Formerly it was employed for tying up parcels in five-and-ten-cent stores, but the practice was given up and paper bags substituted as they were found to be simpler.\nEtymology.\nCalled the \"granny's knot\" with references going back to at least 1849, the knot was so-called because it is \"the natural knot tied by women or landsmen\".\nTying.\nWhen attempting to tie a reef knot (square knot), it is easy to produce a granny knot accidentally. This is dangerous because the granny knot can slip when heavily loaded. A tightened granny knot can also jam and is often more difficult to untie than the reef knot. It is better to tie a reef knot in nearly all circumstances. One way to distinguish them is that in the reef knot each loop passes completely over, or completely under (not through) the neck of the other.\nThe reef knot is commonly taught as \"left over right, tuck under\" then \"right over left, tuck under\". The granny knot is the first step repeated twice, \"left over right, tuck under\". This is a very common mistake made by people learning to tie a reef knot.\nHeraldry.\nIn heraldry, the granny knot is known as the Bourchier knot, due to being a heraldic badge of the Bourchier family."}
{"id": "37459", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37459", "title": "Service Corporation International", "text": "American deathcare provider\nService Corporation International is an American provider of funeral goods and services as well as cemetery property and cremation services. It is headquartered in Neartown, Houston, Texas, and operates secondary corporate offices in Jefferson, Louisiana (near New Orleans). SCI operates more than 1500 funeral homes and 400 cemeteries.\nCompany history.\nRobert L. Waltrip founded the company in 1962. SCI began as a small network of funeral homes and cemeteries in the Houston area.\nSCI, Alderwoods Group, and Stewart Enterprises emerged from the 1990s as the three largest companies in the industry. On December 31, 1999, SCI owned and operated 3,823 funeral service locations, 525 cemeteries, 198 crematoria and two insurance operations located in 20 countries on five continents.\nIn 1999, SCI also introduced its Dignity Memorial branding. \nBetween 2002 and 2006, SCI reduced its net debt (total debt minus cash) by more than , increased operating cash flow, and simplified its field management organization to enhance efficiency, performance, and accountability. It also changed business and sales processes, tightened internal controls following the protocols, strengthened corporate governance standards, and established a new training and development system. For its shareholders, SCI returned value through more than in share repurchases and it resumed payment of a regular quarterly dividend in early 2005, the first since 1999. \nAcquisitions.\nIn 2006, SCI merged with Alderwoods Group, its nearest competitor in terms of size. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) blocked the merger, citing concerns over consumer choice. After SCI agreed to divest funeral home and cemetery locations in several markets and end licensing agreements with other funeral homes, the FTC allowed the merger to continue. By 2007, the integration of Alderwoods's locations and operations was complete.\nIn 2009, SCI put in a bid to purchase Keystone North America for ( million as of 2024). The purchase was completed in 2010 and added about 200 locations.\nIn May 2013, SCI signed a deal to purchase Stewart Enterprises, the second-largest death care company. In December 2013, the FTC imposed conditions on the acquisition, requiring the two companies to sell 53 funeral homes and 38 cemeteries in 59 local markets, and requiring the merged company to be subject to a ten-year period during which the FTC will review any attempt by the company to acquire funeral or cemetery assets in those local markets.\nBrands.\nSCI operates the following brands in the United States and Canada:\nControversies.\nCosts.\nWriting in an October 24, 2013, issue of \"Bloomberg Businessweek\", journalist Paul M. Barrett found, despite its lower overhead, SCI has higher prices than independent funeral home operators. Barrett quoted \"data compiled\" by a \"'concierge' funeral planning service\" Everest Funeral Package, which found that for \"traditional funerals, SCI charges on average (excluding casket and cemetery plot), 42 percent more than independents.\" In reply, SCI points to \"overwhelmingly positive responses\" on customer surveys and states they provide \"top value\" at a variety of funeral price points.\nTexas.\nIn the late 1990s, SCI was involved in a controversy involving alleged violations of Texas State embalming laws. The proceedings took a political slant due to Robert Waltrip's friendship with the family of then-governor George W. Bush and Waltrip's campaign contributions to various members of the Bush family.\nReferred to as \"Funeralgate\" or \"Formaldegate\" in the media, the controversy was widely publicized when Eliza May, a director with the Texas Funeral Service Commission (TFSC), was fired while investigating SCI. May alleged in a civil suit that she was fired because she refused to halt her investigation despite pressure to do so from Governor Bush.\nMay's lawyers subpoenaed President Bush to testify at the trial, but Texas judge John K. Dietz threw out the subpoena on the grounds that the then-governor was not in a position to have enough specialized information to require his involvement.\nThe lawsuit was settled in 2001 for more than (equivalent to in 2024). SCI and the state of Texas were required to jointly pay the decision. On January 23, 2004, the TFSC fined SCI an additional for administrative penalties.\nFlorida.\nOn January 18, 2023, it was reported on local news that the Escambia County Sheriffs Office was called to investigate a crime of corpse abuse by an employee who was caught in the act, by another employee. The alleged criminal was never charged with the crime because he committed suicide the same day. \nThe investigation into the crime and the Oaklawn Funeral Home is still pending.\nIn 2001, it was reported that employees of the Memorial Gardens cemetery near Fort Lauderdale, Florida, had oversold the cemetery, so bodies were buried in the wrong places, separating husbands from wives; vaults were cracked open by a backhoe, bodies were exhumed, with bones, skulls and shrouds thrown into nearby woods, bodies were stacked on top of each other, and remains were relocated without notifying relatives.\nThe allegations were particularly appalling to the Jewish cemetery's more religiously observant customers, \"The Miami Herald\" reported. Traditional Jewish law requires bodies to be buried intact and prohibits disturbing the dead. SCI reached a agreement with the Florida attorney general's office in 2003 that required it to repair plots and reorganize the cemeteries to ensure all graves were properly marked and the grounds could accommodate all plots sold. SCI also settled a separate class-action lawsuit on behalf of 350 families for .\nVirginia.\nOn April 26, 2007, \"The Washington Post\" reported that an SCI cemetery in Alexandria, Virginia, had improperly buried the remains of the stillborn daughter of Nsombi Hale in a grave too shallow (in a grave about deep). Nsombi Hale was filing suit against SCI.\nAfter an internal investigation by SCI, attorneys working for SCI denied the charges against the company in a letter to Virginia funeral regulators, and a few days later, the \"Post\" reported that Robert Ranghelli, one of the SCI employees who had corroborated the initial reports of improper handling of corpses, was fired for \"speaking with the media\" after having been on administrative leave for several months following the initial reports in the newspaper.\nOn April 5, 2009, \"The Washington Post\" reported that the National Funeral Home, a facility owned by SCI in the Falls Church area of Fairfax County, Virginia, which also acts as a centralized embalming and dressing station for embalming and body preparation for other nearby SCI-owned operations (Arlington Funeral Home, Danzansky-Goldberg Memorial Chapel, and Demaine Funeral Home), was storing naked bodies in various stages of decomposition in conditions described as \"disgusting, degrading and humiliating\". The story went on to report that as many as 200 bodies were stored on \"makeshift gurneys in the garage\" and \"at least half a dozen veterans destined for the hallowed ground at Arlington National Cemetery were left in their coffins on a garage rack\". The \"Post\" reported that documentation describing these conditions had been reported to the Virginia Board of Funeral Directors and Embalmers.\nA few days later, the \"Post\" reported that family members of a deceased Army veteran whose remains were stored in an unrefrigerated garage at National Funeral Home asked the Fairfax County Commonwealth's Attorney to investigate the actions of National and its parent company, SCI, as crimes.\nThe \"Post\" further reported that the family of retired U.S. Army Colonel Andrew DeGraff filed a lawsuit in Fairfax County alleging that SCI mishandled DeGraff's remains. According to the article, an SCI spokesman said that the company is conducting an internal investigation.\nCalifornia.\nOn September 14, 2009, a class-action lawsuit was filed against SCI and Eden Memorial Park, a Jewish cemetery managed by SCI in Mission Hills charging that they were destroying graves to make room for new interments.\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that state officials found no evidence of mass grave disturbances. Russ Heimerich, a spokesman for the California Department of Consumer Affairs, said, \"We have not seen any evidence of the kind of massive desecration that is being alleged. The kind of activity they're alleging is not easily hidden, especially on a willful, large-scale basis.\" The plaintiff's attorney rejected the findings of the state's investigation.\nMichael Avenatti, the plaintiff's attorney, said more than 800 families have joined the class action suit. Avenatti claims the state's investigation was shoddy, saying, \"Investigators from the state were told by various groundskeepers over a year ago that they had been repeatedly told to throw bones away, and yet for some reason, the state didn't adequately follow up.\"\nSCI denied all charges. After the lawsuit was filed, the Consumer Affairs Department reviewed five to six years of the cemetery's annual inspection records and found no indication that graves had been disturbed. According to the \"Los Angeles Times\" article, \"The agency also asked the dozens of families that contacted officials to look for signs of disturbances\u2009\u2014\u2009shifted or cracked gravestones or anything else that appeared different from previous visits\u2009\u2014\u2009and didn't receive a single call back, he said.\" \nIn January 2012, the lawsuit against Eden Memorial Park was ruled to be a valid class action in Los Angeles Superior Court, with the trial scheduled to begin in May 2012. In February 2014, the parties reached a settlement in the amount of .\nIn 2015, families filed a second suit alleging that the practice continued after the first settlement. The suit remains pending as of 2020[ [update]].\nIn 2024, the attorney general of California announced a settlement with SCI, which does business in the state under their Neptune Society and Trident Society brands, for state enforcement actions that alleged that SCI had violated the California Unfair Competition Law and False Advertising Law by engaging in false and deceptive advertising in the marketing and sale of pre-need cremation packages. The proposed settlement which is pending court approval, would provide full restitution to customers, comprehensive injunctive relief, and $23 million in civil penalties.\nMassachusetts.\nIn 2010, the State Board of Registration charged the SCI-owned Stanetsky Chapel, a Jewish funeral home in Brookline with serious violations of state law and regulations in connection with an incident where a woman was buried in the wrong grave, then disinterred without a legal permit and reburied in the correct grave with the woman's family not being notified of the mistake and the corrective procedure. As a result, in December 2011, the State Board announced a Consent Agreement and levied the biggest fine in its history, , against Stanetsky and SCI, and suspended the license of the Stanetsky general manager for a year. Other staff members involved in the incident were subject to punitive actions ranging from additional professional training to license revocation. The incident received widespread local media coverage. The Board's action was also published on its website.\nIn a case first reported on April 7, 2005, \"The Boston Globe\" reported J.S. Waterman's &amp; Sons, also owned by SCI, was found by the Board to have accidentally cremated the body of a stillborn infant in 2003. The infant's body was apparently placed on a gurney that held an adult woman's body that was scheduled for cremation. As a result of a civil suit brought by the infant's family, Waterman's was ordered to pay the parents (equivalent to in 2024), with a pending legal claim that the mortuary violated the state's consumer protection law that could triple the damages, \"The Boston Globe\" reported. The family's lawyer, Gordon T. Walker, said SCI could be hit with additional costs, as there is a pending claim that the company violated the state's consumer protection law. The civil verdict was made in Suffolk Superior Court on March 4, 2008. The jury awarded because of emotional distress and because it found the funeral home was negligent and intentionally inflicted emotional harm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37461", "revid": "47937478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37461", "title": "State of matter", "text": "Forms which matter can take\nIn physics, a state of matter or phase of matter is one of the distinct forms in which matter can exist. Four states of matter are observable in everyday life: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma.\nDifferent states are distinguished by the ways the component particles (atoms, molecules, ions and electrons) are arranged, and how they behave collectively. In a solid, the particles are tightly packed and held in fixed positions, giving the material a definite shape and volume. In a liquid, the particles remain close together but can move past one another, allowing the substance to maintain a fixed volume while adapting to the shape of its container. In a gas, the particles are far apart and move freely, allowing the substance to expand and fill both the shape and volume of its container. Plasma is similar to a gas, but it also contains charged particles (ions and free electrons) that move independently and respond to electric and magnetic fields.\nBeyond the classical states of matter, a wide variety of additional states are known to exist. Some of these lie between the traditional categories; for example, liquid crystals exhibit properties of both solids and liquids. Others represent entirely different kinds of ordering. Magnetic states, for instance, do not depend on the spatial arrangement of atoms, but rather on the alignment of their intrinsic magnetic moments (spins). Even in a solid where atoms are fixed in position, the spins can organize in distinct ways, giving rise to magnetic states such as ferromagnetism or antiferromagnetism.\nSome states occur only under extreme conditions, such as Bose\u2013Einstein condensates and Fermionic condensates (in extreme cold), neutron-degenerate matter (in extreme density), and quark\u2013gluon plasma (at extremely high energy).\nThe term \"phase\" is sometimes used as a synonym for state of matter, but it is possible for a single compound to form different phases that are in the same state of matter. For example, ice is the solid state of water, but there are multiple phases of ice with different crystal structures, which are formed at different pressures and temperatures.\nFour classical states.\nSolid.\nIn a solid, constituent particles (ions, atoms, or molecules) are closely packed together. The forces between particles are so strong that the particles cannot move freely but can only vibrate. As a result, a solid has a stable, definite shape, and a definite volume. Solids can only change their shape by an outside force, as when broken or cut.\nIn crystalline solids, the particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) are packed in a regularly ordered, repeating pattern. There are various different crystal structures, and the same substance can have more than one structure (or solid phase). For example, iron has a body-centred cubic structure at temperatures below , and a face-centred cubic structure between 912 and . Ice has fifteen known crystal structures, or fifteen solid phases, which exist at various temperatures and pressures.\nGlasses and other non-crystalline, amorphous solids without long-range order are not thermal equilibrium ground states; therefore they are described below as nonclassical states of matter.\nSolids can be transformed into liquids by melting, and liquids can be transformed into solids by freezing. Solids can also change directly into gases through the process of sublimation, and gases can likewise change directly into solids through deposition.\nLiquid.\nA liquid is a nearly incompressible fluid that conforms to the shape of its container but retains a (nearly) constant volume independent of pressure. The volume is definite if the temperature and pressure are constant. When a solid is heated above its melting point, it becomes liquid, given that the pressure is higher than the triple point of the substance. Intermolecular (or interatomic or interionic) forces are still important, but the molecules have enough energy to move relative to each other and the structure is mobile. This means that the shape of a liquid is not definite but is determined by its container. The volume is usually greater than that of the corresponding solid, the best known exception being water, H2O. The highest temperature at which a given liquid can exist is its critical temperature.\nGas.\nA gas is a compressible fluid. Not only will a gas conform to the shape of its container but it will also expand to fill the container.\nIn a gas, the molecules have enough kinetic energy so that the effect of intermolecular forces is small (or zero for an ideal gas), and the typical distance between neighboring molecules is much greater than the molecular size. A gas has no definite shape or volume, but occupies the entire container in which it is confined. A liquid may be converted to a gas by heating at constant pressure to the boiling point, or else by reducing the pressure at constant temperature.\nAt temperatures below its critical temperature, a gas is also called a vapor, and can be liquefied by compression alone without cooling. A vapor can exist in equilibrium with a liquid (or solid), in which case the gas pressure equals the vapor pressure of the liquid (or solid).\nA supercritical fluid (SCF) is a gas whose temperature and pressure are above the critical temperature and critical pressure respectively. In this state, the distinction between liquid and gas disappears. A supercritical fluid has the physical properties of a gas, but its high density confers solvent properties in some cases, which leads to useful applications. For example, supercritical carbon dioxide is used to extract caffeine in the manufacture of decaffeinated coffee.\nPlasma.\nA gas is usually converted to a plasma in one of two ways, either from a huge voltage difference between two points, or by exposing it to extremely high temperatures. Heating matter to high temperatures causes electrons to leave the atoms, resulting in the presence of free electrons. This creates a so-called partially ionized plasma. At very high temperatures, such as those present in stars, it is assumed that essentially all electrons are \"free\", and that a very high-energy plasma is essentially bare nuclei swimming in a sea of electrons. This forms the so-called fully ionized plasma.\nThe plasma state is often misunderstood, and although not freely existing under normal conditions on Earth, it is quite commonly generated by either lightning, electric sparks, fluorescent lights, neon lights or in plasma televisions. The Sun's corona, some types of flame, and stars are all examples of illuminated matter in the plasma state. Plasma is by far the most abundant of the four fundamental states; 99% of all ordinary matter in the universe is plasma, as it composes all stars.\nPhase transitions.\nA state of matter is also characterized by phase transitions. A phase transition indicates a change in structure and can be recognized by an abrupt change in properties. A distinct state of matter can be defined as any set of states distinguished from any other set of states by a phase transition. Water can be said to have several distinct solid states. The appearance of superconductivity is associated with a phase transition, so there are superconductive states. Likewise, ferromagnetic states are demarcated by phase transitions and have distinctive properties.\nWhen the change of state occurs in stages the intermediate steps are called mesophases. Such phases have been exploited by the introduction of liquid crystal technology.\nThe state or \"phase\" of a given set of matter can change depending on pressure and temperature conditions, transitioning to other phases as these conditions change to favor their existence; for example, solid transitions to liquid with an increase in temperature. Near absolute zero, a substance exists as a solid. As heat is added to this substance it melts into a liquid at its melting point, boils into a gas at its boiling point, and if heated high enough would enter a plasma state in which the electrons are so energized that they leave their parent atoms.\nForms of matter that are not composed of molecules and are organized by different forces can also be considered different states of matter. Superfluids (like Fermionic condensate) and the quark\u2013gluon plasma are examples.\nNon-classical states.\nGlass.\nGlass is a non-crystalline or amorphous solid material that exhibits a glass transition when heated towards the liquid state. Glasses can be made of quite different classes of materials: inorganic networks (such as window glass, made of silicate plus additives), metallic alloys, ionic melts, aqueous solutions, molecular liquids, and polymers.\nThermodynamically, a glass is in a metastable state with respect to its crystalline counterpart. The conversion rate, however, is practically zero.\nCrystals with some degree of disorder.\nA plastic crystal is a molecular solid with long-range positional order but with constituent molecules retaining rotational freedom; in an orientational glass this degree of freedom is frozen in a quenched disordered state.\nSimilarly, in a spin glass magnetic disorder is frozen.\nLiquid crystal states.\nLiquid crystal states have properties intermediate between mobile liquids and ordered solids. Generally, they are able to flow like a liquid but exhibit long-range order. For example, the nematic phase consists of long rod-like molecules such as para-azoxyanisole, which is nematic in the temperature range . In this state the molecules flow as in a liquid, but they all point in the same direction (within each domain) and cannot rotate freely. Like a crystalline solid, but unlike a liquid, liquid crystals react to polarized light.\nOther types of liquid crystals are described in the main article on these states. Several types have technological importance, for example, in liquid crystal displays.\nMicrophase separation.\n Copolymers can undergo microphase separation to form a diverse array of periodic nanostructures, as shown in the example of the styrene-butadiene-styrene block copolymer shown at right. Microphase separation can be understood by analogy to the phase separation between oil and water. Due to chemical incompatibility between the blocks, block copolymers undergo a similar phase separation. However, because the blocks are covalently bonded to each other, they cannot demix macroscopically as water and oil can, and so instead the blocks form nanometre-sized structures. Depending on the relative lengths of each block and the overall block topology of the polymer, many morphologies can be obtained, each its own phase of matter.\nIonic liquids also display microphase separation. The anion and cation are not necessarily compatible and would demix otherwise, but electric charge attraction prevents them from separating. Their anions and cations appear to diffuse within compartmentalized layers or micelles instead of freely as in a uniform liquid.\nMagnetically ordered states.\nTransition metal atoms often have magnetic moments due to the net spin of electrons that remain unpaired and do not form chemical bonds. In some solids the magnetic moments on different atoms are ordered and can form a ferromagnet, an antiferromagnet or a ferrimagnet.\nIn a ferromagnet\u2014for instance, solid iron\u2014the magnetic moment on each atom is aligned in the same direction (within a magnetic domain). If the domains are also aligned, the solid is a permanent magnet, which is magnetic even in the absence of an external magnetic field. The magnetization disappears when the magnet is heated to the Curie point, which for iron is .\nAn antiferromagnet has two networks of equal and opposite magnetic moments, which cancel each other out so that the net magnetization is zero. For example, in nickel(II) oxide (NiO), half the nickel atoms have moments aligned in one direction and half in the opposite direction.\nIn a ferrimagnet, the two networks of magnetic moments are opposite but unequal, so that cancellation is incomplete and there is a non-zero net magnetization. An example is magnetite (Fe3O4), which contains Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions with different magnetic moments.\nA quantum spin liquid (QSL) is a disordered state in a system of interacting quantum spins which preserves its disorder to very low temperatures, unlike other disordered states. It is not a liquid in physical sense, but a solid whose magnetic order is inherently disordered. The name \"liquid\" is due to an analogy with the molecular disorder in a conventional liquid. A QSL is neither a ferromagnet, where magnetic domains are parallel, nor an antiferromagnet, where the magnetic domains are antiparallel; instead, the magnetic domains are randomly oriented. This can be realized e.g. by geometrically frustrated magnetic moments that cannot point uniformly parallel or antiparallel. When cooling down and settling to a state, the domain must \"choose\" an orientation, but if the possible states are similar in energy, one will be chosen randomly. Consequently, despite strong short-range order, there is no long-range magnetic order.\nSuperfluids and condensates.\nBose\u2013Einstein condensates and superfluids.\nBose\u2013Einstein condensation was predicted in 1925 by Albert Einstein, based on the particle statistics developed by him and Satyendra Nath Bose. Bose-Einstein condensation occurs when bosonic particles are cooled close to absolute zero, . At a specific temperature, a large fraction of them suddenly occupies the same lowest energy quantum state. The effect is termed \"condensation\" in analogy with the condensation of water, with which it shares some similarities.\nIn 1937, it was discovered that helium-4, the most common isotope of helium, forms a superfluid below the lambda temperature of . The state is described as \"superfluid\" because it has zero viscosity and flows without friction. In this state it will attempt to \"climb\" out of its container. It also has infinite thermal conductivity so that no temperature gradient can form in a superfluid. Placing a superfluid in a spinning container will result in quantized vortices. These properties are explained by the theory that helium-4 atoms form a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate in the superfluid state.\nIn the gas phase, the Bose\u2013Einstein condensate remained an unverified theoretical prediction for many years. However in 1995, the research groups of Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman, of JILA at the University of Colorado at Boulder, produced the first such condensate experimentally with rubidium atoms. Independently of Cornell and Wieman, Wolfgang Ketterle also produced a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate in a gas of sodium atoms in 1995.\nSuperconductors and fermionic condensates.\nA \"fermionic condensate\" is similar to the Bose\u2013Einstein condensate but composed of fermions. While the Pauli exclusion principle prevents individual fermions from occupying the same quantum state, pairs of fermions can combine to form composite particles that behave like bosons. These pairs can then occupy the same state, forming a condensate analogous to a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate. Examples of fermionic condensates include superconductors and the superfluid phase of helium-3, a rare isotope of helium. Fermionic condensate has also been observed in ultracold lithium-6.\nSuperconductors are materials which have zero electrical resistivity, and therefore perfect conductivity. This is a distinct physical state which exists at low temperature, and the resistivity increases discontinuously to a finite value at a sharply defined transition temperature for each superconductor. A superconductor also excludes all magnetic fields from its interior, a phenomenon known as the Meissner effect or perfect diamagnetism. Superconducting magnets are used as electromagnets in magnetic resonance imaging machines.\nThe phenomenon of superconductivity was discovered in 1911, and for 75 years was only known in some metals and metallic alloys at temperatures below 30 K. In 1986 so-called high-temperature superconductivity was discovered in certain ceramic oxides, and has now been observed in temperatures as high as 164 K.\nHigh-energy states.\nDegenerate matter.\nUnder extremely high pressure, as in the cores of dead stars, ordinary matter undergoes a transition to a series of exotic states of matter collectively known as degenerate matter, which are supported mainly by quantum mechanical effects. In physics, \"degenerate\" refers to two states that have the same energy and are thus interchangeable. Degenerate matter is supported by the Pauli exclusion principle, which prevents two fermionic particles from occupying the same quantum state. Unlike regular plasma, degenerate plasma expands little when heated, because there are simply no momentum states left. Consequently, degenerate stars collapse into very high densities. More massive degenerate stars are smaller, because the gravitational force increases, but pressure does not increase proportionally.\nElectron-degenerate matter is found inside white dwarf stars. Electrons remain bound to atoms but are able to transfer to adjacent atoms. Neutron-degenerate matter is found in neutron stars. Vast gravitational pressure compresses atoms so strongly that the electrons are forced to combine with protons via inverse beta-decay, resulting in a superdense conglomeration of neutrons. Normally free neutrons outside an atomic nucleus will decay with a half life of approximately 10 minutes, but in a neutron star, the decay is overtaken by inverse decay. Cold degenerate matter is also present in planets such as Jupiter and in the even more massive brown dwarfs, which are expected to have a core with metallic hydrogen. Because of the degeneracy, more massive brown dwarfs are not significantly larger. In metals, the electrons can be modeled as a degenerate gas moving in a lattice of non-degenerate positive ions.\nQuark matter.\nIn regular cold matter, quarks, fundamental particles of nuclear matter, are confined by the strong force into hadrons that consist of 2\u20134 quarks, such as protons and neutrons. Quark matter or quantum chromodynamical (QCD) matter is a group of phases where the strong force is overcome and quarks are deconfined and free to move. Quark matter phases occur at extremely high densities or temperatures, and there are no known ways to produce them in equilibrium in the laboratory; in ordinary conditions, any quark matter formed immediately undergoes radioactive decay.\nStrange matter is a type of quark matter that is suspected to exist inside some neutron stars close to the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit (approximately 2\u20133 solar masses), although there is no direct evidence of its existence. In strange matter, part of the energy available manifests as strange quarks, a heavier analogue of the common down quark. It may be stable at lower energy states once formed, although this is not known.\nQuark\u2013gluon plasma is a very high-temperature phase in which quarks become free and able to move independently, rather than being perpetually bound into particles, in a sea of gluons, subatomic particles that transmit the strong force that binds quarks together. This is analogous to the liberation of electrons from atoms in a plasma. This state is briefly attainable in extremely high-energy heavy ion collisions in particle accelerators, and allows scientists to observe the properties of individual quarks. Theories predicting the existence of quark\u2013gluon plasma were developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and it was detected for the first time in the laboratory at CERN in the year 2000. Unlike plasma, which flows like a gas, interactions within QGP are strong and it flows like a liquid.\nAt high densities but relatively low temperatures, quarks are theorized to form a quark liquid whose nature is presently unknown. It forms a distinct color-flavor locked (CFL) phase at even higher densities. This phase is superconductive for color charge. These phases may occur in neutron stars but they are presently theoretical.\nColor-glass condensate.\nColor-glass condensate is a type of matter theorized to exist in atomic nuclei traveling near the speed of light. According to Einstein's theory of relativity, a high-energy nucleus appears length contracted, or compressed, along its direction of motion. As a result, the gluons inside the nucleus appear to a stationary observer as a \"gluonic wall\" traveling near the speed of light. At very high energies, the density of the gluons in this wall is seen to increase greatly. Unlike the quark\u2013gluon plasma produced in the collision of such walls, the color-glass condensate describes the walls themselves, and is an intrinsic property of the particles that can only be observed under high-energy conditions such as those at Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and possibly at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) as well.\nVery high energy states.\nVarious theories predict new states of matter at very high energies. An unknown state has created the baryon asymmetry in the universe, but little is known about it. In string theory, a Hagedorn temperature is predicted for superstrings at about 1030 K, where superstrings are copiously produced. At Planck temperature (1032 K), gravity becomes a significant force between individual particles. No current theory can describe these states and they cannot be produced with any foreseeable experiment. However, these states are important in cosmology because the universe may have passed through these states in the Big Bang.\nOther proposed states.\nSupersolid.\nA supersolid is a spatially ordered material (that is, a solid or crystal) with superfluid properties. Similar to a superfluid, a supersolid is able to move without friction but retains a rigid shape. Although a supersolid is a solid, it exhibits so many characteristic properties different from other solids that many argue it is another state of matter.\nString-net liquid.\nIn a string-net liquid, atoms have apparently unstable arrangement, like a liquid, but are still consistent in overall pattern, like a solid. When in a normal solid state, the atoms of matter align themselves in a grid pattern, so that the spin of any electron is the opposite of the spin of all electrons touching it. But in a string-net liquid, atoms are arranged in some pattern that requires some electrons to have neighbors with the same spin. This gives rise to curious properties, as well as supporting some unusual proposals about the fundamental conditions of the universe itself.\nSuperglass.\nA superglass is a phase of matter characterized, at the same time, by superfluidity and a frozen amorphous structure.\nChain-melted state.\nMetals, like potassium, in the chain-melted state appear to behave as liquids and solids at the same time. This is a result of being subjected to high temperature and pressure, leading the chains in the potassium to dissolve into a liquid while the crystals remain solid.\nQuantum Hall state.\nA \"quantum Hall state\" gives rise to quantized Hall voltage measured in the direction perpendicular to the current flow. A \"quantum spin Hall state\" is a theoretical phase that may pave the way for the development of electronic devices that dissipate less energy and generate less heat.\nPhotonic matter.\nPhotonic matter is a phenomenon where photons interacting with a gas develop apparent mass, and can interact with each other, even forming photonic \"molecules\". The source of mass is the gas, which is massive. This is in contrast to photons moving in empty space, which have no rest mass, and cannot interact.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37462", "revid": "24134703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37462", "title": "Paul Molitor", "text": "American baseball player and manager (born 1956)\nPaul Leo Molitor (born August 22, 1956), nicknamed \"Mollie\" and \"the Ignitor\", is an American former professional baseball player and manager. During his 21-year playing career in Major League Baseball (MLB), he played for the Milwaukee Brewers (1978\u20131992), Toronto Blue Jays (1993\u20131995), and Minnesota Twins (1996\u20131998). He was known for his exceptional hitting and speed. He made seven All-Star Game appearances, and was the World Series Most Valuable Player in 1993. Molitor ranks tenth on the all-time MLB career hits list with 3,319. He is one of only five players in history with 3,000+ hits, a lifetime .300+ batting average, and 500+ career stolen bases. \nConsidered one of the most \"clutch\" hitters in baseball history, Paul Molitor still has the best career postseason batting average in MLB history (minimum 100 at-bats) at .368. \nMolitor was described as \u201cthe most nondescript superstar in baseball,\u201d with Sports Illustrated calling him \u201cThe Complete Player\u201d and \u201ca template of the refined ballplayer.\u201d Ted Williams said, \u201cI watch him and I say to myself, \u2018There is probably the best hitter in the game today.\u2019 He's the closest thing to Joe DiMaggio in the last 30 years. Matter of fact, every time I watch him, I say, \u2018There's Joe.\u2018\u201c \nMolitor grew up in Minnesota and attended the University of Minnesota before beginning his MLB career. After his retirement as a player, he served as a coach for the Seattle Mariners and the Twins. In 2004, he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility, becoming one of the first players enshrined after spending a significant portion of his career as a designated hitter. He was a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. On November 3, 2014, Molitor was announced as the 13th manager of the Twins. He managed the team for four seasons, from 2015 to 2018.\nEarly life.\nMolitor was born in Saint Paul, Minnesota. After graduating from Cretin High School, he was selected in the 28th round of the 1974 MLB draft as a pitcher by the St. Louis Cardinals. He opted instead to attend college at the University of Minnesota, where he was a three-year starter for the Minnesota Golden Gophers. Molitor earned All-American honors as a shortstop for his sophomore year. Between his sophomore and junior seasons, Molitor suffered a broken jaw. With his jaw wired shut for eight weeks, Molitor lost .\nAfter his junior year in college, the Milwaukee Brewers selected Molitor in the first round, with the third overall selection, in the 1977 Major League Baseball draft. He signed with the Brewers and began his professional career with the Class A Burlington Bees of the Midwest League. In 64 games with Burlington, Molitor hit for a .346 batting average, eight home runs, 50 runs batted in (RBI) and 14 stolen bases.\nPlaying career.\nMilwaukee Brewers (1978\u20131992).\nMolitor began as a shortstop, then moved to second base when Robin Yount returned from a brief injury. He made his MLB debut in 1978, playing in 125 games and hitting .273 with six home runs, 45 RBIs and 30 stolen bases. In 1981, he spent time at center field and right field to avoid the injuries associated with infield play. Molitor was moved to third base before the 1982 season. Molitor was part of a young Milwaukee Brewers team that lost the 1982 World Series in seven games to the St. Louis Cardinals. Molitor batted .355 during the series. In Game 1, he had five hits, a World Series record. During the 1982 season, he hit .302 and led the American League (AL) with 136 runs scored. On May 12, he hit three home runs against the Royals in a 9-7 loss.\nMolitor struggled with injuries for much of his early career, being placed on the disabled list six times between 1980 and 1986. In 1984, Molitor struggled with elbow problems, played in only 13 games and ultimately underwent Tommy John surgery (becoming the first position player to undergo the surgery) in an attempt to salvage his career. He played in 140 games in 1985, hitting .297 with 10 home runs and 48 RBIs. He followed that with a .281 average, 9 home runs and 55 RBI in 1986. That year he suffered a hamstring injury, returned for a few days, then reinjured it. He played in 105 games that season.\nMolitor attracted national media attention in 1987 during his 39-game hitting streak. Near the end of the streak, columnist Mike Downey wrote that \"the amazing thing about Paul Molitor's recent bat-o-rama is not that he has hit in 33 straight games but that he has played in 33 straight games.\" The streak ended with Molitor in the on-deck circle when Rick Manning got a game-ending hit to beat the Cleveland Indians on August 26, 1987. Fans booed Manning for driving in the winning run and thus depriving Molitor of one last chance to reach 40 games. The streak stands as the fifth-longest in modern-day baseball history, and remains the longest since Pete Rose's 44-game hit streak in 1978.\nToronto Blue Jays (1993\u20131995).\nAlthough Molitor wanted to remain with Milwaukee when he became a free agent after the 1992 season, the franchise offered him a one-year contract with a $900,000 pay cut (to $2.5 million), while the Toronto Blue Jays offered a three-year, $13 million deal (equivalent to $ million in 2024), leading to his signing with the Blue Jays. Agent Ron Simon said, \"I was also talking with Milwaukee, but it became clear to us that Milwaukee didn't have the same kind of interest in signing Molitor, perhaps because of their financial situation.\"\nMolitor quickly became an offensive juggernaut. In 1993, Molitor led the AL in plate appearances (725) and hits (211) and hit .332 with 22 home runs and 111 RBI. Returning to the playoffs for the first time since 1982, he was a key part of the Blue Jays' second World Series Championship. Molitor hit 2 doubles, 2 triples, and 2 home runs in the Series, earning the World Series MVP Award and tied a World Series record by batting .500 (12-for-24) in the six-game series. In addition, after serving as a DH all season, Molitor played Game 3 of the World Series at first base and Games 4 and 5 at third base in the games played at Philadelphia.\nIn 1994, a strike-shortened season, Molitor hit .341 and led the AL in games played (115) and singles (107). He also stole 20 bases that season without ever being caught, one short of Kevin McReynolds' 1988 major league record of 21. Molitor's average dropped to .270 in 1995, his lowest mark in more than ten years.\nMinnesota Twins (1996\u20131998).\nHe left the Blue Jays after the season, and joined his hometown Minnesota Twins for the final three seasons of his career. He acquired his 3,000th hit on September 16, 1996 against the Kansas City Royals at Kauffman Stadium. He was the first player to reach the 3,000 hits plateau with a triple. Molitor was relishing the opportunity to play with Twins superstar Kirby Puckett, but Puckett developed career-ending glaucoma during spring training in 1996 and never played again. In 1996, Molitor became the second 40-year-old, after Hall of Famer Sam Rice, to have a 200-hit season, leading the league with 225, while also leading the league in singles with 167. Molitor also remains the last MLB player to drive in 100 or more runs in a season while hitting fewer than 10 home runs (nine HR, 113 RBIs).\nMolitor hit .305 in 1997, his twelfth season to finish with a batting average higher than .300. In 1998, he hit .281 with four home runs, 69 RBI and nine stolen bases. Other than his very brief 1984 season, the 1998 season was the first in Molitor's career in which he did not reach double-digit stolen base totals. He retired in December, saying, \"My heart tells me I've done what I can do on the field and in this game,\" Molitor said. \"I'm happy to leave it playing my last season in a Twins uniform... Now I'm going to redirect my efforts to find out what else the future holds.\"\nCoaching and managerial career.\nEarly career.\nAfter retiring as a player, Molitor remained with the Twins as a broadcaster in 1999 and bench coach for two seasons. He was considered a leading candidate to manage the team when Tom Kelly retired after 2001, but he declined in part because the Twins were still being targeted for potential contraction. Molitor was a hitting coach with the Mariners in 2004. He then spent the 2005 to 2013 seasons in the Twins organization as a minor league baserunning and fielding instructor. Molitor joined the Twins coaching staff in 2014 to oversee baserunning, bunting, infield instruction, and positioning.\nMinnesota Twins.\nThe Twins hired Molitor to fill their manager vacancy for the 2015 season, and introduced him in a press conference on November 4, 2014.\nAt the end of the 2017 season, the Twins announced that Molitor would receive a three-year contract extension through 2020. Molitor was rewarded for his efforts in leading the Twins back to the postseason after losing 103 games the season prior, the first team in history to achieve this feat, by being named American League Manager of the Year in November 2017. He became only the second person to be elected to the Hall of Fame as a player and win the Manager of the Year Award behind Frank Robinson, who was named AL Manager of the Year in 1989 while managing the Baltimore Orioles.\nOn October 2, 2018, the Twins fired Molitor as manager, but expressed that they had interest in having him continue to maintain a role with the team in some capacity. He finished with a record of 305 wins and 343 losses in 648 games. Molitor later rejoined the Twins as a special assistant, with roving instructor duties for the team's minor league affiliates.\n \"As of games played on September 30, 2018\"\nAccomplishments.\nMolitor's lifetime statistics include 2,683 games played, 1,782 runs scored, 3,319 hits, 605 doubles, 114 triples, 234 home runs, 1,307 runs batted in, 1,094 walks, a .306 batting average, and 504 stolen bases. His 3,319 hits rank him tenth all-time. In addition, he batted .368 in five postseason series (currently best in MLB history with a minimum 100 at-bats), and was an all-star seven times. Molitor recorded these statistics while missing nearly 500 games due to various injuries throughout his career. In 1999, Molitor ranked No. 99 on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and he was nominated as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. Molitor was elected to the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 1999.\nOn June 11, 1999, the Brewers retired Molitor's uniform number 4. During the ceremony at Milwaukee County Stadium, Molitor announced that if he went into the Hall of Fame, he would do so as a Brewer. On January 6, 2004, he was elected to the Hall in his first year of eligibility, with 85.2% of the votes. True to his word, he joined Robin Yount as the only Hall of Famers to be depicted on their plaques with Brewers caps. At the time of his induction, Molitor was the hitting coach for the Seattle Mariners.\nMolitor is one of five players in major league history with at least 3,000 hits, a .300 lifetime batting average, and 500 stolen bases. The other four are Ty Cobb, Honus Wagner, Eddie Collins and Ichiro Suzuki. Only Ichiro and Molitor played beyond 1930. Molitor is the only player ever to accomplish those feats and hit at least 200 home runs. Molitor is also the first player in World Series history to have at least two home runs, two doubles, and two triples in one series (1993). He is a member of an exclusive club, hitting .300 or better in full seasons across three decades (1970s, 80s, and 90s). He hit better than .300 a dozen times in his career. Including Game 1 of the 1982 World Series, he recorded eight 5-hit games and four 200+ hit seasons in his 21 year major league career. Molitor also compiled 56 4-hit games in his MLB career.\nAs of today, Molitor is the last Major League player to execute the rare feat of stealing home plate at least ten times over the course of their career.\nPersonal life.\nDuring the early years of his career, Molitor began using cocaine and marijuana. During the trial of a drug dealer in 1984, Molitor admitted that he had used drugs. Many years later, he said, \"There are things you're not so proud of \u2014 failures, mistakes, dabbling in drugs, a young ballplayer in the party scene. Part of it was peer pressure. I was young and single, and hung around with the wrong people. ... You learn from it. You find a positive in it. It makes you appreciate the things that are good.\" He claims to have stopped using drugs in 1981, and has since visited schools to lecture about the dangers of drug use.\nMolitor married Linda Kaplan in 1981, and had a daughter, Blaire. Before their 2003 divorce, it was revealed that he had fathered a son, Joshua, in an extramarital affair with Joanna Andreou, and was paying child support. During his legal separation from Linda, he fathered another child, daughter Julia, with the woman who would become his second wife, Destini. Molitor and Destini married in 2014, and went on to have another child, son Benjamin.\nDuring his Hall of Fame induction speech, Molitor mentioned his difficult family relationships; the divorce from Linda caused such hard feelings that his ex-wife and their daughter almost did not attend his induction ceremony.\nMolitor's nephew is professional disc golfer Cale Leiviska.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37463", "revid": "44127043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37463", "title": "Miller's knot", "text": "Type of knot\nA miller's knot (also sack knot or bag knot) is a binding knot used to secure the opening of a sack or bag. Historically, large sacks often contained grains; thus the association of these knots with the miller's trade. Several knots are known interchangeably by these three names.\nConstrictor makes a fiercer binding knot, but Miller's/Bag is suitable for most applications, and is easier to tie/untie. Miller's/Bag makes a great hitch, like the similar Ground-Line. Binding usage has force emanating from inside rope ring evenly, hitch usage has force input from one side, then reducing around.\nVariations.\nAs noted above, several other distinct knots have historically been known as miller's, sack, or bag knots; namely ABOK-1241, ABOK-1242, ABOK-1243 (Ground line hitch), ABOK-1674, ABOK-11 and their slipped versions. These fit the short description \"two crossing turns \u2013 ends tucked under\".\nThe following 3 knots do not fit the simple \"two crossing turns \u2013 ends tucked under\" definition but are very secure:\nTying.\nThe common aspects of the most common bag knots are two crossing turns, and both ends tucked under some turns near the crossing point. Two ends, and two turns one can tuck under, gives a limited number of alternatives. All of these knots can also be made in a slipped form by starting with a bight and/or by completing the final tuck with a bight instead of the end.\nTo avoid ambiguity, versions of these knots that are not slipped are pictured below with the reference numbers found in \"The Ashley Book of Knots\".\nThis is to tie a Constrictor knot version of the miller's knot:\nTo tie the other variants:\nTying other knots that also may function very well as a bag knot but are slightly different from above descriptions:"}
{"id": "37464", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37464", "title": "Bag knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37466", "revid": "45572306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37466", "title": "Butterfly loop", "text": "Knot used to form a fixed loop in the middle of a rope\nThe butterfly loop, also known as lineman's loop, butterfly knot, alpine butterfly knot and lineman's rider, is a knot used to form a fixed loop in the middle of a rope. Tied in the bight, it can be made in a rope without access to either of the ends; this is a distinct advantage when working with long climbing ropes. The butterfly loop is an excellent mid-line rigging knot; it handles multi-directional loading well and has a symmetrical shape that makes it easy to inspect. In a climbing context it is also useful for traverse lines, some anchors, shortening rope slings, and for isolating damaged sections of rope.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known presentation of the knot was in A.A. Burger's 1914 work \"Rope and Its Uses\", included in an agricultural extension bulletin from what is now Iowa State University. Burger called the knot a lineman's rider stating it was often used by \"linemen and especially telephone men\". The knot's security and ability to withstand tension in any direction are both discussed.\nThe knot's association with mountaineering\u2014and with butterflies\u2014originates from a 1928 article in \"Alpine Journal\" by C.E.I. Wright and J.E. Magowan. The authors claim to have developed the butterfly noose themselves while attempting to improve the selection of knots available to climbers. The name is \"so styled on the basis of a more or less fanciful resemblance imagined in the form of the knot.\" In the second part of the article they express dissatisfaction regarding their earlier use of the word \"noose,\" since the knot is non-collapsing, and refer to the knot as butterfly loop or simply butterfly. Wright and Magowan call the butterfly loop \"new,\" along with several other of their knots, in the sense they were unable to identify any earlier record of them. However, they prudently added that it \"might be rash to claim they have never been used before.\"\nClifford Ashley presented the knot in 1944 (text &amp; image #1053), calling it the lineman's loop; he attributed its first publication to J.M. Drew, but made no specific reference as to the source of this claim. A 1912 article called \"Some Knots and Splices\" by Drew appears in the bibliography of \"The Ashley Book of Knots\". A 1913 reprint of this Drew article does not mention the butterfly loop. Nor does Drew's 1942 book Ropework : Knots, Hitches, Splices, Halters --and presumably earlier edition 1936 (but which has 66pp vs. 58 for 1942?!)-- own book on knots present this knot. But in his contributed \"Chapter 12 Rope Work\", pp.202 .. 252 to Lester Griswold's Handicraft does present the knot. (Curiously, Ashley gives no hint that this book which he twice praises contains a full knots chapter written by Drew!)\nUse.\nThe loop is typically attached to a climbing harness by 2 carabiners together with gates to opposite sides from each other.\nIt can also be used to isolate a worn section of rope, where the knot is tied such that the worn section is isolated in the loop (which of course does not receive a carabiner nor bear any loads in this case). The loop portion is isolated when the other two legs are loaded, and in fact the butterfly can be tied as a bend with the ends emerging where the loop would be.\nErrors in tying the butterfly loop can produce a similar looking but inferior knot, the so-called \"false butterfly\", which is prone to slipping. However, some sources suggest this behavior can be exploited purposely for shock absorption. Wright and Magowan called this less secure loop knot the \"half-hitch noose\".\nVariations.\nThe double butterfly loop has two non-collapsing loops, allowing for two clip-in points, both of which have the same advantages and disadvantages of a single-loop butterfly.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37467", "revid": "17171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37467", "title": "Flemish knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37469", "revid": "1306360148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37469", "title": "Constrictor knot", "text": "Binding hitch knot\nThe constrictor knot is one of the most effective binding knots. Simple and secure, it is a harsh knot that can be difficult or impossible to untie once tightened. It is made similarly to a clove hitch but with one end passed under the other, forming an overhand knot under a riding turn. The double constrictor knot is an even more robust variation that features two riding turns.\nHistory.\nFirst called \"constrictor knot\" in Clifford Ashley's 1944 work \"The Ashley Book of Knots\", this knot likely dates back much further. Although Ashley seemed to imply that he had invented the constrictor knot over 25 years before publishing \"The Ashley Book of Knots\", research indicates that he was not its only originator, but his Book of Knots does seem to be the source of subsequent knowledge and awareness of the knot.\nAlthough the description is not entirely without ambiguity, the constrictor knot is thought to have appeared under the name \"gunner's knot\" in the 1866 work \"The Book of Knots\", written under the pseudonym Tom Bowling. The knot is described in relation to the clove hitch, which he illustrated and called the \"builder's knot\". He wrote, \"The Gunner's knot (of which we do not give a diagram) only differs from the builder's knot, by the ends of the cords being simply knotted before being brought from under the loop which crosses them.\" But Bowling is simply an extraction and translation of the knotting work contained in the huge French \", first published in 1841, which says \" When J. T. Burgess copied from Bowling, he changed this text to merely state \"when the ends are knotted, the builder's knot becomes the gunner's Knot.\" Although a clove hitch with knotted ends \"is\" a workable binding knot, Burgess was not actually describing the constrictor knot. In 1917, A. Hyatt Verrill illustrated Burgess's clove hitch variation in \"Knots, Splices and Rope Work\".\nThe constrictor knot was clearly described but not pictured as the \"\" (\"timber knot\") in the 1916 (2nd) edition of the Swedish book ' (\"On Knots\") by Hjalmar \u00d6hrvall. Finnish scout leader Martta Ropponen presented the knot in her 1931 scouting handbook ' (\"Knot Book\"), one of the first published works known to contain an illustration of the constrictor knot. Cyrus L. Day relates that, \"she had never seen it in Finland, she wrote to me in 1954, but had learned about it from a Spaniard named Raphael Gaston, who called it 'whip knot', and told her it was used in the mountains of Spain by muleteers and herdsmen.\" The Finnish name \"\" (\"whip knot\") was a translation from Esperanto, the language Ropponen used to correspond with Gaston. But even this explicit occurrence of the constrictor remains in doubt, as the name \"whip knot\" is not applied to the constrictor in other works, and otherwise is used for the strangle knot, tied in the ends of whip tails. Also in 1931 \u2013 and so of essentially same date as for Ropponen \u2013 James Drew presented the constrictor (as a strangle knot that can be tied in the bight) in Lester Griswold's book, \"Handicraft\"; but Drew did not show it in his on book of knots later published. (As Drew knew Clifford Ashley, it is suspected that he might have learned the knot from him; Ashley does praise Handicraft in his Book of Knots.)\nConstrictor Knot Tying method.\nThe method shown below is the most basic way to tie the knot around a post (that is, using a working end).\nThere are also at least three methods to tie the constrictor knot in the bight and slip it over the end of an object to be bound.\nTwisting method.\nUsing both hands when the end of the object to tie to is available:\nIf one or both of the ends are folded in between the two loops and lead in the opposite direction, the knot becomes slipped.\nFolding method.\npreparing it using only one hands fingers:\nUsing one hand when the end of the object to tie to is available:\nIf the rope is to be stretched in tension, the grabbing at stage 2 may first tighten the top side rope, the bottom side rope may be pulled to tighten the knot itself, and the bottom rope side may be tightened by the knot at the next pole. If one or both of the ends are folded and led in the opposite direction before the last loop is folded over the objects end, the knot becomes slipped and therefore easier to untie: It also makes it possible to stretch either side rope tight by pulling at the slip loops.\nVariations.\nDouble constrictor knot.\nIf a stronger and even more secure knot is required an extra riding turn can be added to the basic knot to form a double constrictor knot. It is particularly useful when tying the knot with very slippery twine, especially when waxed. Adding more than one extra riding turn does not add to its security and makes the knot more difficult to tighten evenly.\nSlipped constrictor knot.\nThis variation is useful if it is known beforehand that the constrictor will need to be released. Depending on the knotting material and how tightly it is cinched, the slipped form can still be very difficult to release.\nThe slipped constrictor can also be tied in the bight and slipped over the object to constrict. Despite its advertised advantage (quick release), the slipped constrictor knot can also be hard to release when worked extremely tight in certain rope materials.\nCross constrictor knot.\nThis variation is similar to the double constrictor knot but has the two riding turns crossing each other rather than riding along. It is unclear whether it is more secure than the double constrictor, and has the unhelpful aspect of being thicker at the bridge of the knot, with three rope diameters. \nThere are two types depending on which direction the two riding turns cross. When the bottom riding turn is along the grove of the ends wrapping around each other on their way out, it gives a slightly lower knot height and may be seen as a strangle knot with an extra riding turn across.\nUsage.\nThe constrictor knot is appropriate for situations where secure temporary or semi-permanent binding is needed. Made with small-stuff it is especially effective, as the binding force is concentrated over a smaller area. When tying over soft material such as the neck of a bag, take care to keep the wraps of the knot together. The constrictor knot can damage or disfigure items it is tied around. To exert extreme tension on the knot without injuring the hands, one can fashion handles using marlinespike hitches made around two rods.\nConstrictor knots can be used for temporarily binding the fibres of a rope (or strand ends) together while splicing, or when cutting to length and before properly whipping the ends. Constrictor knots can also be quite effective as improvised hose clamps or cable ties. The knot has also been recommended as a surgical knot for ligatures in human and veterinary surgery, where it has been shown to be far superior to any of the knots commonly used for ligation. Noted master-rigger Brion Toss says of the constrictor: \"To know the knot is to constantly find uses for it...\"\nFor spearguns, the constrictor knot is the usual knot used to secure modern, toggled, Dyneema, cord wishbones into the hollow, bulk-rubber loops, which are used to power the spear. Usually tied with braid, Kevlar or Dyneema cord of approximately 1.4-2mm diameter.\nReleasing.\nA heavily tightened constrictor knot will likely jam. If the ends are long enough, one can sometimes untie it by pulling one end generally parallel to the bound object and a bit up away from it, and prying it into the opposite end's part to open the knot. Tools that can be forced between parts of the knot (such as picks and marlinespikes) may help.\nIf the ends have been trimmed short, or the knot is otherwise hopelessly jammed, it can be easily released by cutting the riding turn with a sharp knife. The knot will spring apart as soon as the riding turn is cut. If care is taken not to cut too deeply, the underlying wraps will protect the bound object from being damaged by the knife.\nSecurity.\nThe constrictor and double constrictor are both extremely secure when tied tightly around convex objects with cord scaled for the task at hand. If binding around a not fully convex, or square-edged object, arrange the knot so the overhand knot portion is stretched across a convex portion, or a corner, with the riding turn directly atop it. In situations where the object leaves gaps under the knot and there are no corners, it is possible to finish the constrictor knot off with an additional overhand knot, in the fashion of a reef knot, to help stabilize it. Those recommendations aside, constrictor knots do function best on fully convex objects.\nIf the constricted object (such as a temporarily whipped rope) ends very close to where a constrictor binds it, a boa knot may prove a more stable solution.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37471", "revid": "110069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37471", "title": "Figure eight", "text": ""}
{"id": "37472", "revid": "51013933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37472", "title": "Trondheim", "text": "City in Norway\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTrondheim ( , ; ; ), historically Kaupangen, Nidaros, and Trondhjem (), is a city and municipality in Tr\u00f8ndelag county, Norway. As of 2025, it had a population of 216,518. Trondheim is the third most populous municipality in Norway, and is the fourth largest urban area. Trondheim lies on the south shore of Trondheim Fjord at the mouth of the River Nidelva. Among the significant technology-oriented institutions headquartered in Trondheim are the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), the Foundation for Scientific and Industrial Research (SINTEF), the Geological Survey of Norway (NGU), and St. Olavs University Hospital.\nThe settlement was founded in 997 as a trading post and served as the capital of Norway through the Viking Age until 1217. From 1152 to 1537, the city was the seat of the Catholic Archdiocese of Nidaros; it then became, and has remained, the seat of the Lutheran Diocese of Nidaros and the site of the Nidaros Cathedral. The city was incorporated in 1838. The current municipality was formed in 1964, when Trondheim merged with Byneset Municipality, Leinstrand Municipality, Strinda Municipality, and Tiller Municipality, and further expanded on 1 January 2020, when Trondheim merged with Kl\u00e6bu Municipality.\nTrondheim has a mild climate for its northerly latitude, resulting in moderate summers and winters that often remain above the freezing point in seaside areas. At higher elevations, though, the microclimate is colder and snowier.\nThe city functions as the seat of the County Mayor of Tr\u00f8ndelag county but not as its administrative centre (which is Steinkjer). This is designed to avoid making the county administration too centralized.\nTrondheim is home to football club Rosenborg, Norway's most successful football club, and Gran\u00e5sen Ski Centre, which has hosted the World Championship in Nordic Skiing.\nNames and etymology.\nThe city was established in 997 by Olav Tryggvason and it was originally named (). The first element of the name was the local river Nid. The last element of the name was which meant \"the mouth of a river\". Thus the name meant \"the outlet of the river Nid\". Although the formal name was Nidaros, the city was commonly known as , which means \"city\" or \"marketplace\", or more specifically which means \"the city in Trondheim\". Trondheim () was the historic name for the whole district which is now known as Tr\u00f8ndelag. This is the area where the people were known as Tr\u00f8nder (). This district name Trondheim meant \"the home of the Tr\u00f8nder people\" (literally \"Tr\u00f8nder-home\") and Tr\u00f8ndelag () originally meant the \"law area of the Tr\u00f8nder people\" (literally \"Tr\u00f8nder-law\"). The name of the Tr\u00f8nder people derives from the Old Norse word which is an old present participle of the verb which means \"to grow\" or \"to thrive\".\nDuring the late Middle Ages, the city name was commonly shortened to \"\", dropping the \"kaupanger\" part, and over time the name became , using the Dano-Norwegian spelling rather than the Old Norse spelling since the city was part of the Kingdom of Denmark-Norway for centuries.\nOn 21 December 1917, a royal resolution enacted the 1917 Norwegian language reforms. Around the time, many municipalities and cities had their names changed to \"Norwegianize\" the spelling and make them look less Danish. On 1 January 1919, the name of the local Church of Norway diocese was changed from ' to ' (). In 1924, the name of the Norwegian capital city was changed from to Oslo, removing the name referencing a Danish King in favor of the very old name Oslo. In 1928, a referendum in Trondhjem was held on whether to keep the current name or to bring back the original name of \"Nidaros\". The vote resulted in 17,163 votes in favour of and only 1,508 votes in favour of Nidaros. Despite this result, the Storting voted in 1929 to make some changes. The Trondhjem Cathedral would be changed to Nidaros Cathedral effective on 1 July 1929 and the name of the city would change to \"Nidaros\" starting on 1 January 1930. This change caused public outrage and even riots during 1930. This forced the Storting to reconsider this change. On 6 March 1931, the name was formally changed to \"Trondheim\", using the medieval Norwegian spelling instead of the Danish version \"Trondhjem\". The name of the diocese and cathedral, however, continued using the name Nidaros.\nTrondheim was briefly named \"\" during the Second World War as a German exonym.\nHistory.\nTrondheim was named Kaupangen () by Viking King Olav Tryggvason in 997 CE. Shortly after that, it came to be called \"Nidaros\". Initially, it was frequently used as a military retainer (Old Norse: \"hird\"-man) of King Olav I. It was also frequently used as the king's seat and was Norway's capital until 1217.\nPeople have lived in the area for thousands of years, as evidenced by the rock carvings in central Norway, the N\u00f8stvet and Lihult cultures, and the Corded Ware culture. In ancient times, the kings of Norway were hailed in Trondheim at \u00d8retinget, the place for the assembly of all free men by the mouth of the River Nidelva. Harald Fairhair (865\u2013933) was hailed as the king here, as was his son, Haakon I, called 'the Good.' The battle of \"Kalvskinnet\" took place in Trondheim in 1179: King Sverre Sigurdsson and his \"Birkebeiner\" warriors were victorious against Erling Skakke (a rival to the throne). Some scholars believe that the famous Lewis chessmen, 12th-century chess pieces carved from walrus ivory that were found in the Hebrides and are now at the British Museum, may have been made in Trondheim.\nFrom 1152, Trondheim was the seat of the Archbishop of Nidaros for Norway, which operated from the Archbishop's Palace. Due to the introduction of Lutheran Protestantism in 1537, the last archbishop, Olav Engelbrektsson, had to flee from the city to the Netherlands; he died in what today is Lier, Belgium.\nFrom the 16th through the 19th centuries, the city was repeatedly ravaged by fires that caused widespread damage since many of its buildings were made of wood. The worst occurred in 1598, 1651, 1681, 1708, 1717 (twice), 1742, 1788, 1841 and 1842. The 1651 fire destroyed 90% of all buildings within the city limits. After the \"Horneman Fire\" in 1681, there was an almost total reconstruction of the city, overseen by General Johan Caspar von Cicignon, originally from Luxembourg. Broad avenues, such as Munkegata, were created, without regard for private property rights, to limit the damage from future fires. At the time, the city had a population of under 10,000 inhabitants, with most living in the downtown area.\nAfter the Treaty of Roskilde on 26 February 1658, Trondheim and the rest of Tr\u00f8ndelag became Swedish territory briefly. However, after a three-month long siege, the area was reconquered 10 months later. The conflict was finally settled by the Treaty of Copenhagen on 27 May 1660.\nDuring the Second World War, Trondheim was occupied by Nazi Germany from 9 April 1940, the first day of the invasion of Norway, until the end of the war in Europe, 8 May 1945. The German invasion force consisted of the German cruiser Admiral Hipper, 4 destroyers and 1700 Austrian Mountain troops. Except for a coastal battery that opened fire, there was no resistance to the invasion, which began on 9 April at 5 AM. On 14 and 17 April, British and French forces landed near Trondheim in a failed attempt to liberate Trondheim, as part of the Namsos Campaign. During the occupation, Trondheim was the home of the notorious Norwegian Gestapo agent, Henry Rinnan, who operated from a nearby villa and infiltrated Norwegian resistance groups. The city and its citizens were subjected to harsh treatment by the occupying power, including the imposition of martial law in October 1942. During this time, the Germans turned the city and its environs into a major base for submarines (which included building the large submarine base and bunker DORA I), and contemplated a scheme to build a new city for 300,000 inhabitants, \"Nordstern\" (\"Northern Star\"), centred southwest of Trondheim, near the wetlands of \u00d8ysand on the outskirts of Melhus municipality. This new metropolis was to be accompanied by a massively expanded version of the already existing naval base, which was intended to become the future primary stronghold of the German Kriegsmarine. A start was made on this enormous construction project, but it was far from completed when the war ended, and today, there are few physical remains of it.\nMunicipal history.\nThe city of Trondheim was established on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). On 1 January 1864, part of Strinda Municipality (population: 1,229) was amalgamated with Trondheim. Then, on 1 January 1893, another part of Strinda Municipality (population: 4,097) was transferred to Trondheim Municipality. On 1 January 1952, the Lade area of Strinda Municipality (population: 2,230) was transferred to Trondheim Municipality. On 1 January 1964, a major municipal merger took place: Leinstrand Municipality (population: 4,193), Byneset Municipality (population: 2,049), Strinda Municipality (population: 44,600), and Tiller Municipality (population: 3,595) were all merged with the city of Trondheim (population: 56,982), which nearly doubled the population of the municipality. On 1 January 2020, the neighboring Kl\u00e6bu Municipality (population: 6,050) was merged with Trondheim Municipality.\nCoat of arms and seal.\nThe coat of arms dates back to the 13th century. To the left, there is an archbishop with his staff and mitre in a church archway. On the right, a crowned king holding scales in a castle archway. These two pictures rest on a base which forms an arch. Underneath that arch, are three male heads which symbolise the city's rank as Norway's first capital and the archbishop's place of residence. The scales symbolise justice and the motif is based on the political philosophy of the 13th century, where the balance of power between king and church was an important issue. The three heads at the bottom may symbolise the city council. The motif is unique in Norwegian municipal heraldry, but similar motifs are found in bishopric cities on the continent. The design of the coat-of-arms that was adopted in 1897, and is still used today, was made by H\u00e5kon Thorsen.\nGeography.\nTrondheim is situated where the River Nidelva meets Trondheim Fjord with an excellent harbour and sheltered condition. In the Middle Ages the river was deep enough to be navigable by most boats. However, in the mid\u201317th century, an avalanche of mud and stones made it less navigable, and partly ruined the harbour. The municipality's highest elevation is the Storheia hill, above sea level. At the summer solstice, the sun rises at 03:00 and sets at 23:40, and then stays just below the horizon. Between 23 May and 19 July, when the sky is cloud-free, it remains light enough at night that no artificial lighting is needed outdoors. At the winter solstice, the sun rises at 10:01, stays very low above the horizon (at midday its altitude is slightly more than 3 degrees over the horizon), and sets at 14:31.\nClimate.\nTrondheim city has an oceanic climate (Cfb) or humid continental climate (Dfb), depending on the winter threshold used (\u22123\u00a0\u00b0C or 0\u00a0\u00b0C). Winters are fairly cold and summers are mild. The part of the municipality further away from the fjord has slightly colder winters, while the part close to the fjord has the mildest winters. Trondheim is mostly sheltered from the strong south and southwesterly winds which can occur along the outer seaboard but is more exposed to northwesterly winds. As with the rest of Norway, the weather is dependent on the weather pattern. High pressure over Central Norway or to the east can last for weeks, while Atlantic Lows from the west also can dominate for weeks. Such stuck opposite weather patterns was evident in 2020, when May saw northwesterlies with cold air even bringing some snowfall, while the following June was warm and sunny. Trondheim experiences moderate snowfall from November to March, but mixed with mild weather and rainfall. There is often more snow and later snowmelt in suburban areas at a higher elevation, with good skiing conditions in Bymarka. All the monthly record lows are from 1955 or older, with half of them from before 1920. The last overnight frost in June was in 1958. The all-time low was recorded February 1899. The all-time high was recorded 22 July 1901.\nThe earliest weather stations were located closer to the city centre, from 1945 onwards the weather station has been located at a higher elevation (Voll, 127 m and Tyholt, 113 m), therefore being slightly colder.\nA new sunrecorder was established in the city by met.no at Gl\u00f8shaugen (NTNU campus) December 2015, recording more sunhours than the earlier sunrecorder, which had terrain blocking issues. There are on average 229 sunhours in July (based 2016\u20132020). Trondheim recorded 197 sunhours in October 2016 beating the previous national record for October. In April 2019, Trondheim recorded 308 sunhours, setting a new national record for April. In contrast, December 2016 only recorded 10 sunhours.\nFauna.\nThe city has various wetland habitats. among which there is the \"Gaulosen.\" The observation tower accommodates for birdwatching and providing information about birdlife.\nThough Trondheim is Norway's third largest city, wild animals are regularly seen. Otters and beavers thrive in Nidelva and Bymarka. Badgers and red foxes are not uncommon sights. Moose and deer are common in the hills surrounding the city, and might wander into the city, especially in May when the one-year-olds are chased away by their mothers, or in late winter when food grows scarce in the snow-covered higher regions. From 2002 until 2017, a wolverine lived in Bymarka.\nCityscape and sites.\nDORA 1 is a German submarine base that housed the 13th U-boat Flotilla during the Second World War occupation of Norway. Today the bunker houses various archives, among them the city archives, the university and state archives. More recently, DORA has been used as a concert venue.\nKristiansten Fortress, built 1681\u20131684, is located on a hill east of Trondheim. It repelled the invading Swedes in 1718, but was decommissioned in 1816 by Crown Prince Regent Charles John.\nA statue of Olav Tryggvason, the founder of Trondheim, is located in the city's central square, mounted on top of an obelisk. The statue base is also a sun dial, but it is calibrated to UTC+1 so that the reading is inaccurate by one hour in the summer.\nThe islet Munkholmen is a popular tourist attraction and recreation site. The islet has served as a place of execution, a monastery, a fortress, prison, and a Second World War anti-aircraft gun station.\nStiftsg\u00e5rden is the royal residence in Trondheim, originally constructed in 1774 by Cecilie Christine Sch\u00f8ller. At 140 rooms constituting , it is possibly the largest wooden building in Northern Europe and has been used by royals and their guests since 1800.\nA statue of Leif Ericson is located at the seaside, close to the old Customs Building, the cruise ship facilities and the new swimming hall. The statue is a replica, the original being located at a Seattle marina.\nShopping.\nMost of Trondheim's city centre is scattered with small speciality shops. However, the city centre's main shopping area is concentrated around the pedestrianised streets \"Nordre gate\" (), \"Olav Tryggvasons gate\" and \"Thomas Angells gate\" even though the rest of the city centre is provided with everything from old, well-established companies to new, hip and trendy shops.\nIn the mid-to-late 1990s, the area surrounding the old drydock and ship construction buildings of the defunct Trondhjems mekaniske V\u00e6rksted shipbuilding company at the Nedre Elvehavn was renovated and old industrial buildings were torn down to make way for condominiums. A shopping centre was also built, known as Solsiden (The Sunny Side). This is a popular residential and shopping area, especially for young people.\nLarger multi-mall shopping areas are located in the eastern suburb of Lade-Strindheim along the \"Haakon VIIs gate\" and \"Bromstadvegen\" streets, and in the southern suburb of Tiller (The latter centred around City Syd). Swedish store chains are widely present throughout the areas, especially in the DIY and clothing store fields, including IKEA, Biltema, and Clas Ohlson.\nNidaros Cathedral.\nThe Nidaros Cathedral and the Archbishop's Palace are located side by side in the middle of the city centre. The cathedral, built from 1070 on, is the most important Gothic monument in Norway and was Northern Europe's most important Christian pilgrimage site during the Middle Ages, with pilgrimage routes leading to it from Oslo in southern Norway and from the J\u00e4mtland and V\u00e4rmland regions of Sweden. Today, it is the northernmost medieval cathedral in the world, and the second-largest in Scandinavia.\nDuring the Middle Ages, and again after independence was restored in 1814, the Nidaros Cathedral was the coronation church of the Norwegian kings. King Haakon VII was the last monarch to be crowned there, in 1906. Starting with King Olav V in 1957, coronation was replaced by consecration. In 1991, the present King Harald V and Queen Sonja were consecrated in the cathedral. On 24 May 2002, their daughter Princess M\u00e4rtha Louise married the writer Ari Behn in the cathedral.\nThe Pilgrim's Route (\"Pilegrimsleden\") to the site of Saint Olufs's tomb at Nidaros Cathedral, has recently been re-instated. Also known as St. Olav's Way, (\"Sankt Olavs vei\"), the main route, which is approximately long, starts in Oslo and heads North, along Lake Mj\u00f8sa, up the valley Gudbrandsdalen, over the mountain range Dovrefjell and down the Oppdal valley to end at Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim. There is a Pilgrim's Office in Oslo which gives advice to pilgrims and a Pilgrim Centre in Trondheim, under the aegis of the cathedral, which awards certificates to successful pilgrims upon the completion of their journey.\nOther churches.\nThe Lutheran Church of Norway has 21 churches within the municipality of Trondheim. They are all a part of the Diocese of Nidaros, which is based in Trondheim at the Nidaros Cathedral. Many of the churches are several hundred years old, with a couple which were built almost 1,000 years ago.\nThe Roman Catholic Sankt Olav domkirke is the cathedral episcopal see of the exempt Territorial Prelature of Trondheim. Being located across the street from the Nidaros Cathedral, the two of them form an unofficial religious quarter along with a synagogue, a Baptist church, a Salvation Army office, and the 8-auditorium cinema \"Prinsen kinosenter\".\nMuseums.\nSverresborg, also named Zion after King David's castle in Jerusalem, was a fortification built by Sverre Sigurdsson. It is now an open-air museum, consisting of more than 60 buildings. The castle was originally built in 1182\u20131183, but did not last for long as it was burned down in 1188. However, the Sverresaga indicates it had been restored by 1197.\nThe Trondheim Science Center () is a scientific hands-on experience center. The NTNU University Museum (Norwegian: NTNU Vitenskapsmuseet) is part of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. There are also a variety of small history, science and natural history museums, such as the Trondheim Maritime Museum, the \"Armoury\", adjacent to the Archbishops's Palace, Kristiansten Fortress, the music and musical instrument museum Ringve National Museum, Ringve Botanical Garden, the Trondheim Tramway Museum, and the Jewish Museum, co-located with the city's synagogue, which is among the northernmost in the world.\nRockheim (, The National Discovery Center for Pop and Rock) opened at the Pier in August 2010. It is located inside an old warehouse, but characterised by an easily recognisable roof in the shape of a box. \"The box\" is decorated by thousands of tiny lights that change in a variety of colours and patterns, and is a landmark in the cityscape \u2013 especially on dark winter evenings.\nPrison.\nVollan District Jail (Norwegian: \"Vollan kretsfengsel\") was a jail during the nazi occupation of Norway and was used to imprison both prisoners of war and criminals. Vollan was not considered a concentration camp. In a summary of prisoners of war in Norway, numerous prisoners were registered at Vollan. One of its roles was as a transit camp for political prisoners. Many prisoners were taken from Vollan to Kristiansten Fortress and shot. The prisoners at Vollan were interrogated at the Mission Hotel in Trondheim. Some were also interrogated by Henry Rinnan and his gang. It was closed in 1971 after the opening of Trondheim Prison at Tunga.\nTrondheim Prison (Norwegian: \"Trondheim fengsel\") is a prison that belongs to the Northern Region of the Norwegian Correctional Services. The prison can house 184 inmates.\nIt consists of four main departments: \nAttractions.\nThe water park and public pool Pirbadet is located on the northernmost shore of the Bratt\u00f8ra district, within walking distance of the central station.\nWider urban area.\nTrondheim forms the centre of the Trondheim Region, and is a common commuting point for work, shopping, and healthcare. Although the official list of metropolitan regions of Norway defines the region very broadly, the area of two-way commuting where Trondheim residents too would head outwards for transport, shopping, and upper secondary schools, consists roughly of Trondheim, Malvik, downtown Stj\u00f8rdal (incl. V\u00e6rnes), downtown Melhus, Skaun, and the lower sections of Vanvikan in Indre Fosen.\nGovernment.\nTrondheim Municipality is responsible for primary education (through 10th grade), outpatient health services, senior citizen services, welfare and other social services, zoning, economic development, and municipal roads and utilities. The municipality is governed by a municipal council of directly elected representatives. The mayor is indirectly elected by a vote of the municipal council. The municipality is under the jurisdiction of the Tr\u00f8ndelag District Court and the Frostating Court of Appeal.\nOn 1 January 2005, the city was reorganized from five boroughs into four, with each of these having separate social services offices. The current boroughs are Midtbyen (44,967 inhabitants), \u00d8stbyen (42,707 inhabitants), Lerkendal (46,603 inhabitants) and Heimdal (30,744) inhabitants. The Population statistics listed are as of 1 January 2008. Prior to 2005, Trondheim was divided into the boroughs \"Sentrum\", \"Strinda\", \"Nardo\", \"By\u00e5sen\" and \"Heimdal\".\nMunicipal council.\nThe city council of Trondheim Municipality is made up of 67 representatives that are elected to four year terms. Prior to 2011, there were 85 city council members, but this number was reduced to 67 in 2011. The tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"See also the list of primary schools in Trondheim\".\nEducation and research.\nTrondheim is home to both the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) with its many technical lab facilities and disciplines, and BI-Trondheim, a satellite campus for the Norwegian Business School (BI). Both universities welcome a number of international students on a yearly basis and offer various scholarships.\nSt. Olav's University Hospital, a regional hospital for Central Norway, is located in downtown Trondheim. St. Olav's is a teaching hospital and cooperates closely with the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) on both research and medical education.\nSINTEF, a large independent research organisation in Scandinavia, has 1,800 employees with 1,300 of these located in Trondheim. The Air Force Academy of the Royal Norwegian Air Force is located at Kuhaugen in Trondheim.\nThe Geological Survey of Norway is located at Lade in Trondheim and is a major geoscientific institution with 220 employees of which 70% are scientists.\nThere are 11 high schools in the city. Trondheim katedralskole (\"Trondheim Cathedral School\") was founded in 1152 and is the oldest upper secondary school (gymnasium) in Norway, while Charlottenlund videreg\u00e5ende skole is the largest in S\u00f8r-Tr\u00f8ndelag with its 1,100 students and 275 employees. Brundalen Skole, has big festivals each year, and is building out to increase space.\nIla skole was founded in 1770 and is the oldest primary school in Trondheim.\nMedia.\nAdresseavisen is the largest regional newspaper and the oldest active newspaper in Norway, having been established in 1767. The two headquarters of the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) are located at in Trondheim, and in Oslo. On 31 December 2019 the fully digital and local newspaper Nidaros was launched as a competitor to Adresseavisen. The student press of Trondheim features three types of media. Under Dusken is the student paper, Radio Revolt is the student radio, and Student-TV broadcasts videos online.\nRadio stations established in Trondheim include Tr\u00f8ndelag-focused opt-out feeds of NRK P1 and NRK P1+, a local version of NRK Yr's radio station, and Radio Revolt. Along with Norway's national radio stations, they can be listened to on DAB+ across most of Tr\u00f8ndelag, as well as on internet radio. As of 2017, the commercial stations Radio Trondheim and Radio 247 also broadcast from within Trondheim, but as of May 2025 there are no commercial local stations that broadcast from within Trondheim Municipality proper, but intra-regional stations like Nea Radio, Radio Tr\u00f8ndelag, and P5 Fosen (Not to be mistaken for the national P5 Hits) are fully available on DAB+ in Trondheim.\nCulture.\nVisual arts.\nThe Trondheim Art Museum has Norway's third largest public art collection, mainly Norwegian art from the last 150 years.\nThe National Museum of Decorative Arts and Design boasts a large collection of decorative arts and design, including a great number of tapestries from the Norwegian tapestry artist Hannah Ryggen, as well as Norway's only permanent exhibibition of Japanese arts and crafts.\nTr\u00f8ndelag senter for samtidskunst (, TSSK) was established in 1976.\nThere are two artist-run spaces, Galleri Blunk, that was founded by students of the Trondheim Academy of Fine Art in 2002, and Babel, that was founded by Lademoen Kunstnerverksteder (, LKV) in 2006.\nKunsthall Trondheim was inaugurated at its permanent premises on Kongens gate in October 2016.\nThe PoMo Museum, dedicated to modern and contemporary art, opened on Dronningens gate in February 2025.\nStage.\nThe main regional theatre, Tr\u00f8ndelag Teater, is situated in Trondheim. Built in 1816, the theatre is the oldest theatre still in use in Scandinavia. The city also features an alternative theatre house Teaterhuset Avant Garden, and the theatre company Teater Fusentast.\nMusic.\nTrondheim has a broad music scene, and is known for its strong communities committed to rock, jazz and classical music. The city's interest in Jazz and classical music are spearheaded by the music conservatory at NTNU which has been called one of the most innovative in the world, and the municipal music school, \"Trondheim Kommunale Musikk- og Kulturskole\". The Trondheim Symphony Orchestra and the Trondheim Soloists are well-known. The city hosts a yearly Jazz festival, and is home to Trondheim Jazz Orchestra. The Fjordgata Records label is also hosted in Trondheim.\nClassical artists hailing from Trondheim include violinist Arve Tellefsen, Elise B\u00e5tnes and Marianne Thorsen. Also the Nidaros Cathedral Boys' Choir.\nThomas Bergersen, a Norwegian self-taught composer, multi-instrumentalist, and the co-founder of the production music company Two Steps From Hell, was born in Trondheim.\nPop/rock artists and bands associated with Trondheim include \u00c5ge Aleksandersen, Margaret Berger, DumDum Boys, Lasse Marhaug, G\u00e5te, Keep Of Kalessin, Lumsk, Motorpsycho, Kari Ruesl\u00e5tten, the 3rd and the Mortal, TNT, Tre Sm\u00e5 Kinesere, the Kids, Bokassa, Casino Steel (of the Boys), Atrox, Bloodthorn, Manes, child prodigy Malin Reitan and Aleksander With. The most popular punk scene is UFFA.\nGeorg Kajanus, creator of the bands Eclection, Sailor and DATA, was born in Trondheim. The music production team Stargate started out in Trondheim.\nTrondheim is also home to Rockheim, the national museum of popular music, which is responsible for collecting, preserving and sharing Norwegian popular music from the 1950s to the present day.\nFilm.\nTrondheim features a lively film scene, including three filmfests: Minimalen Short Film Fest and Kosmorama International Film Fest in March, and Trondheim Documentarfestival in November. Trondheim has two cinemas in the center of the city, Prinsen Kino and Nova kino Prinsen Kinosenter, Nova Kinosenter\nStudent culture.\nWith students comprising almost a fifth of the population, the city of Trondheim is heavily influenced by student culture. Most noticeable is Studentersamfundet i Trondhjem, the city's student society. Its characteristic round, red building from 1929 sits at the head of the bridge crossing the river southwards from the city centre. As the largest university in Norway, the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) is the host of some 36,000 students.\nStudent culture in Trondheim is characterised by a long-standing tradition of volunteer work. The student society is for example run by more than 1,200 volunteers. NTNUI, Norway's largest sports club, is among the other volunteer organisations that dominate student culture in Trondheim. Students in Trondheim are also behind two major Norwegian culture festivals, UKA and The International Student Festival in Trondheim (ISFiT). NTNU lists over 200 student organisations with registered web pages on its servers alone.\nIn popular culture.\nTrondheim culture is parodied on the Monty Python album \"Another Monty Python Record\" in the form of the fictitious Trondheim Hammer Dance.\nTrondheim is also a key location in the \"\" universe, as it is a critical battleground for both factions.\nTrondheim was the name of a planet in the Hundred Worlds of the \"Ender's Game\" novel series.\nTrondheim likely serves as an inspiration for the fictional city Tronjheim in The Inheritance Cycle.\nSports and recreation.\nGran\u00e5sen Ski Centre, a Nordic skiing venue located in By\u00e5sen, regularly hosts World Cup competitions in ski jumping, biathlon and cross-country skiing, as well as the 1997 and 2025 FIS Nordic World Ski Championships. Trondheim attempted but failed to become the Norwegian candidate for the 2018 Winter Olympics. Hiking and recreational skiing is available around the city, particularly in Bymarka, which can be reached by the tramway. Trondheim Golfklubb, one of the oldest golf clubs in Norway, has a nine-hole golf course in By\u00e5sen. Byneset Golfklubb has a full 18 hole par 72 course, which has hosted the Norwegian Challenge of the Challenge Tour in 2012, as well as a short and easy 9 hole course, located at Spongdal. Kl\u00e6bu Golfklubb in Kl\u00e6bu has another 9 hole course, albeit with artificial greens. There's also a public (no golf experience of course required) 9 hole par 3 course with a nice view overlooking the city centre at By\u00e5sen.\nRosenborg BK is the city's only top flight football club. They play their home matches at Lerkendal Stadion. They have won the Norwegian Premier League 26 times between 1967 and 2018, have reached the UEFA Champions League group stage 12 times, and made it to the last 8 on one occasion. Ranheim Fotball was promoted from the Norwegian First Division to join Eliteserien in 2018. They finished seventh in their first season in the top flight, but finished last the following season and was relegated. They have played in the first division since the 2020 season. Ranheim's home ground is the EXTRA Arena.\nBy\u00e5sen IL plays in the women's handball league, and used to be a regular in the EHF Women's Champions League, whereas Kolstad H\u00e5ndball plays in the men's handball league and have played in the 2023\u201324 and 2024\u201325 seasons of the EHF Champions League. The 2 teams variably play their home games at Trondheim Spektrum and Kolstad Arena depending on expected attendances and economic viability.\nTrondheim and Tr\u00f8ndelag is also regarded as the home of the basse game, a game played using a ball made from tightly bound rubber bands.\nTransportation.\nTrondheim has an international airport, Trondheim Airport, V\u00e6rnes, situated in Stj\u00f8rdal away, which is Norway's fourth largest airport in terms of passenger traffic. V\u00e6rnes has non-stop connections to cities such as London, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, and Stockholm, among others. The domestic route Trondheim \u2013 Oslo is among the busiest air routes in Europe with around 2 million passengers annually.\nTrondheim boasts the world's only bicycle lift, \"Trampe\".\nBus.\nThe bus network, operated by AtB, runs throughout most of the city and its suburbs. A new metro line system went public 3 August 2019. The new transportation system covers the Trondheim area (Trondheim, Malvik, and Melhus). The three metro lines and the city lines that link the city across. The new public transport system becomes flexible, with buses running more often and accommodating more passengers. Fewer travelers must take a detour through the center of Trondheim, but relies more on bus transits.\nIn addition, the Nattbuss (Night Bus) service ensures cheap and effective transport for those enjoying nightlife in the city centre during the weekends. The Nattbus has other and more expensive prices than ordinary buses.\nBoats.\nThe Coastal Express ships (Hurtigruten: Covering the Bergen\u2013Kirkenes stretch of the coast) call at Trondheim, as do many cruise ships during the summer season. Every morning the Hurtigruten ships have one southbound and one northbound arrival and departure in Trondheim.\nSince 1994 there is also a fast commuter boat service to Kristiansund (via Brekstad), the closest coastal city to the southwest; there is also a second commuter boat service to Vanvikan.\nA car ferry route from the port of Flakk in the northwest of the municipality, connects Trondheim with Fosen.\nRail transport.\nMajor railway connections are the northbound Nordland Line, the eastbound Mer\u00e5ker Line to \u00c5re and \u00d6stersund in Sweden, and two southbound connections to Oslo, the R\u00f8ros Line and Dovre Line.\nTrondheim also boasts the northernmost (since closure of Arkhangelsk tram in 2004) tramway line in the world: the Gr\u00e5kallen Line, the last remaining segment of the Trondheim Tramway, is an route (which is mostly single-track outside the innermost parts of the city; except the stretch between Breidablikk and Nordre Hoem stations) which runs from the city centre, through the By\u00e5sen district, and up to Lian, in the large recreation area Bymarka.\nRoads.\nNorway's longest road, the European route E6 north-south motorway, passes through Trondheim mostly southeast of the major districts, except a long section between Tiller and Sluppen just north of Nidelva. The eastern terminus for European route E39 is at Klett narrowly within the municipality border, which heads west to M\u00f8re og Romsdal.\nThe later built National Road 706, \"Nordre avlastningsvei\", is an alternate bypass that heads northwest instead of northeast at Sluppen, passing through Ila, Piren, and northern Strindheim before rejoining European Route E6 northeast of IKEA. This bypass is slower and has various roundabout crosses.\nVarious bridge projects over the Trondheim Fjord to replace the car ferry have been planned, but none have begun construction.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nTrondheim is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\nPublic Service &amp; public thinking.\nStephen Zhao 1990- Notable Engineer and CTO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37473", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37473", "title": "Airlines", "text": ""}
{"id": "37476", "revid": "24323093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37476", "title": "Civil liberties", "text": "Civil rights and freedoms that provide individual specific rights\nCivil liberties are fundamental rights and freedoms that governments pledge not to restrict, either through constitutions, legislation, or judicial interpretation, without due process of law. Although the scope of civil liberties differs between countries, they often include the freedom of conscience, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, personal security, personal liberty, freedom of speech, right to privacy, equality before the law, due process of law, the right to a fair trial, and the right to life. Other civil liberties include the right to own property, the right to defend oneself, and the right to bodily integrity. Within the distinctions between civil liberties and other types of liberty, distinctions exist between positive liberty/positive rights and negative liberty/negative rights.\nLibertarians advocate for the negative liberty aspect of civil liberties, emphasizing minimal government intervention in both personal and economic affairs. Influential advocates of this interpretation include John Stuart Mill, whose work \"On Liberty\" argues for the protection of individual freedoms from government encroachment, and Friedrich Hayek, whose \"The Road to Serfdom\" warns against the dangers of expanding state power. Ayn Rand's \"Atlas Shrugged\" and Ron Paul's \"\" further emphasize the importance of safeguarding personal autonomy and limiting government authority. These contributions have played a significant role in shaping the discourse on civil liberties and the appropriate scope of government.\nOverview.\nMany contemporary nations have a constitution, a bill of rights, or similar constitutional documents that enumerate and seek to guarantee civil liberties. Other nations have enacted similar laws through a variety of legal means, including signing and ratifying or otherwise giving effect to key conventions such as the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The existence of some claimed civil liberties is a matter of dispute, as are the extent of most civil rights. Controversial examples include property rights, reproductive rights, and civil marriage. In authoritarian regimes in which government censorship impedes on perceived civil liberties, some civil liberty advocates argue for the use of anonymity tools to allow for free speech, privacy, and anonymity. The degree to which societies acknowledge civil liberties is affected by the influence of terrorism and war. \nWhether the existence of victimless crimes infringes upon civil liberties is also a matter of dispute. Another matter of debate is the suspension or alteration of certain civil liberties in times of war or state of emergency, including whether and to what extent this should occur.\nThe formal concept of civil liberties is often dated back to Magna Carta, an English legal charter agreed in 1215 which in turn was based on pre-existing documents, namely the Charter of Liberties.\nAsia.\nChina.\nThe Constitution of the People's Republic of China (which applies only to mainland China, not to Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan) especially its Fundamental Rights and Duties of Citizens, claims to protect many civil liberties. Taiwan, which is separated from mainland China, has its own Constitution.\nAlthough the 1982 constitution guarantees civil liberties, the Chinese government usually uses the \"subversion of state power\" and \"protection of state secrets\" clauses in their law system to imprison those who criticize the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the state leaders.\nIndia.\nThe Fundamental Rights\u00a0\u2013 embodied in Part III of the constitution\u00a0\u2013 guarantee liberties such that all Indians can lead their lives in peace as citizens of India. The six fundamental rights are right to equality, right to freedom, right against exploitation, right to freedom of religion, cultural and educational rights and the right to constitutional remedies.\nThese include individual rights common to most liberal democracies, incorporated in the fundamental law of the land and are enforceable in a court of law. Violations of these rights result in punishments as prescribed in the Indian Penal Code, subject to the discretion of the judiciary. These rights are neither absolute nor immune from constitutional amendments. They have been aimed at overturning the inequalities of pre-independence social practices. Specifically, they resulted in the abolishment of untouchability and prohibited discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth. They forbid human trafficking and unfree labour. They protect the cultural and educational rights of ethnic and religious minorities by allowing them to preserve their languages and administer their own educational institutions.\nAll people, irrespective of race, religion, caste or sex, have the right to approach the High Courts or the Supreme Court for the enforcement of their fundamental rights. It is not necessary that the aggrieved party has to be the one to do so. In the public interest, anyone can initiate litigation in the court on their behalf. This is known as \"public interest litigation\". High Court and Supreme Court judges can also act on their own on the basis of media reports.\nThe Fundamental Rights emphasize equality by guaranteeing all citizens access to and use of public institutions and protections, irrespective of their background. The rights to life and personal liberty apply to persons of any nationality, while others, such as the freedom of speech and expression apply only to the citizens of India (including non-resident Indian citizens). The right to equality in matters of public employment cannot be conferred to overseas citizens of India.\nFundamental Rights primarily protect individuals from any arbitrary State actions, but some rights are enforceable against private individuals too. For instance, the constitution abolishes untouchability and prohibits \"begar\". These provisions act as a check both on State actions and the actions of private individuals. Fundamental Rights are not absolute and are subject to reasonable restrictions as necessary for the protection of national interest. In the \"Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala\" case, the Supreme Court ruled that all provisions of the constitution, including Fundamental Rights can be amended. However, the Parliament cannot alter the basic structure of the constitution like secularism, democracy, federalism, and separation of powers. Often called the \"Basic structure doctrine\", this decision is widely regarded as an important part of Indian history. In the 1978 \"Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India\" case, the Supreme Court extended the doctrine's importance as superior to any parliamentary legislation. According to the verdict, no act of parliament can be considered a law if it violates the basic structure of the constitution. This landmark guarantee of Fundamental Rights was regarded as a unique example of judicial independence in preserving the sanctity of Fundamental Rights.\nThe Fundamental Rights can only be altered by a constitutional amendment, hence their inclusion is a check not only on the executive branch but also on the Parliament and state legislatures. The imposition of a state of emergency may lead to a temporary suspension of the rights conferred by Article 19 (including freedoms of speech, assembly and movement, etc.) to preserve national security and public order. The President can, by order, suspend the constitutional written remedies as well.\nJapan.\nSince 1947, Japan, a country with a constitutional monarchy and known for its socially \"conservative society where change is gradual,\" has a constitution with a seemingly strong bill of rights at its core (). In many ways, it resembles the U.S. Constitution prior to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and that is because it came into life during the Allied occupation of Japan. This constitution may have felt like a foreign imposition to the governing elites, but not to the ordinary people \"who lacked faith in their discredited leaders and supported meaningful change.\" In the abstract, the constitution strives to secure fundamental individual liberties and rights, which are covered pointedly in articles 10 to 40. Most salient of the human dignity articles is article 25, section 1, which guarantees that all \nDespite the adoption of this liberal constitution, often referred as the \"Postwar Constitution\" (\u6226\u5f8c\u61b2\u6cd5, Sengo-Kenp\u014d) or the \"Peace Constitution\" (\u5e73\u548c\u61b2\u6cd5, Heiwa-Kenp\u014d), the Japanese governing elites have struggled to usher in an inclusive, open and Pluralist society. Even after the end of World War II and the departure of the Allied government of occupation in 1952, Japan has been the target of international criticism for failing to admit to war crimes, institutional religious discrimination and maintaining a weak freedom of the press, the treatment of children, minorities, foreigners, and women, its punitive criminal justice system, and more recently, the systematic bias against LGBT people.\nThe first Japanese attempt to a bill of rights was in the 19th century Meiji constitution (1890), which took both the Prussian (1850) and British constitutions as basic models. However, it had but a meagre influence in the practice of the rule of law as well as in people's daily lives. So, the short and deliberately gradual history of struggles for personal rights and protection against government/society's impositions has yet to transform Japan into a champion of universal and individual freedom. According to constitutional scholar, Shigenori Matsui,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;People tend to view the Bill of Rights as a moral imperative and not as a judicial norm. The people also tend to rely upon bureaucrats to remedy social problems, including even human rights violations, rather than the court.\u2014\u200a\nDespite the divergences between Japan's social culture and the Liberal Constitutionalism that it purports to have adopted, the country has moved toward closing the gap between the notion and the practice of the law. The trend is more evident in the long term. Among several examples, the Diet (bicameral legislature) ratified the International Bill of Human Rights in 1979 and then it passed the Law for Equal Opportunity in Employment for Men and Women in 1985, measures that were heralded as major steps toward a democratic and participatory society. In 2015, moreover, it reached an agreement with Korea to compensate for abuses related to the so-called \"women of comfort\" that took place during the Japanese occupation of the peninsula. However, human rights group, and families of the survivors condemned the agreement as patronizing and insulting.\nOn its official https://, the Japanese government has identified various human rights problems. Among these are child abuses (e.g., bullying, corporal punishment, child sexual abuse, child prostitution, and child pornography), frequent neglect and ill-treatment of elderly persons and individuals with disabilities, Dowa claims (discrimination against the Burakumin), Ainu people (indigenous people in Japan), foreign nationals, HIV/AIDS carriers, Hansen's disease patients, persons released from prison after serving their sentence, crime victims, people whose human rights are violated using the Internet, the homeless, individuals with gender identity disorders, and women. Also, the government lists systematic problems with gender biases and the standard reference to sexual preferences for jobs and other functions in society.\nHuman rights organizations, national and foreign, expand the list to include human rights violations that relate to government policies, as in the case of daiyo kangoku system (substitute prison) and the methods of interrogating crime suspects. The effort of these agencies and ordinary people seem to pay off. In 2016, the U.S. Department of State released a report stating that Japan's human right record is showing signs of improvement.\nAustralia.\nWhilst Australia does not have an enshrined Bill of Rights or similar binding legal document, civil liberties are assumed as protected through a series of rules and conventions. Australia had primary involvement in and was a key signatory to the UN Universal Declaration on Human Rights (1948)\nThe Constitution of Australia (1900) does offer very limited protection of rights:\nCertain High Court interpretations of the Constitution have allowed for implied rights such as freedom of political communication (which is construed broadly) and the right to vote to be established, however, others such as freedom of assembly and freedom of association are yet to be identified.\nRefugee issues\nWithin the past decade, Australia has experienced increasing contention regarding its treatment of those seeking asylum. Although Australia is a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention (1951), successive governments have demonstrated an increasing tightening of borders; particularly against those who seek passage via small water vessels.\nThe Abbott Government (2013) like its predecessors (the Gillard and Howard Governments) has encountered particular difficulty curbing asylum seekers via sea, increasingly identified as \"illegal immigration\". The recent involvement of the Australian Navy in refugee rescue operations has many human rights groups such as Amnesty International concerned over the \"militarisation\" of the treatment of refugees and the issue of their human rights in Australia. The current \"turn-back\" policy is particularly divisive, as it involves placing refugees in government lifeboats and turning them towards Indonesia. Despite opposition however, the Abbott government's response has so far seen a reduction in the number of potential refugees undertaking the hazardous cross to Australia, which is argued by the government as an indicator of its policy success.\nEurope.\nEuropean Convention on Human Rights.\nThe European Convention on Human Rights, to which almost all European countries belong (apart from Belarus), enumerates a number of civil liberties and is of varying constitutional force in different European states.\nCzech Republic.\nFollowing the Velvet Revolution, a constitutional overhaul took place in Czechoslovakia. In 1991, the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms was adopted, having the same legal standing as the Constitution. The Czech Republic has kept the Charter in its entirety following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia as Act No. 2/1993 Coll. (Constitution being No. 1).\nFrance.\nFrance's 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen listed many civil liberties and is of constitutional force.\nGermany.\nThe German constitution, the \"Grundgesetz\" (lit. \"Base Law\"), starts with an elaborate listing of civil liberties and states in sec. 1 \"The dignity of man is inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all public authority.\" Following the \"Austrian System\", the people have the right to appeal to the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany (\"Bundesverfassungsgericht\") if they feel their civil rights are being violated. This procedure has shaped German law considerably over the years.\nUnited Kingdom.\nCivil liberties in the United Kingdom date back to Magna Carta in 1215 and 17th century English common law and statute law, such as the 1628 Petition of Right, the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 and the Bill of Rights 1689. Parts of these laws remain in statute today and are supplemented by other legislation and conventions that collectively form the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom. In addition, the United Kingdom is a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights which covers both human rights and civil liberties. The Human Rights Act 1998 incorporates the great majority of Convention rights directly into UK law.\nIn June 2008 the then Shadow Home Secretary David Davis resigned his parliamentary seat over what he described as the \"erosion of civil liberties\" by the then Labour government, and was re-elected on a civil liberties platform (although he was not opposed by candidates of other major parties). This was in reference to anti-terrorism laws and in particular the extension to pre-trial detention, that is perceived by many to be an infringement of \"habeas corpus\" established in Magna Carta.\nRussia.\nThe Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees in theory many of the same rights and civil liberties as the U.S. except to bear arms, i.e.: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of association and assembly, freedom to choose language, to due process, to a fair trial, privacy, freedom to vote, right for education, etc. However, human rights groups like Amnesty International have warned that Vladimir Putin has seriously curtailed freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of association amidst growing authoritarianism.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nThe Constitution of Canada includes the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which guarantees many of the same rights as the U.S. Constitution. The Charter omits any mention of, or protection for, property.\nMexico.\nThe Constitution of Mexico was ratified on February 5, 1917. Similar to the U.S. Constitution, the United Mexican States provides all citizens the right to freedom of expression, but this right is not absolute (for example, child pornography, death threats, and defamation are exceptions to freedom of speech, and offenders can be subject to penalties). However, unlike the United States and Canada, Mexico has stricter limits on citizenship. For example, only people born in Mexico may take roles in law enforcement, legislating, or enlist in the armed forces. It also states each person born in Mexico cannot be deprived of their citizenship status.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Constitution, especially its Bill of Rights, protects civil liberties. The passage of the Fourteenth Amendment further protected civil liberties by introducing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, Due Process Clause, and Equal Protection Clause. Human rights within the United States are often called civil rights, which are those rights, privileges, and immunities held by all people, in distinction to \"political\" rights, which are the rights that inhere to those who are entitled to participate in elections, as candidates or voters. Before universal suffrage, this distinction was important, since many people were ineligible to vote but still were considered to have the fundamental freedoms derived from the rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. This distinction is less important now that Americans enjoy near universal suffrage, and civil rights are now taken to include the political rights to vote and participate in elections, being furthermore classified with civil liberties in general as either positive rights or negative rights. Because Native American tribal governments retain sovereignty over tribal members, the U.S. Congress in 1968 enacted a law that essentially applies most of the protections of the Bill of Rights to tribal members, to be enforced mainly by tribal courts.\nThe Civil Liberties Act of 1988 was signed into effect by President Ronald Reagan on August 10, 1988. The act was passed by Congress to issue a public apology for those of Japanese ancestry who lost their property and liberty due to discriminatory actions by the United States Government during the internment period. This act also provided many other benefits within various sectors of the government. Within the treasury, it established a civil liberties public education fund. It directed the Attorney General to identify and locate each individual affected by this act and to pay them $20,000 from the Civil Liberties public education fund. It also established a board of directors who is responsible for making disbursements from this fund. Finally, it required that all documents and records that are created or received by the commission be kept by the Archivist of the United States.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37477", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37477", "title": "Civil liberty", "text": ""}
{"id": "37478", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37478", "title": "Freight aircraft", "text": ""}
{"id": "37479", "revid": "31876559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37479", "title": "Jamie Zawinski", "text": "American programmer\nJamie Werner Zawinski (born November 3, 1968), commonly known as jwz, is an American computer programmer, blogger, and impresario. He is best known for his role in the creation of Netscape Navigator, Netscape Mail, Lucid Emacs, Mozilla.org, and XScreenSaver. He is also the proprietor of DNA Lounge, a nightclub and live music venue in San Francisco.\nBiography.\nZawinski's programming career began at age 16 with Scott Fahlman's Spice Lisp project at Carnegie Mellon University. He then worked at AI startup Expert Technologies, Inc. followed by Robert Wilensky and Peter Norvig's AI research group at UC Berkeley, working on natural language processing.\nIn 1990 he began working at Lucid Inc., first working on Lucid Common Lisp, and then on Lucid's Energize C++ IDE. Lucid decided to use GNU Emacs as the text editor for their IDE due to its free license, popularity, and extensibility, and Zawinski led that project. As Zawinski and the other programmers made fundamental changes to GNU Emacs to add new functionality, tensions over how to merge these patches into the main tree eventually led to the fork of the project into GNU Emacs and Lucid Emacs (now XEmacs).\nIn 1992 he released the first version of XScreenSaver, a free and open-source collection now containing more than 240\nscreensavers. Initially released for Unix, it now supports macOS, iOS, and Android as well. On Unix systems, it also provides the framework for blanking and locking the screen. He still maintains it, with new releases coming out several times a year.\nNetscape and Mozilla.\nFollowing Lucid's bankruptcy in 1994, Zawinski was one of the initial employees of Mosaic Communications, later known as Netscape. At Netscape, he developed the Unix release of Netscape Navigator 1.0,\nand later, Netscape Mail, the first mail reader (or Usenet reader) to natively support HTML.\nZawinski came up with the name \"Mozilla\" (originally the internal code-name of the web browser) during a staff meeting, as a reference to Godzilla and a portmanteau of \"Mosaic killer\".\nAn easter egg he coded in the Netscape browser became quite well known during the early days of the World Wide Web: typing \"about:jwz\" into the address box would take the user to his home page, and would change the browser's logo animation to a fire-breathing dragon.\nThrough his long-time support and advocacy for free software both inside and outside the company, Zawinski is credited with having been the inspiration for Netscape's decision to open-source the source code of the browser in 1998.\nHe was a founder of Mozilla.org, personally registering its domain name on the day of Netscape's open source announcement and helping design and run the organization through its first year.\nWhen Netscape was acquired by AOL in 1999, he wrote a bulletin explaining that Mozilla's work would continue with or without Netscape. And a year after the initial source code release, he resigned from Netscape and Mozilla, citing his disappointment that others involved in the project had decided to rewrite the code instead of incrementally improving it.\nDNA Lounge.\nShortly after leaving Mozilla, he announced his purchase of DNA Lounge, a nightclub in San Francisco. Zawinski purchased the nightclub in 1999 for approximately 5 million dollars and it was re-opened in July 2001, a process which he documented extensively in a blog named \"DNA Sequencing\".\nIn 2016, he explored alternative funding ideas to keep the venue afloat during a downturn in attendance.\nInterviews and appearances.\nIn 2000, Zawinski starred in the 60-minute-long PBS documentary \"Code Rush\", which chronicles the creation of Mozilla.org and the release of the browser source code over the course of 1998.\nZawinski features extensively in Josh Quittner's 1998 book \"Speeding the Net: The Inside Story of Netscape and How It Challenged Microsoft\",\nand in Glyn Moody's 2001 book, \"Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution\".\nThere is a chapter on Zawinski in Peter Seibel's 2009 book, \"Coders at Work: Reflections on the Craft of Programming\".\nAnd in 2001, he was featured in \"California Dreamin': The Gold Rush\", a documentary for German public television.\nZawinski appears in several video installations at the Computer History Museum's exhibit, \"Revolution: The First 2000 Years of Computing\".\nHe was also featured in \"Sleep Mode: The Art of the Screensaver\", a gallery exhibition curated by Rafa\u00ebl Rozendaal at Rotterdam's Het Nieuwe Instituut in 2017.\nZawinski's Law.\n\"Zawinski's Law of Software Envelopment\", also known as \"Zawinski's Law\", states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Every program attempts to expand until it can read mail. Those programs which cannot so expand are replaced by ones which can.\nSome have interpreted this as commenting on the phenomenon of software bloating with popular features.\nZawinski stated, in 2020: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My point was not about copycats, it was about platformization. Apps that you \"live in\" all day have pressure to become everything and do everything. An app for editing text becomes an IDE, then an OS. An app for displaying hypertext documents becomes a mail reader, then an OS.\nPrinciples.\nZawinski first attained prominence as a Lisp programmer, but most of his larger projects are written in C. Despite that, he has long been critical of languages lacking memory safety and automatic memory management. He has particularly proselytized against C++. In Peter Seibel's book \"Coders at Work: Reflections on the Craft of Programming\", Zawinski calls C++ an \"abomination... the PDP-11 assembler that thinks it's an object system\".\nThough he has written and published many utilities in Perl, he is not without his criticisms, characterizing Perl as \"combining all the worst aspects of C and Lisp: a billion different sublanguages in one monolithic executable. It combines the power of C with the readability of PostScript.\"\nHe has criticized several language and library deficiencies he encountered while programming in Java, specifically the overhead of certain fundamental classes but especially the marketing and politics behind it that led Sun to conflate the language, the class library, the virtual machine, and the security model all under the same name, \"Java\" \u2013 to, he says, the detriment of them all. Despite the positive aspects, ultimately Zawinski returned to programming in C \"since it's still the only way to ship portable programs\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37481", "revid": "33625371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37481", "title": "Intranet", "text": "Network of private resources in an organization\nAn intranet is a computer network for sharing information, easier communication, collaboration tools, operational systems, and other computing services within an organization, usually to the exclusion of access by outsiders. The term is used in contrast to public networks, such as the Internet, but uses the same technology based on the Internet protocol suite.\nAn organization-wide intranet can constitute an important focal point of internal communication and collaboration, and provide a single starting point to access internal and external resources. In its simplest form, an intranet is established with the technologies for local area networks (LANs) and wide area networks (WANs). Many modern intranets have search engines, user profiles, blogs, mobile apps with notifications, and events planning within their infrastructure.\nAn intranet is sometimes contrasted to an extranet. While an intranet is generally restricted to employees of the organization, extranets may also be accessed by customers, suppliers, or other approved parties. Extranets extend a private network onto the Internet with special provisions for authentication, authorization and accounting (AAA protocol).\nUses.\nIntranets are increasingly being used to deliver tools, such as for collaboration (to facilitate working in groups and teleconferencing) or corporate directories, sales and customer relationship management, or project management. Intranets are also used as corporate culture-change platforms. For example, a large number of employees using an intranet forum application to host a discussion about key issues could come up with new ideas related to management, productivity, quality, and other corporate issues. In large intranets, website traffic is often similar to public website traffic and can be better understood by using web metrics software to track overall activity. User surveys also improve intranet website effectiveness.\nLarger businesses allow users within their intranet to access public internet through firewall servers. They have the ability to screen incoming and outgoing messages, keeping security intact. When part of an intranet is made accessible to customers and others outside the business, it becomes part of an extranet. Businesses can send private messages through the public network using special encryption/decryption and other security safeguards to connect one part of their intranet to another.\nIntranet user-experience, editorial, and technology teams work together to produce in-house sites. Most commonly, intranets are managed by the communications, HR or CIO departments of large organizations, or some combination of these.\nBecause of the scope and variety of content and the number of system interfaces, the intranets of many organizations are much more complex than their respective public websites. Intranets and the use of intranets are growing rapidly. According to the Intranet Design Annual 2007 from Nielsen Norman Group, the number of pages on participants' intranets averaged 200,000 over the years 2001 to 2003 and has grown to an average of 6 million pages over 2005\u20132007.\nBenefits.\nIntranets can help users locate and view information faster and use applications relevant to their roles and responsibilities. With a web browser interface, users can access data held in any database the organization wants to make available at any time and\u00a0\u2014 subject to security provisions\u00a0\u2014 from anywhere within company workstations, increasing employees' ability to perform their jobs faster, more accurately, and with confidence that they have the right information. It also helps improve services provided to users.\nUsing hypermedia and Web technology, Web publishing allows for the maintenance of and easy access to cumbersome corporate knowledge, such as employee manuals, benefits documents, company policies, business standards, news feeds, and even training, all of which can be accessed throughout a company using common Internet standards (Acrobat files, Flash files, CGI applications). Because each business unit can update the online copy of a document, the most recent version is usually available to employees using the intranet. Intranets are also used as a platform for developing and deploying applications to support business operations and decisions across the internetworked enterprise.\nInformation is easily accessible to all authorised users, enabling collaboration. Being able to communicate in real-time through integrated third-party tools, such as an instant messenger, promotes the sharing of ideas and removes blockages to communication to help boost a business's productivity.\nIntranets can serve as powerful tools for communicating (such as through chat, email and/or blogs) within a given organization about vertically strategic initiatives that have a global reach throughout said organization. The type of information that can easily be conveyed is the purpose of the initiative and what it is aiming to achieve, who is driving it, results achieved to date, and whom to speak to for more information. By providing this information on the intranet, staff can keep up-to-date with the strategic focus of their organization. For example, when Nestl\u00e9 had a number of food processing plants in Scandinavia, their central support system had to deal with a number of queries every day. When Nestl\u00e9 decided to invest in an intranet, they quickly realized the savings. Gerry McGovern says that the savings from the reduction in query calls was substantially greater than the investment in the intranet.\nUsers can view information and data via a web browser rather than maintaining physical documents such as procedure manuals, internal phone list and requisition forms. This can potentially save the business money on printing, duplicating documents, and the environment, as well as document maintenance overhead. For example, the HRM company PeopleSoft \"derived significant cost savings by shifting HR processes to the intranet\". McGovern goes on to say the manual cost of enrolling in benefits was found to be US$109.48 per enrollment. \"Shifting this process to the intranet reduced the cost per enrollment to $21.79; a saving of 80 percent\". Another company that saved money on expense reports was Cisco. \"In 1996, Cisco processed 54,000 reports and the amount of dollars processed was USD19 million\".\nMany companies dictate computer specifications which, in turn, may allow Intranet developers to write applications that only have to work on one browser such that there are no cross-browser compatibility issues. Being able to specifically address one's \"viewer\" is a great advantage. Since intranets are user-specific (requiring database/network authentication prior to access), users know exactly who they are interfacing with and can personalize their intranet based on role (job title, department) or individual (\"Congratulations Jane, on your 3rd year with our company!\").\nSince \"involvement in decision making\" is one of the main drivers of employee engagement, offering tools (like forums or surveys) that foster peer-to-peer collaboration and employee participation can make employees feel more valued and involved.\nPlanning and creation.\nMost organizations devote considerable resources into the planning and implementation of their intranet as it is of strategic importance to the organization's success. Some of the planning would include topics such as determining the purpose and goals of the intranet, identifying persons or departments responsible for implementation and management and devising functional plans, page layouts and designs.\nThe appropriate staff would also ensure that implementation schedules and phase-out of existing systems were organized, while defining and implementing security of the intranet and ensuring it lies within legal boundaries and other constraints. In order to produce a high-value end product, systems planners should determine the level of interactivity (e.g. wikis, on-line forms) desired.\nPlanners may also consider whether the input of new data and updating of existing data is to be centrally controlled or devolve. These decisions sit alongside to the hardware and software considerations (like content management systems), participation issues (like good taste, harassment, confidentiality), and features to be supported.\nIntranets are often static sites; they are a shared drive, serving up centrally stored documents alongside internal articles or communications (often one-way communication). By leveraging firms which specialise in 'social' intranets, organisations are beginning to think of how their intranets can become a 'communication hub' for their entire team. The actual implementation would include steps such as securing senior management support and funding, conducting a business requirement analysis and identifying users' information needs.\nFrom the technical perspective, there would need to be a coordinated installation of the web server and user access network, the required user/client applications and the creation of document framework (or template) for the content to be hosted.\nThe end-user should be involved in testing and promoting use of the company intranet, possibly through a parallel adoption methodology or pilot programme. In the long term, the company should carry out ongoing measurement and evaluation, including through benchmarking against other company services.\nMaintenance.\nSome aspects are non-static.\nStaying current.\nAn intranet structure needs key personnel committed to maintaining the intranet and keeping content current. For feedback on the intranet, social networking can be done through a forum for users to indicate what they want and what they do not like.\nPrivacy protection.\nThe European Union's General Data Protection Regulation went into effect May 2018. Since then, the protection of the privacy of employees, customers and other stakeholders (e.g. consultants) has become more and more a significant concern for most companies (at least, all those having an interest in markets and countries where regulations are in place to protect the privacy).\nEnterprise private network.\nAn enterprise private network is a computer network built by a business to interconnect its various company sites (such as production sites, offices and shops) in order to share computer resources.\nBeginning with the digitalisation of telecommunication networks, started in the 1970s in the US by AT&amp;T, and propelled by the growth in computer systems availability and demands, enterprise networks have been built for decades without the need to append the term \"private\" to them. The networks were operated over telecommunications networks and, as for voice communications, a certain amount of security and secrecy was expected and delivered.\nBut with the Internet in the 1990s came a new type of network, virtual private networks, built over this public infrastructure, using encryption to protect the data traffic from eaves-dropping. So the enterprise networks are now commonly referred to as \"enterprise private networks\" in order to clarify that these are private networks, in contrast to public networks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37482", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37482", "title": "Junkfood", "text": ""}
{"id": "37483", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37483", "title": "Alternative spellings of woman", "text": "Feminist alternative spellings of \"women\"\nWomxn and womyn are alternative political spellings of the English word \"woman\", used by some feminists. There are other spellings, including womban (a reference to the womb or uterus) or womon (singular), and wombyn or wimmin (plural). Some writers who use such alternative spellings, avoiding the suffix \"-man\" or \"-men\", see them as an expression of female independence and a repudiation of traditions that define women by reference to a male norm.\nThese re-spellings existed alongside the use of herstory, a feminist re-examination and re-telling of history.\nDefinitions.\nThe Oxford English Dictionary (OED) defines \"womyn\" as \"in feminist use: women.\"\nThe OED added \"womxn\" in 2021, and defines it as \"adopted by some as a more inclusive alternative to womyn, which is perceived as marginalizing certain groups, especially ethnic minority and transgender women.\". Dictionary.com added \"womxn\" to its dictionary in 2019 with the definition \"used, especially in intersectional feminism, as an alternative spelling to avoid the suggestion of sexism perceived in the sequences m-a-n and m-e-n, and to be inclusive of trans and nonbinary people.\"\nSee also:\nControversy.\nThe terms \"womyn\" and \"womxn\" have been criticised for being unnecessary or confusing neologisms, due to the uncommonness of \"mxn\" to describe men.\nThe word \"womyn\" has been criticised by transgender people due to its usage in trans-exclusionary radical feminist circles which exclude trans women from identifying into the category of \"woman\", particularly the term \"womyn-born womyn\". The term \"wombyn\" was also particularly criticized by trans advocates since it implies that a woman must have a womb to be a woman.\nSome trans-inclusionary feminists argue in favor of the word \"womxn\" as being more inclusive of transgender women, non-binary people, and intersex women, while other trans-inclusionary feminists criticize the term \"womxn\" for the implication that trans women are not \"women\" but are a separate category, or for the implication that non-binary people are women. Jennie Kermode, chair of Trans Media Watch, stated in 2018 that the organization would not use the term \"womxn\", considering that \"women\" already includes trans women.\nOld English.\nThe word \"woman\" is derived from the Old English word ('woman-person'), which is formed from (the source of \"wife\"), then meaning 'woman', and (the source of \"man\"), then meaning 'person, human', originally without connotations of gender. \"Man\" took on its additional masculine meaning in the Late Middle English period, replacing the now-obsolete word . This has created the present situation with \"man\" bearing a dual meaning\u2014either masculine or nonspecific.\nOld English had a system of grammatical gender, whereby every noun was treated as either masculine, feminine or neuter, similar to modern German. In Old English sources, the word \"man\" was grammatically masculine but gender-neutral in meaning. One of its meanings was similar to the modern English usage of \"one\" as a gender-neutral indefinite pronoun (compare with \"mankind\" (\"man\"\u00a0+ \"kind\"), which means the human race, and German , which has retained the indefinite pronoun meaning to the modern day). The words \"wer\" and \"w\u012bf\" were used, when necessary, to specify a man or woman, respectively. Combining them into \"werman\" or \"w\u012bfman\" expressed the concept of \"any man\" or \"any woman\". Some feminist writers have suggested that this more symmetrical usage reflected more egalitarian notions of gender at the time.\n18th and 19th century uses.\nThe term \"wimmin\" was considered by George P. Krapp (1872\u20131934), an American scholar of English, to be eye dialect, the literary technique of using nonstandard spelling that implies a pronunciation of the given word that is actually standard. The spelling indicates that the character's speech overall is dialectal, foreign, or uneducated. This form of nonstandard spelling differs from others in that a difference in spelling does not indicate a difference in pronunciation of a word. That is, it is dialect to the eye rather than to the ear. It suggests that a character \"would use a vulgar pronunciation if there were one\" and \"is at the level of ignorance where one misspells in this fashion, hence mispronounces as well.\"\nThe word \"womyn\" appeared as an Older Scots spelling of \"woman\" in the Scots poetry of James Hogg. The word \"wimmin\" appeared in 19th-century renderings of Black American English, without any feminist significance.\n20th century: second-wave feminism and \"womyn\".\nSecond-wave feminism developed several alternative political spellings of the word \"woman\", especially womyn. Keridwen Luis, a sociologist at Brandeis University, states that feminists have experimented for decades to devise a suitable alternative for the term identifying the female gender. Such terms have included \"wimmin\" (in the 1990s), based upon the original Old English term, and \"womyn\" (since at least 1975).\nThe usage of \"womyn\" as a feminist spelling of \"women\" (with \"womon\" as the singular form) first appeared in print in 1976 referring to the first Michigan Womyn's Music Festival. This is just after the founding of the Mountain Moving Coffeehouse for Womyn and Children, a lesbian feminist social event centred around women's music. Both the annual \"MichFest\" and the weekly coffeehouse operated a womyn-born womyn (cisgender women-only) policy. Womyn's land was another usage of the term, associated with separatist feminism.\nWhen 1970s feminism in Australia was at its peak, the Wimmins Circus, a feminist circus troupe which combined circus skills, comedy, and music in their performances, was established in Melbourne in 1979.\nZ. Budapest promoted the use of the word \"wimmin\" (singular \"womon\") in the 1970s as part of her Dianic Wicca movement, which claims that present-day patriarchy represents a fall from a matriarchal golden age.\nMillie Tant, a fictional character in the British satirical comic \"Viz\", often used the term \"wimmin\" when discussing women's rights.\n2010s: fourth-wave feminism and \"womxn\".\nIn the mid 2010s, fourth-wave feminism focused on intersectionality and debated whether to use \"womxn\" as a term more inclusive of trans women, or whether to avoid \"womxn\" because it implied trans women are not women.\nIn 2017, the Womxn's March on Seattle chose to use the term \"womxn\" to promote the march. Elizabeth Hunter-Keller, the event's communications chair, told \"The New York Times\" that they chose it based upon the recommendation of a core organizer, who was a nonbinary person, and to reflect the organizing group's diversity. Nita Harker, a sociologist and organizer of the march praised the term \"womxn\" for its ambiguity in pronunciation, saying that it forces users to \"stop and think\". \"The Boston Globe\", reporting on the march, called \"womxn\" term \"a powerful, increasingly popular label, encompassing a broader range of gender identities than 'woman'\u2014or even older feminist terms such as 'womyn'... a nontraditional spelling for people whose gender identity doesn\u2019t fit in the traditional boxes\".\nIn January 2018, Portland held the Indigenous Womxn's March, dedicated to missing and murdered indigenous girls, women, and transgender people.\nIn 2018, student university groups in the US and UK used \"womxn\" in communications, such as advertising for \"Womxn\u2019s Basketball Session\" and \"Womxn of Color Network\".\nIn 2018, the Wellcome Collection, a museum and library in London, made an announcement through Twitter using the term \"womxn\" to demonstrate their goal of including diverse perspectives; after complaints from hundreds of followers, the museum later apologized and removed the term from its website. Labour Party politician Jess Phillips responded to the incident by saying, \"I've never met a trans woman who was offended by the word woman being used, so I'm not sure why this keeps happening\". Clara Bradbury-Rance of King's College London conjectured that the push-back was because the use of the term was seen as too simplistic and a \"fix-all\".\nIn a 2019 Styles article published in \"The New York Times\", journalist Breena Kerr stated that while \"womxn\" was difficult to pronounce, it was \"perhaps the most inclusive word yet\".\nOn 1 March 2021, the streaming platform Twitch used the term \"womxn\" to promote events celebrating Women's History Month. The event was announced through Twitter, which led to immediate backlash from various users who considered the term transphobic for implying that trans women are not \"women\" but a separate category (\"womxn\"). Twitch removed the tweet and apologised, stating that they wanted to use the word to acknowledge the shortcomings of gender-binary language and that they would use the term \"women\" moving forward.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37484", "revid": "47880584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37484", "title": "Clit (disambiguation)", "text": "The clit or clitoris is a female sex organ.\nClit or Cli\u021b may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37485", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37485", "title": "H-bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "37486", "revid": "9041952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37486", "title": "Nuke (disambiguation)", "text": "A nuke is a nuclear weapon.\nNuke may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37488", "revid": "863774508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37488", "title": "Algebraically closed", "text": ""}
{"id": "37492", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37492", "title": "Angler's knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37493", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37493", "title": "True Lover's knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37495", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37495", "title": "Noun", "text": "Part of speech that names an object or set of objects\nIn grammar, a noun is a word that represents a concrete or abstract thing, like living creatures, places, actions, qualities, states of existence, and ideas. A noun may serve as an object or subject within a phrase, clause, or sentence.\nIn linguistics, nouns constitute a lexical category (part of speech) defined according to how its members combine with members of other lexical categories. The syntactic occurrence of nouns differs among languages. \nIn English, prototypical nouns are common nouns or proper nouns that can occur with determiners, articles and attributive adjectives, and can function as the head of a noun phrase. According to traditional and popular classification, pronouns are distinct from nouns, but in much modern theory they are considered a subclass of nouns. Every language has various linguistic and grammatical distinctions between nouns and verbs.\nHistory.\nWord classes (parts of speech) were described by Sanskrit grammarians from at least the 5th century BC. In Y\u0101ska's \"Nirukta\", the noun (\"n\u0101ma\") is one of the four main categories of words defined.\nThe Ancient Greek equivalent was \"\u00f3noma\" (\u1f44\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1), referred to by Plato in the \"Cratylus\" dialog, and later listed as one of the eight parts of speech in \"The Art of Grammar\", attributed to Dionysius Thrax (2nd century BC). The term used in Latin grammar was \"n\u014dmen\". All of these terms for \"noun\" were also words meaning \"name\". The English word \"noun\" is derived from the Latin term, through the Anglo-Norman \"nom\" (other forms include \"nomme\", and \"noun\" itself).\nThe word classes were defined partly by the grammatical forms that they take. In Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin, for example, nouns are categorized by gender and inflected for case and number. Because adjectives share these three grammatical categories, adjectives typically were placed in the same class as nouns.\nSimilarly, the Latin term \"n\u014dmen\" includes both nouns (substantives) and adjectives, as originally did the English word \"noun\", the two types being distinguished as \"nouns substantive\" and \"nouns adjective\" (or \"substantive nouns\" and \"adjective nouns\", or simply \"substantives\" and \"adjectives\"). (The word \"nominal\" is now sometimes used to denote a class that includes both nouns and adjectives.)\nMany European languages use a cognate of the word \"substantive\" as the basic term for \"noun\" (for example, Spanish \"sustantivo\", \"noun\"). Nouns in the dictionaries of such languages are demarked by the abbreviation \"s.\" or \"sb.\" instead of \"n.\", which may be used for proper nouns or neuter nouns instead. In English, some modern authors use the word \"substantive\" to refer to a class that includes both nouns (single words) and noun phrases (multiword units that are sometimes called \"noun equivalents\"). It can also be used as a counterpart to \"attributive\" when distinguishing between a noun being used as the head (main word) of a noun phrase and a noun being used as a noun adjunct. For example, the noun \"knee\" can be said to be used substantively in \"my knee hurts\", but attributively in \"the patient needed knee replacement\".\nExamples.\nA noun can co-occur with an article or an attributive adjective. Verbs and adjectives cannot. In the following, an asterisk (*) in front of an example means that this example is ungrammatical.\nCharacterization and definition.\nNouns have sometimes been characterized in terms of the grammatical categories by which they may be varied (for example gender, case, and number). Such definitions tend to be language-specific, since different languages may apply different categories.\nNouns are frequently defined, particularly in informal contexts, in terms of their semantic properties (their meanings). Nouns are described as words that refer to a \"person\", \"place\", \"thing\", \"event\", \"substance\", \"quality\", \"quantity\", etc., but this manner of definition has been criticized as uninformative.\nSeveral English nouns lack an intrinsic referent of their own: \"behalf\" (as in \"on behalf of\"), \"dint\" (\"by dint of\"), and \"sake\" (\"for the sake of\"). Moreover, other parts of speech may have reference-like properties: the verbs \"to rain\" or \"to mother\", or adjectives like \"red\"; and there is little difference between the adverb \"gleefully\" and the prepositional phrase \"with glee\".\nA functional approach defines a noun as a word that can be the head of a nominal phrase, i.e., a phrase with referential function, without needing to go through morphological transformation.\nClassification.\nNouns can have a number of different properties and are often sub-categorized based on various of these criteria, depending on their occurrence in a language. Nouns may be classified according to morphological properties such as which prefixes or suffixes they take, and also their relations in syntax\u00a0\u2013 how they combine with other words and expressions of various types. \nMany such classifications are language-specific, given the obvious differences in syntax and morphology. In English for example, it might be noted that nouns are words that can co-occur with definite articles (as stated at the start of this article), but this could not apply in Russian, which has no definite articles.\nGender.\nIn some languages common and proper nouns have grammatical gender, typically masculine, feminine, and neuter. The gender of a noun (as well as its number and case, where applicable) will often require agreement in words that modify or are used along with it. In French for example, the singular form of the definite article is \"le\" for masculine nouns and \"la\" for feminine; adjectives and certain verb forms also change (sometimes with the simple addition of \"-e\" for feminine). Grammatical gender often correlates with the form of the noun and the inflection pattern it follows; for example, in both Italian and Romanian most nouns ending in\u00a0\"-a\" are feminine. Gender can also correlate with the sex or social gender of the noun's referent, particularly in the case of nouns denoting people (and sometimes animals), though with exceptions (the feminine French noun \"personne\" can refer to a male or a female person).\nIn Modern English, even common nouns like \"hen\" and \"princess\" and proper nouns like \"Alicia\" do not have grammatical gender (their femininity has no relevance in syntax), though they denote persons or animals of a specific sex. The gender of a pronoun must be appropriate for the item referred to: \"The \"girl\" said the \"ring\" was from \"her\" new \"boyfriend\", but \"he\" denied \"it\" was from \"him\"\" (three nouns; and three gendered pronouns: or four, if this \"her\" is counted as a possessive pronoun).\nProper and common nouns.\nA \"proper noun\" (sometimes called a \"proper name\", though the two terms normally have different meanings) is a noun that represents a unique entity (\"India\", \"Pegasus\", \"Jupiter\", \"Confucius\", \"Pequod\") \u2013 as distinguished from \"common nouns\" (or appellative nouns), which describe a class of entities (\"country\", \"animal\", \"planet\", \"person\", \"ship\"). In Modern English, most proper nouns \u2013 unlike most common nouns \u2013 are capitalized regardless of context (\"Albania\", \"Newton\", \"Pasteur\", \"America\"), as are many of the forms that are derived from them (the common noun in \"he's an \"Albanian\"\"; the adjectival forms in \"he's of \"Albanian\" heritage\" and \"\"Newtonian\" physics\", but not in \"\"pasteurized\" milk\"; the second verb in \"they sought to \"Americanize\" us\").\nCountable nouns and mass nouns.\n\"Count nouns\" or \"countable nouns\" are common nouns that can take a plural, can combine with numerals or counting quantifiers (e.g., \"one\", \"two\", \"several\", \"every\", \"most\"), and can take an indefinite article such as \"a\" or \"an\" (in languages that have such articles). Examples of count nouns are \"chair\", \"nose\", and \"occasion\".\n\"Mass nouns\" or \"uncountable\" (\"non-count\") \"nouns\" differ from count nouns in precisely that respect: they cannot take plurals or combine with number words or the above type of quantifiers. For example, the forms \"a furniture\" and \"three furnitures\" are not used \u2013 even though \"pieces\" of furniture can be counted. The distinction between mass and count nouns does not primarily concern their corresponding referents but more how the nouns \"present\" those entities.\nMany nouns have both countable and uncountable uses; for example, \"soda\" is countable in \"give me three sodas\", but uncountable in \"he likes soda\".\nCollective nouns.\n\"Collective nouns\" are nouns that \u2013 even when they are treated in their morphology and syntax as singular \u2013 refer to \"groups\" consisting of more than one individual or entity. Examples include \"committee\", \"government\", and \"police\". In English these nouns may be followed by a singular or a plural verb and referred to by a singular or plural pronoun, the singular being generally preferred when referring to the body as a unit and the plural often being preferred, especially in British English, when emphasizing the individual members. Examples of acceptable and unacceptable use given by Gowers in \"Plain Words\" include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"A committee \"was\" appointed to consider this subject.\" (singular)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"The committee \"were\" unable to agree.\" (plural)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;* \"The committee were of one mind when I sat in on them.\" (unacceptable use of plural)\nConcrete nouns and abstract nouns.\n\"Concrete nouns\" refer to physical entities that can, in principle at least, be observed by at least one of the senses (\"chair\", \"apple\", \"Janet\", \"atom\"), as items supposed to exist in the physical world. \"Abstract nouns\", on the other hand, refer to abstract objects: ideas or concepts (\"justice\", \"anger\", \"solubility\", \"duration\").\nSome nouns have both concrete and abstract meanings: \"art\" usually refers to something abstract (\"Art is important in human culture\"), but it can also refer to a concrete item (\"I put my daughter's art up on the fridge\"). A noun might have a literal (concrete) and also a figurative (abstract) meaning: \"a brass \"key\"\" and \"the \"key\" to success\"; \"a \"block\" in the pipe\" and \"a mental \"block\"\". Similarly, some abstract nouns have developed etymologically by figurative extension from literal roots (\"drawback\", \"fraction\", \"holdout\", \"uptake\").\nMany abstract nouns in English are formed by adding a suffix (\"-ness\", \"-ity\", \"-ion\") to adjectives or verbs (\"happiness\" and \"serenity\" from the adjectives \"happy\" and \"serene\"; \"circulation\" from the verb \"circulate\").\nAlienable vs. inalienable nouns.\nIllustrating the wide range of possible classifying principles for nouns, the Awa language of Papua New Guinea regiments nouns according to how \"ownership\" is assigned: as alienable possession or inalienable possession. An alienably possessed item (a tree, for example) can exist even without a possessor. But inalienably possessed items are necessarily associated with their possessor and are referred to differently, for example with nouns that function as kin terms (meaning \"father\", etc.), body-part nouns (meaning \"shadow\", \"hair\", etc.), or part\u2013whole nouns (meaning \"top\", \"bottom\", etc.).\nNoun phrases.\nA noun phrase (or NP) is a phrase usually headed by a common noun, a proper noun, or a pronoun. The head may be the only constituent, or it may be modified by determiners and adjectives. For example, \"The dog sat near Ms Curtis and wagged its tail\" contains three NPs: \"the dog\" (subject of the verbs \"sat\" and \"wagged\"); \"Ms Curtis\" (complement of the preposition \"near\"); and \"its tail\" (object of \"wagged\"). \"You became their teacher\" contains two NPs: \"you\" (subject of \"became\"); and \"their teacher\".\nNouns in relation to other word classes.\nPronouns.\nNouns and noun phrases can typically be replaced by pronouns, such as \"he, it, she, they, which, these\", and \"those\", to avoid repetition or explicit identification, or for other reasons (but as noted earlier, current theory often classifies pronouns as a subclass of nouns parallel to \"prototypical nouns\"). For example, in the sentence \"Gareth thought she was weird\", the word \"she\" is a pronoun that refers to a person just as the noun \"Gareth\" does. The word \"one\" can replace parts of noun phrases, and it sometimes stands in for a noun. An example is given below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;John's car is newer than \"the one\" that Bill has.\nBut \"one\" can also stand in for larger parts of a noun phrase. For example, in the following example, \"one\" can stand in for \"new car\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;This new car is cheaper than \"that one\".\nNominalization.\nNominalization is a process whereby a word that belongs to another part of speech comes to be used as a noun. This can be a way to create new nouns, or to use other words in ways that resemble nouns. In French and Spanish, for example, adjectives frequently act as nouns referring to people who have the characteristics denoted by the adjective. This sometimes happens in English as well, as in the following examples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;This legislation will have the most impact on the \"poor\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;The race is not to the \"swift\", nor the battle to the \"powerful\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;The Socialist \"International\" is a worldwide association of political parties.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nFor definitions of nouns based on the concept of \"identity criteria\":\nFor more on identity criteria:\nFor the concept that nouns are \"prototypically referential\":\nFor an attempt to relate the concepts of identity criteria and prototypical referentiality:"}
{"id": "37496", "revid": "24886994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37496", "title": "Fisherman's knot", "text": "Type of knot\nThe fisherman's knot is a bend (a knot for joining two lines) with a symmetrical structure. The fisherman's knot is also known as angler's knot, English knot, halibut knot, waterman's knot, and true lover's knot.\nProperties.\nThe bend consists of two overhand knots, each tied around the standing part of the other. It is compact, jams when tightened, and the working ends can be cropped very close to the knot. It can easily be tied with cold, wet hands.\nUses.\nThese properties are well-suited to fishing, so the fisherman's knot is often used with fishing line. However it can slip when using modern nylon monofilament line, which is more slippery than historic fishing materials. If more holding strength is required, the overhand knots can be made with more turns, as in the double fisherman's knot, and triple fisherman's knot. Other knots sometimes provide superior performance with nylon lines, such as the blood knot.\nIn knitting, this knot is used to join two strands of yarn. In this context, it is commonly known as \"the magic knot\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37497", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37497", "title": "Englishman's knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37498", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37498", "title": "Waterman's knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "37500", "revid": "6953547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37500", "title": "Rutger Hauer", "text": "Dutch actor (1944\u20132019)\nRutger Oelsen Hauer (; 23 January 1944 \u2013 19 July 2019) was a Dutch actor, with a career that spanned over 170 roles across nearly 50 years, beginning in 1969. In 1999, he was named by the Dutch public as the Best Dutch Actor of the Century.\nHauer's career began in 1969 with the title role in the Dutch television series \"Floris\" and surged with his leading role in \"Turkish Delight\" (1973), which in 1999 was named the Best Dutch Film of the Century. After gaining international recognition with \"Soldier of Orange\" (1977) and \"Spetters\" (1980), he moved into American films such as \"Nighthawks\" (1981) and \"Blade Runner\" (1982), starring in the latter as self-aware replicant Roy Batty. His performance in \"Blade Runner\" led to roles in \"The Osterman Weekend\" (1983), \"Ladyhawke\" (1985), \"The Hitcher\" (1986), \"Escape from Sobibor\" (1987), \"The Legend of the Holy Drinker\" (1988), and \"Blind Fury\" (1989), among other films.\nFrom the 1990s on, Hauer moved into low-budget films, and supporting roles in major films like \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" (1992), \"Confessions of a Dangerous Mind\" (2002), \"Batman Begins\" (2005), \"Sin City\" (2005), and \"The Rite\" (2011). Hauer also became well known for his work in commercials. Towards the end of his career, he made a return to Dutch cinema, and won the 2012 Rembrandt Award for Best Actor in recognition of his lead role in \"The Heineken Kidnapping\" (2011).\nHauer supported environmentalist causes and was a member of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society. He also founded the Rutger Hauer Starfish Association, an AIDS awareness organization. He was made a knight of the Order of the Netherlands Lion in 2013.\nEarly life.\nHauer was born in Breukelen, in the Province of Utrecht, on 23 January 1944, while the Netherlands was under German occupation during World War II. He stated in a 1981 interview, \"I was born in the middle of the war, and I think for that reason I have deep roots in pacifism. Violence frightens me.\" His parents were Teunke (n\u00e9e Mellema) and Arend Hauer, both actors who operated an acting school in nearby Amsterdam. He had three sisters. According to Hauer, his parents were more interested in their art than their children. He did not have a close relationship with his father, and writer Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema later became a father figure to Hauer after they met during the filming of \"Soldier of Orange\".\nHauer attended a Rudolf Steiner school, as his parents wanted him to develop his creativity. At the age of 15, he left school to join the Dutch merchant navy. He spent a year travelling the world aboard a freighter, but was unable to become a captain due to his colourblindness. Returning home, he worked in odd jobs while finishing his high school diploma at night. He then entered the Academy for Theater and Dance in Amsterdam for acting classes, but soon dropped out to join the Royal Netherlands Army. He received training as a combat medic, but left the service after a few months as he opposed the use of deadly weapons. He subsequently returned to acting school and graduated in 1967.\nCareer.\nEarly works.\nHauer had his first acting role at the age of 11, as Eurysakes in the play \"Ajax\". After graduating from the Academy for Theater and Dance, he became a stage actor with the Toneelgroep Noorder Compagnie. Hauer made his screen debut in 1969 when Paul Verhoeven cast him in the lead role of the television series \"Floris\", a Dutch medieval action drama. The role made him famous in his native country, and Hauer reprised his role for the 1975 German remake \"Floris von Rosemund\".\nHauer's career changed course when Verhoeven cast him in \"Turkish Delight\" (1973), which received an Oscar nomination for best foreign-language film. The film found box office favour abroad and at home, and Hauer looked to appear in more international films. Within two years, Hauer made his English-language debut in the British film \"The Wilby Conspiracy\" (1975). Set in South Africa, the film was an action-drama with a focus on apartheid. Hauer's supporting role, however, was barely noticed in Hollywood, and he returned to Dutch films for several years. During this period, he made \"Katie Tippel\" (1975) and worked again with Verhoeven on \"Soldier of Orange\" (1977), and \"Spetters\" (1980). These two films paired Hauer with fellow Dutch actor Jeroen Krabb\u00e9. At the 1981 Netherlands Film Festival, Hauer received the Golden Calf for Best Actor for his overall body of work.\nAmerican breakthrough.\nHauer made his American debut in the Sylvester Stallone film \"Nighthawks\" (1981) as a psychopathic, cold-blooded terrorist named Wulfgar. With his sights set on a long-term career in Hollywood, Hauer worked with an accent coach in the early 1980s to develop a convincing American accent. Unafraid of controversial roles, he portrayed the German architect and Nazi minister Albert Speer in the 1982 American Broadcasting Company production \"Inside the Third Reich\". The same year, Hauer appeared in arguably his most famous and acclaimed role as the eccentric and violent but sympathetic antihero Roy Batty in Ridley Scott's 1982 science fiction thriller \"Blade Runner\", in which he delivered the famous tears in rain monologue. Hauer composed parts of the monologue the evening prior to filming, \"cutting away swathes of the original script before adding the speech's poignant final line\". He went on to play the adventurer courting Theresa Russell in \"Eureka\" (1983), an investigative reporter opposite John Hurt in \"The Osterman Weekend\" (1983), the hardened mercenary Martin in \"Flesh &amp; Blood\" (1985), and a knight paired with Michelle Pfeiffer in \"Ladyhawke\" (1985).\nHe appeared in \"The Hitcher\" (1986) as the titular mysterious hitchhiker tormenting a lone motorist, murdering anyone in his way. He received the 1987 Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in the television film \"Escape from Sobibor\". At the height of Hauer's fame, he was set to be cast as RoboCop (1987), but Verhoeven, the film's director, considered his frame as too large to move comfortably in the character's suit. Also in 1987, Hauer starred as Nick Randall in \"\" as the descendant of the character played by Steve McQueen in the television series of the same name.\nIn 1988, he played a homeless man in Ermanno Olmi's \"The Legend of the Holy Drinker\". This performance won Hauer the Best Actor award at the 1989 Seattle International Film Festival. Hauer was chosen to portray a blind martial artist superhero in Phillip Noyce's action film \"Blind Fury\" (1989). He initially struggled with the implausibility of the character, but learned to \"unfocus my eyes, to react to smells and sounds\" after meeting with blind judo practitioner Lynn Manning during his research for the role. Hauer returned to science fiction in 1989 with \"The Blood of Heroes\", in which he played a gladiator in a post-apocalyptic world.\nCommercials and later roles.\nBy the 1990s, Hauer was well known for his humorous Guinness commercials as well as his screen roles, which had increasingly involved low-budget films, such as \"Split Second\" (1992); \"The Beans of Egypt, Maine\" (1994); \"Omega Doom\" (1996) and \"New World Disorder\" (1999). In 1992, he appeared in the horror-comedy film \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" as the main antagonist vampire Lothos. He also appeared in the Kylie Minogue music video \"On a Night Like This\" (2000). During this time, Hauer acted in several British, Canadian and American television productions, including ' (1994) as Earhart's navigator Fred Noonan, \"Fatherland\" (1994), \"Hostile Waters\" (1997), ' (1997), \"Merlin\" (1998), \"The 10th Kingdom\" (2000), \"Smallville\" (2003), \"Alias\" (2003), and \"Salem's Lot\" (2004).\nHauer played an assassin in \"Confessions of a Dangerous Mind\" (2003), a villainous cardinal with influential power in \"Sin City\" (2005) and a devious corporate executive running Wayne Enterprises in \"Batman Begins\" (2005). Also in 2005, he played the title role in Patrick Lussier's film '. Seven years later, he portrayed the vampire hunter Abraham Van Helsing in Dario Argento's \"Dracula 3D\". Hauer hosted the British reality television documentary \"Shock Treatment\" in 2005, and featured in ' (2007) as Real Madrid coach Rudi Van der Merwe. He also recorded voice-overs for the British advertising campaign for the Danish butter brand Lurpak.\nIn 2008, Hauer received the Golden Calf Culture Prize for his contributions to Dutch cinema. The award recognised his work as an actor as well as his efforts to aid the development of young filmmakers and actors, through initiatives such as the Rutger Hauer Film Factory. In 2009, his role in avant-garde filmmaker Cyrus Frisch's \"Dazzle\" received positive reviews; it was described in Dutch press as \"the most relevant Dutch film of the year\". The same year, Hauer starred in the title role of \"Barbarossa\", an Italian film directed by Renzo Martinelli. In April 2010, he was cast in the live action adaptation of the short and fictitious \"Grindhouse\" trailer \"Hobo with a Shotgun\" (2011). Hauer played Freddie Heineken in \"The Heineken Kidnapping\" (2011), for which he received the 2012 Rembrandt Award for Best Actor. Also in 2011, Hauer appeared in the supernatural horror film \"The Rite\" as an undertaker named Istvan, the protagonist's father.\nFrom 2013 to 2014, Hauer featured as Niall Brigant in HBO's \"True Blood\". In 2015, he starred as Ravn in \"The Last Kingdom\" and as Kingsley in \"Galavant\". In 2016, he joined the film jury for ShortCutz Amsterdam, an annual film festival promoting short films in Amsterdam. Hauer voiced the role of Daniel Lazarski in the 2017 video game \"Observer\", set in post-apocalyptic Poland. Lazarski is a member of a special elite police unit that can hack into minds and interact with memories within. Hauer also provided the voice of Xehanort in the 2019 video game \"Kingdom Hearts III\", replacing the late Leonard Nimoy; following his death, he was replaced by Christopher Lloyd.\nPersonal life.\nHauer was married twice. Hauer and his first wife, Heidi Merz, had one child. Hauer was with his second wife, Ineke ten Cate, from 1968. They married in a private ceremony on 22 November 1985.\nAlthough born in Utrecht, Hauer had strong links to Friesland. He once stated in an interview with the \"Algemeen Dagblad\" that he \"needed to feel the Frisian clay under [his] feet\". Hauer was an environmentalist. He supported the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society and was a member of its board of advisors. He also established an AIDS awareness organization called the Rutger Hauer Starfish Association. In April 2007, he published his autobiography, \"All Those Moments: Stories of Heroes, Villains, Replicants, and Blade Runners\" (co-written with Patrick Quinlan), in which he discussed many of his acting roles. Proceeds from the book go to the Rutger Hauer Starfish Association.\nHauer died from pancreatic cancer on 19 July 2019 at his residence in the Netherlands, age 75.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37503", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37503", "title": "Terrarium", "text": "Container used for keeping plants and animals\nA terrarium (pl. terraria or terrariums) is a glass container containing soil and plants in an environment different from the surroundings. It is usually a sealable container that can be opened for maintenance or to access the plants inside; however, terraria can also be open to the atmosphere. Terraria are often kept as ornamental items.\nA closed terrarium's transparent walls allow heat and light to enter, creating a very favorable environment for plant growth. Heat entering the sealed container allows the creation of a small water cycle due to evaporating moisture from the soil and plants. The water vapor then condenses onto the walls of the container, eventually falling back onto the plants and soil below. Light passing through the transparent walls allows photosynthesis. Open terraria are not sealed and are better suited to plants requiring a more arid environment.\nHistory.\nThe first terrarium was created by botanist Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward in 1842. Ward had an interest in observing insect behaviour and accidentally left one of his jars unattended. A fern spore in the jar grew and germinated into a plant, becoming the first known terrarium. The trend quickly spread in the Victorian Era amongst the English. Instead of the terrarium, it was known as the Wardian case.\nWard hired carpenters to build his Wardian cases to export native British plants to Sydney, Australia. After months of travel, the plants arrived well and thriving. Likewise, plants from Australia sent to London using the same method were received by Ward in pristine condition. His experiment indicated plants can be sealed, without ventilation, and continue thriving. Wardian cases were used for many decades by Kew Gardens to ship plants around the British Empire and were also used during European colonization of Africa to bring African goods, like spices and coffee, back to Europe.\nTypes.\nTerraria are typically classified into two categories: closed and open. Closed terraria are sealed shut with a lid, door, or cork; open terraria have access to fresh air, most commonly by leaving the container open or through a hole drilled into the container.\nClosed terrarium.\nTropical plant varieties, such as moss, orchids, ferns, and air plants are generally kept within closed terraria to replicate their native humid, sheltered environment in the tropics. Keeping the terrarium sealed allows for circulation of water, making the terrarium self-sufficient. The terrarium may be opened once a week, allowing evaporation of excess moisture from the air and walls of the container, to prevent growth of mold or algae, which may damage plants and discolor the sides of the terrarium. Springtails may be used to consume mold or fungi within the terrarium.\nAny wilting plants or absence of condensation on the walls of the terrarium indicates the terrarium requires water; watering is primarily done using a spray bottle.\nClosed terrarium benefit from specific soil mixes to ensure ideal growing conditions and reduce risk of microbial damage; a common medium used is \"peat-lite:\" a mixture of peat moss, vermiculite, and perlite. The mixture should be sterile to minimize risk of introducing potentially harmful microbes to the terrarium.\nOpen terrarium.\nNot all plants require or are suited to the moist environment of closed terraria; open terraria are better suited for plants preferring less humidity and soil moisture, such as temperate plants and plants adapted to dry climates. Open terraria also work well for plants requiring more (but not direct) sunlight, as closed terraria can trap excess heat, potentially killing the plants inside. While open terraria require more watering than closed terraria, they have reduced risk of disease due to their lower humidity.\nDifference from dish garden.\nAn open terrarium should not be confused with a dish garden. A terrarium, even open, allows for increased humidity compared to the environment outside the structure, whereas a dish garden does not provide additional humidity. Due to the transparent walls of terraria causing magnification of the sun's rays, terraria cannot be placed in direct sunlight because the intense light will cause foliage to burn. A dish garden can tolerate direct sun, as long as it is planted with full sun-tolerant plants. Succulents and cacti are better suited for a dish garden than a terrarium because dish gardens allow succulents and cacti to be placed in the full sun they require without burning.\nDifference from plant pot.\nWhile both terrariums and plant pots serve as containers for growing plants, they differ significantly in structure and function. A typical plant pot is an open container, usually made from ceramic, plastic, or terracotta, designed to hold soil and allow for natural air circulation and drainage. Plant pots enable easy watering and provide flexibility for a wide variety of plant species, including larger houseplants.\nTerrariums, by contrast, are typically glass containers and can be either enclosed or open at the top. Enclosed terrariums create a more controlled environment by recycling moisture within the vessel, which raises humidity levels and makes them particularly suited to tropical or moisture-loving plants. Open terrariums provide a partially contained space for smaller plants like succulents and cacti, though they require more frequent care similar to conventional plant pots. In addition to their functional differences, terrariums are often considered decorative objects and are used to create miniature landscapes as part of home d\u00e9cor, whereas plant pots are typically more utilitarian in design and use.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nRead more on https://"}
{"id": "37504", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37504", "title": "Stock (disambiguation)", "text": "Stock is a representation of capital paid or invested into a business entity by stockholders.\nStock may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37506", "revid": "50628529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37506", "title": "Garnet", "text": "Mineral, semi-precious stone\nGarnets () are a group of silicate minerals that have been used since the Bronze Age as gemstones and abrasives.\nGarnet minerals, while sharing similar physical and crystallographic properties, exhibit a wide range of chemical compositions, defining distinct species. These species fall into two primary solid solution series: the pyralspite series (pyrope, almandine, spessartine), with the general formula [Mg,Fe,Mn]3Al2(SiO4)3; and the ugrandite series (uvarovite, grossular, andradite), with the general formula Ca3[Cr,Al,Fe]2(SiO4)3. Notable varieties of grossular include hessonite and tsavorite.\nAlthough garnets are often associated with metamorphism, they can also occur in volcanic rocks on rare occasions.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"garnet: comes from the 14th-century Middle English word \"gernet\", meaning dark red. It is borrowed from Old French \"grenate\" from Latin \"granatus,\" from \"granum\" (grain, seed). This is possibly a reference to \"mela granatum\" or even \"pomum granatum\" ('pomegranate', \"Punica granatum\"), a plant whose fruits contain abundant and vivid red seed covers (arils), which are similar in shape, size, and color to some garnet crystals. Hessonite garnet is also named \"gomed\" in Indian literature and is one of the nine jewels in Vedic astrology that comprise the Navaratna.\nPhysical properties.\nProperties.\nGarnet species are found in every colour, with reddish shades most common. Blue garnets are the rarest and were first reported in the 1990s.\nGarnet species' light transmission properties can range from the gemstone-quality transparent specimens to the opaque varieties used for industrial purposes as abrasives. The mineral's lustre is categorized as vitreous (glass-like) or resinous (amber-like).\nCrystal structure.\nGarnets are nesosilicates having the general formula \"X\"3\"Y\"2(SiO4)3. The \"X\" site is usually occupied by divalent cations (Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn)2+ and the \"Y\" site by trivalent cations (Al, Fe, Cr)3+ in an octahedral/tetrahedral framework with [SiO4]4\u2212 occupying the tetrahedra. Garnets are most often found in the dodecahedral crystal habit, but are also commonly found in the trapezohedron habit as well as the hexoctahedral habit. They crystallize in the cubic system, having three axes that are all of equal length and perpendicular to one another but are never actually cubic because, despite being isometric, the {100} and {111} families of planes are depleted. Garnets do not have any cleavage planes, so when they fracture under stress, sharp, irregular (conchoidal) pieces are formed.\nHardness.\nBecause the chemical composition of garnet varies, the atomic bonds in some species are stronger than in others. As a result, this mineral group shows a range of hardness on the Mohs scale of about 6.0 to 7.5. The harder species like almandine are often used for abrasive purposes.\nMagnetics used in garnet series identification.\nFor gem identification purposes, a pick-up response to a strong neodymium magnet separates garnet from all other natural transparent gemstones commonly used in the jewelry trade. Magnetic susceptibility measurements in conjunction with refractive index can be used to distinguish garnet species and varieties, and determine the composition of garnets in terms of percentages of end-member species within an individual gem.\nGarnet group end member species.\nPyralspite garnets \u2013 aluminium in \"Y\" site.\nAlmandine.\nAlmandine, sometimes incorrectly called almandite, is the modern gem known as carbuncle (though originally almost any red gemstone was known by this name). The term \"carbuncle\" is derived from the Latin meaning \"live coal\" or burning charcoal. The name \"almandine\" is a corruption of Alabanda, a region in Asia Minor where these stones were cut in ancient times. Chemically, almandine is an iron-aluminium garnet with the formula Fe3Al2(SiO4)3; the deep red transparent stones are often called precious garnet and are used as gemstones (being the most common of the gem garnets). Almandine occurs in metamorphic rocks like mica schists, associated with minerals such as staurolite, kyanite, andalusite, and others. Almandine has nicknames of Oriental garnet, almandine ruby, and carbuncle.\nPyrope.\nPyrope (from the Greek \"pyr\u014dp\u00f3s\" meaning \"firelike\") is red in color and chemically an aluminium silicate with the formula Mg3Al2(SiO4)3, though the magnesium can be replaced in part by calcium and ferrous iron. The color of pyrope varies from deep red to black. Pyrope and spessartine gemstones have been recovered from the Sloan diamondiferous kimberlites in Colorado, from the Bishop Conglomerate and in a Tertiary age lamprophyre at Cedar Mountain in Wyoming.\nA variety of pyrope from Macon County, North Carolina, is a violet-red shade and has been called \"rhodolite\", Greek for rose. In chemical composition, it may be considered as essentially an isomorphous mixture of pyrope and almandine, in the proportion of two parts pyrope to one part almandine. Pyrope has tradenames some of which are misnomers: Cape ruby, Arizona ruby, California ruby, Rocky Mountain ruby, and Bohemian ruby'from the Czech Republic.\nPyrope is an indicator mineral for high-pressure rocks. Mantle-derived rocks (peridotites and eclogites) commonly contain a pyrope variety.\nSpessartine.\nSpessartine or spessartite is manganese aluminium garnet, Mn3Al2(SiO4)3. Its name is derived from Spessart in Bavaria. It occurs most often in skarns, granite pegmatite and allied rock types, and in certain low grade metamorphic phyllites. Spessartine of an orange-yellow is found in Madagascar. Violet-red spessartines are found in rhyolites in Colorado \nPyrope\u2013spessartine (blue garnet or color-change garnet).\nBlue pyrope\u2013spessartine garnets were discovered in the late\u00a01990s in Bekily, Madagascar. This type has also been found in parts of the United States, Russia, Kenya, Tanzania, and Turkey. It changes color from blue-green to purple depending on the color temperature of viewing light, as a result of the relatively high amounts of vanadium (about 1 wt.% V2O3).\nOther varieties of color-changing garnets exist. In daylight, their color ranges from shades of green, beige, brown, gray, and blue, but in incandescent light, they appear a reddish or purplish/pink color.\nThis is the rarest type of garnet. Because of its color-changing quality, this kind of garnet resembles alexandrite.\nUgrandite group \u2013 calcium in \"X\" site.\nAndradite.\nAndradite is a calcium-iron garnet, Ca3Fe2(SiO4)3, is of variable composition and may be red, yellow, brown, green, or black. The recognized varieties are demantoid (green), melanite (black), and topazolite (yellow or green). The red-brown translucent variety of colophonite is recognized as a partially obsolete name. Andradite is found in skarns and in deep-seated igneous rocks like syenite as well as serpentines and greenschists. Demantoid is one of the most prized of garnet varieties.\nGrossular.\nGrossular is a calcium-aluminium garnet with the formula Ca3Al2(SiO4)3, though the calcium may in part be replaced by ferrous iron and the aluminium by ferric iron. The name grossular is derived from the botanical former generic name for the gooseberry, \"Grossularia\", in reference to the green garnet of this composition that is found in Siberia. Other shades include cinnamon brown (cinnamon stone variety), red, and yellow. Because of its inferior hardness to zircon, which the yellow crystals resemble, they have also been called hessonite from the Greek meaning inferior. Grossular is found in skarns, contact metamorphosed limestones with vesuvianite, diopside, wollastonite, and wernerite.\nGrossular garnet from Kenya and Tanzania has been called tsavorite. Tsavorite was first described in the 1960s in the area of Kenya, from which the gem takes its name.\nUvarovite.\nUvarovite is a calcium chromium garnet with the formula Ca3Cr2(SiO4)3. This is a rather rare garnet, bright green in color, usually found as small crystals associated with chromite in peridotite, serpentinite, and kimberlites. It is found in crystalline marbles and schists in the Ural Mountains of Russia and Outokumpu, Finland. Uvarovite is named for Count Uvaro, a Russian imperial statesman.\nLess common species.\nKnorringite.\nKnorringite is a magnesium-chromium garnet species with the formula Mg3Cr2(SiO4)3. Pure endmember knorringite never occurs in nature. Pyrope rich in the knorringite component is only formed under high pressure and is often found in kimberlites. It is used as an indicator mineral in the search for diamonds.\nSynthetic garnets.\nSynthetic garnets are also known as rare-earth garnets. The crystallographic structure of garnets has been expanded from the prototype to include chemicals with the general formula \"A\"3\"B\"2(\"C\"O4)3. Besides silicon, a large number of elements have been put on the \"C\" site, including germanium, gallium, aluminum, vanadium and iron.\nYttrium aluminium garnet (YAG), Y3Al2(AlO4)3, is used for synthetic gemstones. Due to its fairly high refractive index, YAG was used as a diamond simulant in the 1970s until the methods of producing the more advanced simulant cubic zirconia in commercial quantities were developed. When doped with neodymium (Nd3+), erbium or gadolinium YAG may be used as the lasing medium in s, s and Gd:YAG lasers respectively. These doped YAG lasers are used in medical procedures including laser skin resurfacing, dentistry, and ophthalmology.\nInteresting magnetic properties arise when the appropriate elements are used. In yttrium iron garnet (YIG), Y3Fe2(FeO4)3, the five iron(III) ions occupy two octahedral and three tetrahedral sites, with the yttrium(III) ions coordinated by eight oxygen ions in an irregular cube. The iron ions in the two coordination sites exhibit different spins, resulting in magnetic behavior. YIG is a ferrimagnetic material having a Curie temperature of 550\u00a0\u00b0K. Yttrium iron garnet can be made into YIG spheres, which serve as magnetically tunable filters and resonators for microwave frequencies.\nLutetium aluminium garnet (LuAG), , is an inorganic compound with a unique crystal structure primarily known for its use in high-efficiency laser devices. LuAG is also useful in the synthesis of transparent ceramics. LuAG is particularly favored over other crystals for its high density and thermal conductivity; it has a relatively small lattice constant in comparison to the other rare-earth garnets, which results in a higher density producing a crystal field with narrower linewidths and greater energy level splitting in absorption and emission.\nTerbium gallium garnet (TGG), , is a Faraday rotator material with excellent transparency properties and is very resistant to laser damage. TGG can be used in optical isolators for laser systems, in optical circulators for fiber optic systems, in optical modulators, and in current and magnetic field sensors.\nAnother example is gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG), which is synthesized for use as a substrate for liquid-phase epitaxy of magnetic garnet films for bubble memory and magneto-optical applications.\nGeological importance.\nThe mineral garnet is commonly found in metamorphic and to a lesser extent, igneous rocks. Most natural garnets are compositionally zoned and contain inclusions. Its crystal lattice structure is stable at high pressures and temperatures and is thus found in green-schist facies metamorphic rocks including gneiss, hornblende schist, and mica schist. The composition that is stable at the pressure and temperature conditions of Earth's mantle is pyrope, which is often found in peridotites and kimberlites, as well as the serpentines that form from them. Garnets are unique in that they can record the pressures and temperatures of peak metamorphism and are used as geobarometers and geothermometers in the study of geothermobarometry which determines \"P-T Paths\", Pressure-Temperature Paths. Garnets are used as an index mineral in the delineation of isograds in metamorphic rocks. Compositional zoning and inclusions can mark the change from growth of the crystals at low temperatures to higher temperatures. Garnets that are not compositionally zoned more than likely experienced ultra high temperatures (above 700\u00a0\u00b0C) that led to diffusion of major elements within the crystal lattice, effectively homogenizing the crystal or they were never zoned. Garnets can also form metamorphic textures that can help interpret structural histories.\nIn addition to being used to devolve conditions of metamorphism, garnets can be used to date certain geologic events. Garnet has been developed as a U-Pb geochronometer, to date the age of crystallization as well as a thermochronometer in the (U-Th)/He system to date timing of cooling below a closure temperature.\nGarnets can be chemically altered and most often alter to serpentine, talc, and chlorite.\nLargest garnet crystal.\nThe open-pit Barton Garnet Mine, located at Gore Mountain in the Adirondack Mountains, yields the world's largest single crystals of garnet; diameters range from 5 to 35\u00a0cm and commonly average 10\u201318\u00a0cm.\nGore Mountain garnets are unique in many respects, and considerable effort has been made to determine the timing of garnet growth. The first dating was that of Basu et al. (1989), who used plagioclase-hornblende-garnet to produce a Sm/Nd isochron that yielded an age of 1059 \u00b1 19 Ma. Mezger et al. (1992) conducted their own Sm/Nd investigation using hornblende and the drilled core of a 50\u00a0cm garnet to produce an isochron age of 1051 \u00b1 4 Ma. Connelly (2006) utilized seven different fractions of a Gore Mountain garnet to obtain a Lu-Hf isochron age of 1046.6 \u00b1 6 Ma. It is therefore concluded with confidence that the garnets formed at 1049 \u00b1 5 Ma, the average of the three determinations. This is also the local age of peak metamorphism in the 1090\u20131040 Ma Ottawan phase of the Grenvillian orogeny and serves as a critical data point in ascertaining the evolution of the megacrystic garnet deposits.\nUses.\nGemstones.\nRed garnets were the most commonly used gemstones in the Late Antique Roman world, and the Migration Period art of the \"barbarian\" peoples who took over the territory of the Western Roman Empire. They were especially used inlaid in gold cells in the cloisonn\u00e9 technique, a style often just called garnet cloisonn\u00e9, found from Anglo-Saxon England, as at Sutton Hoo, to the Black Sea. Thousands of Tamraparniyan gold, silver and red garnet shipments were made in the Old World, including to Rome, Greece, the Middle East, Serica and Anglo Saxons; recent findings such as the Staffordshire Hoard and the pendant of the Winfarthing Woman skeleton of Norfolk confirm an established gem trade route with South India and Tamraparni (ancient Sri Lanka), known from antiquity for its production of gemstones.\nPure crystals of garnet are still used as gemstones. The gemstone varieties occur in shades of green, red, yellow, and orange. In the United States it is known as the birthstone for January. It is also the birthstone of Aquarius and Capricorn in tropical astrology. The garnet family is one of the most complex in the gem world. It is not a single species, but is composed of multiple species and varieties. \nAlmandine garnet is the state mineral of Connecticut, star garnet is the state gemstone of Idaho, garnet is the state gemstone of New York, and grossular garnet is the state gemstone of Vermont.\nIndustrial uses.\nGarnet sand is a good abrasive, and a common replacement for silica sand in abrasive blasting operations. Alluvial garnet grains which are rounder are more suitable for such blasting treatments. Mixed with very high pressure water, garnet is used to cut steel and other materials in water jets. For water jet cutting, garnet extracted from hard rock is suitable since it is more angular in form, therefore more efficient in cutting.\nGarnet paper is favored by cabinetmakers for finishing bare wood.\nGarnet sand is also used for water filtration media.\nAs an abrasive, garnet can be broadly divided into two categories; blasting grade and water jet grade. The garnet, as it is mined and collected, is crushed to finer grains; all pieces which are larger than 60\u00a0mesh (250\u00a0micrometers) are normally used for sand blasting. The pieces between 60\u00a0mesh (250\u00a0micrometers) and 200\u00a0mesh (74\u00a0micrometers) are normally used for water jet cutting. The remaining garnet pieces that are finer than 200\u00a0mesh (74\u00a0micrometers) are used for glass polishing and lapping. Regardless of the application, the larger grain sizes are used for faster work and the smaller ones are used for finer finishes.\nThere are different kinds of abrasive garnets which can be divided based on their origin. The largest source of abrasive garnet today is garnet-rich beach sand which is quite abundant on Indian and Australian coasts and the main producers today are Australia and India.\nThis material is particularly popular due to its consistent supplies, huge quantities and clean material. The common problems with this material are the presence of ilmenite and chloride compounds. Since the material has been naturally crushed and ground on the beaches for past centuries, the material is normally available in fine sizes only. Most of the garnet at the Tuticorin beach in south India is 80\u00a0mesh, and ranges from 56\u00a0mesh to 100\u00a0mesh size.\n\"River garnet\" is particularly abundant in Australia. The river sand garnet occurs as a placer deposit.\n\"Rock garnet\" is perhaps the garnet type used for the longest period of time. This type of garnet is produced in America, China and western India. These crystals are crushed in mills and then purified by wind blowing, magnetic separation, sieving and, if required, washing. Being freshly crushed, this garnet has the sharpest edges and therefore performs far better than other kinds of garnet. Both the river and the beach garnet suffer from the tumbling effect of hundreds of thousands of years which rounds off the edges. Gore Mountain Garnet from Warren County, New York, USA, is a significant source of rock garnet for use as an industrial abrasive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37508", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37508", "title": "Magma", "text": "Hot semifluid material found beneath the surface of Earth\nMagma (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'thick unguent') is the molten or semi-molten natural material from which all igneous rocks are formed. Magma (sometimes colloquially but incorrectly referred to as \"lava\") is found beneath the surface of the Earth, and evidence of magmatism has also been discovered on other terrestrial planets and some natural satellites. Besides molten rock, magma may also contain suspended crystals and gas bubbles.\nMagma is produced by melting of the mantle or the crust in various tectonic settings, which on Earth include subduction zones, continental rift zones, mid-ocean ridges and hotspots. Mantle and crustal melts migrate upwards through the crust where they are thought to be stored in magma chambers or trans-crustal crystal-rich mush zones. During magma's storage in the crust, its composition may be modified by fractional crystallization, contamination with crustal melts, magma mixing, and degassing. Following its ascent through the crust, magma may feed a volcano and be extruded as lava, or it may solidify underground to form an intrusion, such as a dike, a sill, a laccolith, a pluton, or a batholith.\nWhile the study of magma has relied on observing magma after its transition into a lava flow, magma has been encountered in situ three times during geothermal drilling projects, twice in Iceland (see Use in energy production) and once in Hawaii.\nPhysical and chemical properties.\nMagma consists of liquid rock that usually contains suspended solid crystals. As magma approaches the surface and the overburden pressure drops, dissolved gases bubble out of the liquid, so that magma near the surface consists of materials in solid, liquid, and gas phases.\nComposition.\nMost magma is rich in silica. Rare nonsilicate magma can form by local melting of nonsilicate mineral deposits or by separation of a magma into separate immiscible silicate and nonsilicate liquid phases.\nSilicate magmas are molten mixtures dominated by oxygen and silicon, the most abundant chemical elements in the Earth's crust, with smaller quantities of aluminium, calcium, magnesium, iron, sodium, and potassium, and minor amounts of many other elements. Petrologists routinely express the composition of a silicate magma in terms of the weight or molar mass fraction of the oxides of the major elements (other than oxygen) present in the magma.\nBecause many of the properties of a magma (such as its viscosity and temperature) are observed to correlate with silica content, silicate magmas are divided into four chemical types based on silica content: \"felsic\", \"intermediate\", \"mafic\", and \"ultramafic\".\nFelsic magmas.\n\"Felsic\" or silicic magmas have a silica content greater than 63%. They include rhyolite and dacite magmas. With such a high silica content, these magmas are extremely viscous, ranging from 108 cP (105 Pa\u22c5s) for hot rhyolite magma at to 1011 cP (108 Pa\u22c5s) for cool rhyolite magma at . For comparison, water has a viscosity of about 1 cP (0.001 Pa\u22c5s). Because of this very high viscosity, felsic lavas usually erupt explosively to produce pyroclastic (fragmental) deposits. However, rhyolite lavas occasionally erupt effusively to form lava spines, lava domes or \"coulees\" (which are thick, short lava flows). The lavas typically fragment as they extrude, producing block lava flows. These often contain obsidian.\nFelsic lavas can erupt at temperatures as low as . Unusually hot (&gt;950\u00a0\u00b0C; &gt;1,740\u00a0\u00b0F) rhyolite lavas, however, may flow for distances of many tens of kilometres, such as in the Snake River Plain of the northwestern United States.\nIntermediate magmas.\n\"Intermediate\" or andesitic magmas contain 52% to 63% silica, and are lower in aluminium and usually somewhat richer in magnesium and iron than felsic magmas. Intermediate lavas form andesite domes and block lavas, and may occur on steep composite volcanoes, such as in the Andes. They are also commonly hotter, in the range of ). Because of their lower silica content and higher eruptive temperatures, they tend to be much less viscous, with a typical viscosity of 3.5 million cP (3,500 Pa\u22c5s) at . This is slightly greater than the viscosity of smooth peanut butter. Intermediate magmas show a greater tendency to form phenocrysts. Higher iron and magnesium tends to manifest as a darker groundmass, including amphibole or pyroxene phenocrysts.\nMafic magmas.\n\"Mafic\" or basaltic magmas have a silica content of 52% to 45%. They are typified by their high ferromagnesian content, and generally erupt at temperatures of . Viscosities can be relatively low, around 104 to 105 cP (10 to 100 Pa\u22c5s), although this is still many orders of magnitude higher than water. This viscosity is similar to that of ketchup. Basalt lavas tend to produce low-profile shield volcanoes or flood basalts, because the fluidal lava flows for long distances from the vent. The thickness of a basalt lava, particularly on a low slope, may be much greater than the thickness of the moving lava flow at any one time, because basalt lavas may \"inflate\" by supply of lava beneath a solidified crust. Most basalt lavas are of \"\u02bbA\u02bb\u0101\" or \"p\u0101hoehoe\" types, rather than block lavas. Underwater, they can form pillow lavas, which are rather similar to entrail-type pahoehoe lavas on land.\nUltramafic magmas.\n\"Ultramafic\" magmas, such as picritic basalt, komatiite, and highly magnesian magmas that form boninite, take the composition and temperatures to the extreme. All have a silica content under 45%. Komatiites contain over 18% magnesium oxide, and are thought to have erupted at temperatures of . At this temperature there is practically no polymerization of the mineral compounds, creating a highly mobile liquid. Viscosities of komatiite magmas are thought to have been as low as 100 to 1000 cP (0.1 to 1 Pa\u22c5s), similar to that of light motor oil. Most ultramafic lavas are no younger than the Proterozoic, with a few ultramafic magmas known from the Phanerozoic in Central America that are attributed to a hot mantle plume. No modern komatiite lavas are known, as the Earth's mantle has cooled too much to produce highly magnesian magmas.\nAlkaline magmas.\nSome silicic magmas have an elevated content of alkali metal oxides (sodium and potassium), particularly in regions of continental rifting, areas overlying deeply subducted plates, or at intraplate hotspots. Their silica content can range from ultramafic (nephelinites, basanites and tephrites) to felsic (trachytes). They are more likely to be generated at greater depths in the mantle than subalkaline magmas. Olivine nephelinite magmas are both ultramafic and highly alkaline, and are thought to have come from much deeper in the mantle of the Earth than other magmas.\nNon-silicate magmas.\nSome lavas of unusual composition have erupted onto the surface of the Earth. These include:\nMagmatic gases.\nThe concentrations of different gases can vary considerably. Water vapor is typically the most abundant magmatic gas, followed by carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide. Other principal magmatic gases include hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen chloride, and hydrogen fluoride.\nThe solubility of magmatic gases in magma depends on pressure, magma composition, and temperature. Magma that is extruded as lava is extremely dry, but magma at depth and under great pressure can contain a dissolved water content in excess of 10%. Water is somewhat less soluble in low-silica magma than high-silica magma, so that at 1,100\u00a0\u00b0C and 0.5 GPa, a basaltic magma can dissolve 8% while a granite pegmatite magma can dissolve 11% . However, magmas are not necessarily saturated under typical conditions.\nCarbon dioxide is much less soluble in magmas than water, and frequently separates into a distinct fluid phase even at great depth. This explains the presence of carbon dioxide fluid inclusions in crystals formed in magmas at great depth.\nRheology.\nViscosity is a key melt property in understanding the behaviour of magmas. Whereas temperatures in common silicate lavas range from about for felsic lavas to for mafic lavas, the viscosity of the same lavas ranges over seven orders of magnitude, from 104 cP (10 Pa\u22c5s) for mafic lava to 1011 cP (108 Pa\u22c5s) for felsic magmas. The viscosity is mostly determined by composition but is also dependent on temperature. The tendency of felsic lava to be cooler than mafic lava increases the viscosity difference.\nThe silicon ion is small and highly charged, and so it has a strong tendency to coordinate with four oxygen ions, which form a tetrahedral arrangement around the much smaller silicon ion. This is called a \"silica tetrahedron\". In a magma that is low in silicon, these silica tetrahedra are isolated, but as the silicon content increases, silica tetrahedra begin to partially polymerize, forming chains, sheets, and clumps of silica tetrahedra linked by bridging oxygen ions. These greatly increase the viscosity of the magma.\nThe tendency towards polymerization is expressed as NBO/T, where NBO is the number of non-bridging oxygen ions and T is the number of network-forming ions. Silicon is the main network-forming ion, but in magmas high in sodium, aluminium also acts as a network former, and ferric iron can act as a network former when other network formers are lacking. Most other metallic ions reduce the tendency to polymerize and are described as network modifiers. In a hypothetical magma formed entirely from melted silica, NBO/T would be 0, while in a hypothetical magma so low in network formers that no polymerization takes place, NBO/T would be 4. Neither extreme is common in nature, but basalt magmas typically have NBO/T between 0.6 and 0.9, andesitic magmas have NBO/T of 0.3 to 0.5, and rhyolitic magmas have NBO/T of 0.02 to 0.2. Water acts as a network modifier, and dissolved water drastically reduces melt viscosity. Carbon dioxide neutralizes network modifiers, so dissolved carbon dioxide increases the viscosity. Higher-temperature melts are less viscous, since more thermal energy is available to break bonds between oxygen and network formers.\nMost magmas contain solid crystals of various minerals, fragments of exotic rocks known as xenoliths and fragments of previously solidified magma. The crystal content of most magmas gives them thixotropic and shear thinning properties. In other words, most magmas do not behave like Newtonian fluids, in which the rate of flow is proportional to the shear stress. Instead, a typical magma is a Bingham fluid, which shows considerable resistance to flow until a stress threshold, called the yield stress, is crossed. This results in plug flow of partially crystalline magma. A familiar example of plug flow is toothpaste squeezed out of a toothpaste tube. The toothpaste comes out as a semisolid plug, because shear is concentrated in a thin layer in the toothpaste next to the tube, and only here does the toothpaste behave as a fluid. Thixotropic behavior also hinders crystals from settling out of the magma. Once the crystal content reaches about 60%, the magma ceases to behave like a fluid and begins to behave like a solid. Such a mixture of crystals with melted rock is sometimes described as \"crystal mush\".\nMagma is typically also viscoelastic, meaning it flows like a liquid under low stresses, but once the applied stress exceeds a critical value, the melt cannot dissipate the stress fast enough through relaxation alone, resulting in transient fracture propagation. Once stresses are reduced below the critical threshold, the melt viscously relaxes once more and heals the fracture.\nTemperature.\nTemperatures of molten lava, which is magma extruded onto the surface, are almost all in the range , but very rare carbonatite magmas may be as cool as , and komatiite magmas may have been as hot as . Magma has occasionally been encountered during drilling in geothermal fields, including drilling in Hawaii that penetrated a dacitic magma body at a depth of . The temperature of this magma was estimated at . Temperatures of deeper magmas must be inferred from theoretical computations and the geothermal gradient.\nMost magmas contain some solid crystals suspended in the liquid phase. This indicates that the temperature of the magma lies between the solidus, which is defined as the temperature at which the magma completely solidifies, and the liquidus, defined as the temperature at which the magma is completely liquid. Calculations of solidus temperatures at likely depths suggests that magma generated beneath areas of rifting starts at a temperature of about . Magma generated from mantle plumes may be as hot as . The temperature of magma generated in subduction zones, where water vapor lowers the melting temperature, may be as low as .\nDensity.\nMagma densities depend mostly on composition, iron content being the most important parameter.\nMagma expands slightly at lower pressure or higher temperature. When magma approaches the surface, its dissolved gases begin to bubble out of the liquid. These bubbles had significantly reduced the density of the magma at depth and helped drive it toward the surface in the first place.\nOrigins.\nThe temperature within the interior of the earth is described by the geothermal gradient, which is the rate of temperature change with depth. The geothermal gradient is established by the balance between heating through radioactive decay in the Earth's interior and heat loss from the surface of the earth. The geothermal gradient averages about 25\u00a0\u00b0C/km in the Earth's upper crust, but this varies widely by region, from a low of 5\u201310\u00a0\u00b0C/km within oceanic trenches and subduction zones to 30\u201380\u00a0\u00b0C/km along mid-ocean ridges or near mantle plumes. The gradient becomes less steep with depth, dropping to just 0.25 to 0.3\u00a0\u00b0C/km in the mantle, where slow convection efficiently transports heat. The average geothermal gradient is not normally steep enough to bring rocks to their melting point anywhere in the crust or upper mantle, so magma is produced only where the geothermal gradient is unusually steep or the melting point of the rock is unusually low. However, the ascent of magma towards the surface in such settings is the most important process for transporting heat through the crust of the Earth.\nRocks may melt in response to a decrease in pressure, to a change in composition (such as an addition of water), to an increase in temperature, or to a combination of these processes. Other mechanisms, such as melting from a meteorite impact, are less important today, but impacts during the accretion of the Earth led to extensive melting, and the outer several hundred kilometers of the early Earth was probably a magma ocean. Impacts of large meteorites in the last few hundred million years have been proposed as one mechanism responsible for the extensive basalt magmatism of several large igneous provinces.\nDecompression.\nDecompression melting occurs because of a decrease in pressure. It is the most important mechanism for producing magma from the upper mantle.\nThe solidus temperatures of most rocks (the temperatures below which they are completely solid) increase with increasing pressure in the absence of water. Peridotite at depth in the Earth's mantle may be hotter than its solidus temperature at some shallower level. If such rock rises during the convection of solid mantle, it will cool slightly as it expands in an adiabatic process, but the cooling is only about 0.3\u00a0\u00b0C per kilometer. Experimental studies of appropriate peridotite samples document that the solidus temperatures increase by 3\u00a0\u00b0C to 4\u00a0\u00b0C per kilometer. If the rock rises far enough, it will begin to melt. Melt droplets can coalesce into larger volumes and be intruded upwards. This process of melting from the upward movement of solid mantle is critical in the evolution of the Earth.\nDecompression melting creates the ocean crust at mid-ocean ridges, making it by far the most important source of magma on Earth. It also causes volcanism in intraplate regions, such as Europe, Africa and the Pacific sea floor. Intraplate volcanism is attributed to the rise of mantle plumes or to intraplate extension, with the importance of each mechanism being a topic of continuing research.\nEffects of water and carbon dioxide.\nThe change of rock composition most responsible for the creation of magma is the addition of water. Water lowers the solidus temperature of rocks at a given pressure. For example, at a depth of about 100 kilometers, peridotite begins to melt near 800\u00a0\u00b0C in the presence of excess water, but near 1,500\u00a0\u00b0C in the absence of water. Water is driven out of the oceanic lithosphere in subduction zones, and it causes melting in the overlying mantle. Hydrous magmas with the composition of basalt or andesite are produced directly and indirectly as results of dehydration during the subduction process. Such magmas, and those derived from them, build up island arcs such as those in the Pacific Ring of Fire. These magmas form rocks of the calc-alkaline series, an important part of the continental crust. With low density and viscosity, hydrous magmas are highly buoyant and will move upwards in Earth's mantle.\nThe addition of carbon dioxide is relatively a much less important cause of magma formation than the addition of water, but genesis of some silica-undersaturated magmas has been attributed to the dominance of carbon dioxide over water in their mantle source regions. In the presence of carbon dioxide, experiments document that the peridotite solidus temperature decreases by about 200\u00a0\u00b0C in a narrow pressure interval at pressures corresponding to a depth of about 70\u00a0km. At greater depths, carbon dioxide can have more effect: at depths to about 200\u00a0km, the temperatures of initial melting of a carbonated peridotite composition were determined to be 450\u00a0\u00b0C to 600\u00a0\u00b0C lower than for the same composition with no carbon dioxide. Magmas of rock types such as nephelinite, carbonatite, and kimberlite are among those that may be generated following an influx of carbon dioxide into mantle at depths greater than about 70\u00a0km.\nTemperature increase.\nIncrease in temperature is the most typical mechanism for formation of magma within continental crust. Such temperature increases can occur because of the upward intrusion of magma from the mantle. Temperatures can also exceed the solidus of a crustal rock in continental crust thickened by compression at a plate boundary. The plate boundary between the Indian and Asian continental masses provides a well-studied example, as the Tibetan Plateau just north of the boundary has crust about 80 kilometers thick, roughly twice the thickness of normal continental crust. Studies of electrical resistivity deduced from magnetotelluric data have detected a layer that appears to contain silicate melt and that stretches for at least 1,000 kilometers within the middle crust along the southern margin of the Tibetan Plateau. Granite and rhyolite are types of igneous rock commonly interpreted as products of the melting of continental crust because of increases in temperature. Temperature increases also may contribute to the melting of lithosphere dragged down in a subduction zone.\nThe melting process.\nWhen rocks melt, they do so over a range of temperature, because most rocks are made of several minerals, which all have different melting points. The temperature at which the first melt appears (the solidus) is lower than the melting temperature of any one of the pure minerals. This is similar to the lowering of the melting point of ice when it is mixed with salt. The first melt is called the \"eutectic\" and has a composition that depends on the combination of minerals present.\nFor example, a mixture of anorthite and diopside, which are two of the predominant minerals in basalt, begins to melt at about 1274\u00a0\u00b0C. This is well below the melting temperatures of 1392\u00a0\u00b0C for pure diopside and 1553\u00a0\u00b0C for pure anorthite. The resulting melt is composed of about 43 wt% anorthite. As additional heat is added to the rock, the temperature remains at 1274\u00a0\u00b0C until either the anorthite or diopside is fully melted. The temperature then rises as the remaining mineral continues to melt, which shifts the melt composition away from the eutectic. For example, if the content of anorthite is greater than 43%, the entire supply of diopside will melt at 1274\u00a0\u00b0C., along with enough of the anorthite to keep the melt at the eutectic composition. Further heating causes the temperature to slowly rise as the remaining anorthite gradually melts and the melt becomes increasingly rich in anorthite liquid. If the mixture has only a slight excess of anorthite, this will melt before the temperature rises much above 1274\u00a0\u00b0C. If the mixture is almost all anorthite, the temperature will reach nearly the melting point of pure anorthite before all the anorthite is melted. If the anorthite content of the mixture is less than 43%, then all the anorthite will melt at the eutectic temperature, along with part of the diopside, and the remaining diopside will then gradually melt as the temperature continues to rise.\nBecause of eutectic melting, the composition of the melt can be quite different from the source rock. For example, a mixture of 10% anorthite with diopside could experience about 23% partial melting before the melt deviated from the eutectic, which has the composition of about 43% anorthite. This effect of partial melting is reflected in the compositions of different magmas. A low degree of partial melting of the upper mantle (2% to 4%) can produce highly alkaline magmas such as melilitites, while a greater degree of partial melting (8% to 11%) can produce alkali olivine basalt. Oceanic magmas likely result from partial melting of 3% to 15% of the source rock. Some calk-alkaline granitoids may be produced by a high degree of partial melting, as much as 15% to 30%.\nHigh-magnesium magmas, such as komatiite and picrite, may also be the products of a high degree of partial melting of mantle rock.\nCertain chemical elements, called incompatible elements, have a combination of ionic radius and ionic charge that is unlike that of the more abundant elements in the source rock. The ions of these elements fit rather poorly in the structure of the minerals making up the source rock, and readily leave the solid minerals to become highly concentrated in melts produced by a low degree of partial melting. Incompatible elements commonly include potassium, barium, caesium, and rubidium, which are large and weakly charged (the large-ion lithophile elements, or LILEs), as well as elements whose ions carry a high charge (the high-field-strength elements, or HSFEs), which include such elements as zirconium, niobium, hafnium, tantalum, the rare-earth elements, and the actinides. Potassium can become so enriched in melt produced by a very low degree of partial melting that, when the magma subsequently cools and solidifies, it forms unusual potassic rock such as lamprophyre, lamproite, or kimberlite.\nWhen enough rock is melted, the small globules of melt (generally occurring between mineral grains) link up and soften the rock. Under pressure within the earth, as little as a fraction of a percent of partial melting may be sufficient to cause melt to be squeezed from its source. Melt rapidly separates from its source rock once the degree of partial melting exceeds 30%. However, usually much less than 30% of a magma source rock is melted before the heat supply is exhausted.\nPegmatite may be produced by low degrees of partial melting of the crust. Some granite-composition magmas are eutectic (or cotectic) melts, and they may be produced by low to high degrees of partial melting of the crust, as well as by fractional crystallization.\nEvolution of magmas.\nMost magmas are fully melted only for small parts of their histories. More typically, they are mixes of melt and crystals, and sometimes also of gas bubbles. Melt, crystals, and bubbles usually have different densities, and so they can separate as magmas evolve.\nAs magma cools, minerals typically crystallize from the melt at different temperatures. This resembles the original melting process in reverse. However, because the melt has usually separated from its original source rock and moved to a shallower depth, the reverse process of crystallization is not precisely identical. For example, if a melt was 50% each of diopside and anorthite, then anorthite would begin crystallizing from the melt at a temperature somewhat higher than the eutectic temperature of 1274\u00a0\u00b0C. This shifts the remaining melt towards its eutectic composition of 43% diopside. The eutectic is reached at 1274\u00a0\u00b0C, the temperature at which diopside and anorthite begin crystallizing together. If the melt was 90% diopside, the diopside would begin crystallizing first until the eutectic was reached.\nIf the crystals remained suspended in the melt, the crystallization process would not change the overall composition of the melt plus solid minerals. This situation is described as \"equillibrium crystallization\". However, in a series of experiments culminating in his 1915 paper, \"Crystallization-differentiation in silicate liquids\", Norman L. Bowen demonstrated that crystals of olivine and diopside that crystallized out of a cooling melt of forsterite, diopside, and silica would sink through the melt on geologically relevant time scales. Geologists subsequently found considerable field evidence of such \"fractional crystallization\".\nWhen crystals separate from a magma, then the residual magma will differ in composition from the parent magma. For instance, a magma of gabbroic composition can produce a residual melt of granitic composition if early formed crystals are separated from the magma. Gabbro may have a liquidus temperature near 1,200\u00a0\u00b0C, and the derivative granite-composition melt may have a liquidus temperature as low as about 700\u00a0\u00b0C. Incompatible elements are concentrated in the last residues of magma during fractional crystallization and in the first melts produced during partial melting: either process can form the magma that crystallizes to pegmatite, a rock type commonly enriched in incompatible elements. Bowen's reaction series is important for understanding the idealised sequence of fractional crystallisation of a magma.\nMagma composition can be determined by processes other than partial melting and fractional crystallization. For instance, magmas commonly interact with rocks they intrude, both by melting those rocks and by reacting with them. Assimilation near the roof of a magma chamber and fractional crystallization near its base can even take place simultaneously. Magmas of different compositions can mix with one another. In rare cases, melts can separate into two immiscible melts of contrasting compositions.\nPrimary magmas.\nWhen rock melts, the liquid is a \"primary magma\". Primary magmas have not undergone any differentiation and represent the starting composition of a magma. In practice, it is difficult to unambiguously identify primary magmas, though it has been suggested that boninite is a variety of andesite crystallized from a primary magma. The Great Dyke of Zimbabwe has also been interpreted as rock crystallized from a primary magma. The interpretation of leucosomes of migmatites as primary magmas is contradicted by zircon data, which suggests leucosomes are a residue (a cumulate rock) left by extraction of a primary magma.\nParental magma.\nWhen it is impossible to find the primitive or primary magma composition, it is often useful to attempt to identify a parental magma. A parental magma is a magma composition from which the observed range of magma chemistries has been derived by the processes of igneous differentiation. It need not be a primitive melt.\nFor instance, a series of basalt flows are assumed to be related to one another. A composition from which they could reasonably be produced by fractional crystallization is termed a \"parental magma\". Fractional crystallization models would be produced to test the hypothesis that they share a common parental magma.\nMigration and solidification.\nMagma develops within the mantle or crust where the temperature and pressure conditions favor the molten state. After its formation, magma buoyantly rises toward the Earth's surface, due to its lower density than the source rock. As it migrates through the crust, magma may collect and reside in magma chambers (though recent work suggests that magma may be stored in trans-crustal crystal-rich mush zones rather than dominantly liquid magma chambers ). Magma can remain in a chamber until it either cools and crystallizes to form intrusive rock, it erupts as a volcano, or it moves into another magma chamber.\nPlutonism.\nWhen magma cools it begins to form solid mineral phases. Some of these settle at the bottom of the magma chamber forming cumulates that might form mafic layered intrusions. Magma that cools slowly within a magma chamber usually ends up forming bodies of plutonic rocks such as gabbro, diorite and granite, depending upon the composition of the magma. Alternatively, if the magma is erupted it forms volcanic rocks such as basalt, andesite and rhyolite (the extrusive equivalents of gabbro, diorite and granite, respectively).\nVolcanism.\nMagma that is extruded onto the surface during a volcanic eruption is called lava. Lava cools and solidifies relatively quickly compared to underground bodies of magma. This fast cooling does not allow crystals to grow large, and a part of the melt does not crystallize at all, becoming glass. Rocks largely composed of volcanic glass include obsidian, scoria and pumice.\nBefore and during volcanic eruptions, volatiles such as CO2 and H2O partially leave the melt through a process known as exsolution. Magma with low water content becomes increasingly viscous. If massive exsolution occurs when magma heads upwards during a volcanic eruption, the resulting eruption is usually explosive.\nUse in energy production.\nThe Iceland Deep Drilling Project, while drilling several 5,000\u00a0m holes in an attempt to harness the heat in the volcanic bedrock below the surface of Iceland, struck a pocket of magma at 2,100\u00a0m in 2009. Because this was only the third time in recorded history that magma had been reached, IDDP decided to invest in the hole, naming it IDDP-1.\nA cemented steel case was constructed in the hole with a perforation at the bottom close to the magma. The high temperatures and pressure of the magma steam were used to generate 36\u00a0MW of power, making IDDP-1 the world's first magma-enhanced geothermal system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37510", "revid": "50022150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37510", "title": "Respiration", "text": "Respiration may refer to:\nEntertainment.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37512", "revid": "50910159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37512", "title": "Adjective", "text": "Part of speech that defines a noun or pronoun\nAn adjective (abbreviated ADJ) is a word that describes or defines a noun or noun phrase. Its semantic role is to change information given by the noun.\nThe adjective is considered one of the main parts of speech of the English language, although historically they were classed together with nouns. Nowadays, certain words that usually had been classified as adjectives, including \"the\", \"this\", \"my\", etc., typically are classed separately, as determiners.\nExamples:\nEtymology.\n\"Adjective\" comes from Latin \"\", a calque of (whence also English \"epithet\"). In the grammatical tradition of Latin and Greek, because adjectives were inflected for gender, number, and case like nouns (a process called declension), they were considered a type of noun. The words that are today typically called nouns were then called \"substantive nouns\" (). The terms \"noun substantive\" and \"noun adjective\" were formerly used in English but are now obsolete.\nTypes of use.\nDepending on the language, an adjective can precede a corresponding noun on a prepositive basis or it can follow a corresponding noun on a postpositive basis. Structural, contextual, and style considerations can impinge on the pre-or post-position of an adjective in a given instance of its occurrence. In English, occurrences of adjectives generally can be classified into one of three categories:\nDistribution.\nAdjectives feature as a part of speech (word class) in most languages. In some languages, the words that serve the semantic function of adjectives are categorized together with some other class, such as nouns or verbs. In the phrase \"a Ford car\", \"Ford\" is unquestionably a noun but its function is adjectival (noun adjunct, see below): to modify \"car\".\nIn some languages adjectives can function as nouns: for example, the Spanish phrase means 'a red [one]'. This is also possible in English, see above. However, such nominalized adjectives mostly refer to people and are more commonly found in the plural: \"Reds\" or \"a Red\" (most commonly in the sense of 'communist'), \"the rich and the famous\", \"the oppressed\", \"the poorer\" or \"the poorest\", or (not for people) \"(to venture into) the unknown\", \"the obvious\", etc., though use in the singular such as \"a poor\" (also the plural \"(the) poors\" unlike \"the poor\") or \"a gay\" (less so \"(the) gays\") is widely considered dated and generally avoided.\nAs for \"confusion\" with verbs, rather than an adjective meaning \"big\", a language might have a verb that means \"to be big\" and could then use an attributive verb construction analogous to \"big-being house\" to express what in English is called a \"big house\". Such an analysis is possible for the grammar of Standard Chinese and Korean, for example.\nDifferent languages do not use adjectives in exactly the same situations. For example, where English uses \"\"\"to be \"hungry\"\" (\"hungry\" being an adjective), Dutch, French, and Spanish use \", \", and \"\" respectively (literally \"to have hunger\", the words for \"hunger\" being nouns). Similarly, where Hebrew uses the adjective &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d6\u05e7\u05d5\u05e7\u200e (, roughly \"in need of\" or \"needing\"), English uses the verb \"to need\".\nIn languages that have adjectives as a word class, it is usually an open class; that is, it is relatively common for new adjectives to be formed via such processes as derivation. However, Bantu languages are well known for having only a small closed class of adjectives, and new adjectives are not easily derived. Similarly, native Japanese adjectives (\"i\"-adjectives) are considered a closed class (as are native verbs), although nouns (an open class) may be used in the genitive to convey some adjectival meanings, and there is also the separate open class of adjectival nouns (\"na\"-adjectives).\nAdverbs.\nMany languages (including English) distinguish between adjectives, which qualify nouns and pronouns, and adverbs, which mainly modify verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs. Not all languages make this exact distinction; many (including English) have words that can function as either. For example, in English, \"fast\" is an adjective in \"a \"fast\" car\" (where it qualifies the noun \"car\") but an adverb in \"he drove \"fast\"\" (where it modifies the verb \"drove\").\nIn Dutch and German, adjectives and adverbs are usually identical in form and many grammarians do not make the distinction, but patterns of inflection can suggest a difference:\nA \"clever\" new idea.\nA \"cleverly\" developed idea.\nA German word like (\"clever(ly)\") takes endings when used as an attributive adjective but not when used adverbially. Whether these are distinct parts of speech or distinct usages of the same part of speech is a question of analysis. While German linguistic terminology distinguishes from , German refers to both as (\"property words\").\nDeterminers.\nLinguists today distinguish determiners from adjectives, considering them to be two separate parts of speech (or \"lexical categories\"). Determiners formerly were considered to be adjectives in some of their uses. Determiners function neither as nouns nor pronouns but instead characterize a nominal element within a particular context. They generally do this by indicating definiteness (\"a\" vs. \"the\"), quantity (\"one\" vs. \"some\" vs. \"many\"), or another such property.\nAdjective phrases.\nAn adjective acts as the head of an \"adjective phrase\" or \"adjectival phrase\" (AP). In the simplest case, an adjective phrase consists solely of the adjective; more complex adjective phrases may contain one or more adverbs modifying the adjective (\"\"very\" strong\"), or one or more complements (such as \"worth \"several dollars\"\", \"full \"of toys\"\", or \"eager \"to please\"\"). In English, attributive adjective phrases that include complements typically follow the noun that they qualify (\"an evildoer \"devoid of redeeming qualities\"\").\nOther modifiers of nouns.\nIn many languages (including English) it is possible for nouns to modify other nouns. Unlike adjectives, nouns acting as modifiers (called \"attributive nouns\" or \"noun adjuncts\") usually are not predicative; a beautiful park is beautiful, but a car park is not \"car\". The modifier often indicates origin (\"\"Virginia\" reel\"), purpose (\"\"work\" clothes\"), semantic patient (\"\"man\" eater\") or semantic subject (\"\"child\" actor\"); however, it may generally indicate almost any semantic relationship. It is also common for adjectives to be derived from nouns, as in \"boyish\", \"birdlike\", \"behavioral (behavioural)\", \"famous\", \"manly\", \"angelic\", and so on.\nIn Australian Aboriginal languages, the distinction between adjectives and nouns is typically thought weak, and many of the languages only use nouns, or nouns with a limited set of adjective-deriving affixes, to modify other nouns. In languages that have a subtle adjective-noun distinction, one way to tell them apart is that a modifying adjective can come to stand in for an entire elided noun phrase, while a modifying noun cannot. For example, in Bardi, the adjective \"moorrooloo\" 'little' in the phrase \"moorrooloo\" \"baawa\" 'little child' can stand on its own to mean 'the little one', while the attributive noun \"aamba\" 'man' in the phrase \"aamba baawa\" 'male child' cannot stand for the whole phrase to mean 'the male one'. In other languages, like Warlpiri, nouns and adjectives are lumped together beneath the nominal umbrella because of their shared syntactic distribution as arguments of predicates. The only thing distinguishing them is that some nominals seem to semantically denote entities (typically nouns in English) and some nominals seem to denote attributes (typically adjectives in English).\nMany languages have participle forms that can act as noun modifiers either alone or as the head of a phrase. Sometimes participles develop into functional usage as adjectives. Examples in English include \"relieved\" (the past participle of \"relieve\"), used as an adjective in passive voice constructs such as \"I am so \"relieved\" to see you\". Other examples include \"spoken\" (the past participle of \"speak\") and \"going\" (the present participle of \"go\"), which function as attribute adjectives in such phrases as \"the \"spoken\" word\" and \"the \"going\" rate\".\nOther constructs that often modify nouns include prepositional phrases (as in \"a rebel \"without a cause\"\"), relative clauses (as in \"the man \"who wasn't there\"\"), and infinitive phrases (as in \"a cake \"to die for\"\"). Some nouns can also take complements such as content clauses (as in \"the idea \"that I would do that\"\"), but these are not commonly considered modifiers. For more information about possible modifiers and dependents of nouns, see Components of noun phrases.\nOrder.\nIn many languages, attributive adjectives usually occur in a specific order. In general, the adjective order in English can be summarised as: opinion, size, age or shape, colour, origin, material, purpose. Other language authorities, like the \"Cambridge Dictionary\", state that shape precedes rather than follows age.\nDeterminers and postdeterminers\u2014articles, numerals, and other limiters (e.g. \"three\" blind mice)\u2014come before attributive adjectives in English. Although certain combinations of determiners can appear before a noun, they are far more circumscribed than adjectives in their use\u2014typically, only a single determiner would appear before a noun or noun phrase (including any attributive adjectives).\nThis means that, in English, adjectives pertaining to size precede adjectives pertaining to age (\"little old\", not \"old little\"), which in turn generally precede adjectives pertaining to colour (\"old white\", not \"white old\"). So, one would say \"One (quantity) nice (opinion) little (size) old (age) round (shape) [\"or\" round old] white (colour) brick (material) house.\" When several adjectives of the same type are used together, they are ordered from general to specific, like \"lovely intelligent person\" or \"old medieval castle\".\nThis order may be more rigid in some languages than others; in some, like Spanish, it may only be a default (\"unmarked\") word order, with other orders being permissible. Other languages, such as Tagalog, follow their adjectival orders as rigidly as English.\nThe normal adjectival order of English may be overridden in certain circumstances, especially when one adjective is being fronted or with ablaut reduplication. For example, the usual order of adjectives in English would result in the phrase \"the bad big wolf\" (opinion before size), but instead, the usual phrase is \"the big bad wolf\".\nOwing partially to borrowings from French, English has some adjectives that follow the noun as postmodifiers, called postpositive adjectives, as in \"time immemorial\" and \"attorney general\". Adjectives may even change meaning depending on whether they precede or follow, as in \"proper\": \"They live in a \"proper town\"\" (a real town, not a village) vs. \"They live in the \"town proper\" (in the town itself, not in the suburbs). All adjectives can follow objects or subjects in elliptical constructions, such as \"tell me \"something\" [that is] \"new\"\" or \"We ate the \"pizza\" [that was] \"cold\".\"\nComparison (degrees).\nIn many languages, some adjectives are \"comparable\" and the measure of comparison is called \"degree\". For example, a person may be \"polite\", but another person may be \"\"more\" polite\", and a third person may be the \"\"most\" polite\" of the three. The word \"more\" here modifies the adjective \"polite\" to indicate a comparison is being made, and \"most\" modifies the adjective to indicate an absolute comparison (a \"superlative\").\nAmong languages that allow adjectives to be compared, different means are used to indicate comparison. Some languages do not distinguish between comparative and superlative forms. Other languages allow adjectives to be compared but do not have a special comparative form of the adjective. In such cases, as in some Australian Aboriginal languages, case-marking, such as the ablative case, may be used to indicate one entity has more of an adjectival quality than (i.e. \"from\"\u2014hence ABL) another.\nIn English, many adjectives can be inflected to comparative and superlative forms by taking the suffixes \"-er\" and \"-est\" (sometimes requiring additional letters before the suffix; see forms for \"far\" below), respectively:\n \"great\", \"greater\", \"greatest\"\n \"deep\", \"deeper\", \"deepest\"\nSome adjectives are \"irregular\" in this sense:\n \"good\", \"better\", \"best\"\n \"bad\", \"worse\", \"worst\"\n \"many\", \"more\", \"most\" (sometimes regarded as an adverb or determiner)\n \"little\", \"less\", \"least\"\nSome adjectives can have both \"regular\" and \"irregular\" variations:\n \"old\", \"older\", \"oldest\"\n \"far\", \"farther\", \"farthest\"\nalso\n \"old\", \"elder\", \"eldest\"\n \"far\", \"further\", \"furthest\"\nAnother way to convey comparison is by incorporating the words \"more\" and \"most\". There is no simple rule to decide which means is correct for any given adjective, however. The general tendency is for simpler adjectives and those from Anglo-Saxon to take the suffixes, while longer adjectives and those from French, Latin, or Greek do not\u2014but sometimes the \"sound\" of the word is the deciding factor.\nMany adjectives do not naturally lend themselves to comparison. For example, some English speakers would argue that it does not make sense to say that one thing is \"more ultimate\" than another, or that something is \"most ultimate\", since the word \"ultimate\" is already absolute in its semantics. Such adjectives are called \"non-comparable\" or \"absolute\". Nevertheless, native speakers will frequently play with the raised forms of adjectives of this sort. Although \"pregnant\" is logically non-comparable (either one is pregnant or not), one may hear a sentence like \"She looks more and more pregnant each day\".\nComparative and superlative forms are also occasionally used for other purposes than comparison. In English comparatives can be used to suggest that a statement is only tentative or tendential: one might say \"John is more the shy-and-retiring type\", where the comparative \"more\" is not really comparing him with other people or with other impressions of him, but rather, could be substituting for \"on the whole\" or \"more so than not\". In Italian, superlatives are frequently used to put strong emphasis on an adjective: means \"most beautiful\", but is in fact more commonly heard in the sense \"extremely beautiful\".\nRestrictiveness.\nAttributive adjectives and other noun modifiers may be used either \"restrictively\" (helping to identify the noun's referent, hence \"restricting\" its reference) or \"non-restrictively\" (helping to describe a noun). For example:\n\"He was a lazy sort, who would avoid a \"difficult task\" and fill his working hours with easy ones.\"\nHere \"difficult\" is restrictive \u2013 it tells which tasks he avoids, distinguishing these from the easy ones: \"Only those tasks that are difficult\".\n\"She had the job of sorting out the mess left by her predecessor, and she performed this \"difficult task\" with great acumen.\"\nHere \"difficult\" is non-restrictive \u2013 it is already known which task it was, but the adjective describes it more fully: \"The aforementioned task, which (by the way) is difficult.\"\nIn some languages, such as Spanish, restrictiveness is consistently marked; for example, in Spanish means \"the difficult task\" in the sense of \"the task that is difficult\" (restrictive), whereas means \"the difficult task\" in the sense of \"the task, which is difficult\" (non-restrictive). In English, restrictiveness is not marked on adjectives but is marked on relative clauses (the difference between \"the man \"who recognized me\" was there\" and \"the man, \"who recognized me\", was there\" being one of restrictiveness).\nAgreement.\nIn some languages, adjectives alter their form to reflect the gender, case and number of the noun that they describe. This is called agreement or concord. Usually it takes the form of inflections at the end of the word, as in Latin:\nIn Celtic languages, however, initial consonant lenition marks the adjective with a feminine singular noun, as in Irish:\nHere, a distinction may be made between attributive and predicative usage. In English, adjectives never agree, whereas in French, they always agree. In German, they agree only when they are used attributively, and in Hungarian, they agree only when they are used predicatively:\nSemantics.\nSemanticist Barbara Partee classifies adjectives semantically as intersective, subsective, or nonsubsective, with nonsubsective adjectives being plain nonsubsective or privative.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37513", "revid": "49836368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37513", "title": "Adverb", "text": "Class of wordsAn adverb is a word or an expression that generally modifies a verb, an adjective, another adverb, a determiner, a clause, a preposition, or a sentence. Adverbs typically express manner, place, time, frequency, degree, or level of certainty by answering questions such as \"how\", \"in what way\", \"when\", \"where\", \"to what extent\". This is called the adverbial function and may be performed by an individual adverb, by an adverbial phrase, or by an adverbial clause.\nAdverbs are traditionally regarded as one of the parts of speech. Modern linguists note that the term \"adverb\" has come to be used as a kind of \"catch-all\" category, used to classify words with various types of syntactic behavior, not necessarily having much in common except that they do not fit into any of the other available categories (noun, adjective, preposition, etc.).\nFunctions.\nThe English word \"adverb\" derives (through French) from Latin \"adverbium\", from \"ad-\" ('to'), \"verbum\" ('word', 'verb'), and the nominal suffix \"-ium\". The term implies that the principal function of adverbs is to act as modifiers of verbs or verb phrases. An adverb used in this way may provide information about the manner, place, time, frequency, certainty, or other circumstances of the activity denoted by the verb or verb phrase. Some examples:\nAdverbs can also be used as modifiers of adjectives, and of other adverbs, often to indicate degree. Examples:\nThey can also modify determiners, prepositional phrases, or whole clauses or sentences, as in the following examples:\nAdverbs thus perform a wide range of modifying functions. The major exception is the function of modifier of nouns, which is performed instead by adjectives (compare \"she sang loudly\" with \"her loud singing disturbed me\"; here the verb \"sang\" is modified by the adverb \"loudly\", whereas the noun \"singing\" is modified by the adjective \"loud\"). However, because some adverbs and adjectives are homonyms, their respective functions are sometimes conflated:\nThe word \"even\" in the first sentence is an adjective, since it is a prepositive modifier that modifies the noun \"numbers\". The word \"even\" in the second sentence is a prepositive adverb that modifies the verb \"drank.\"\nAlthough it is possible for an adverb to precede or to follow a noun or a noun phrase, the adverb nonetheless does \"not\" modify either in such cases, as in:\nIn the first sentence, \"Internationally\" is a prepositive adverb that modifies the clause, \"there is\u00a0...\" In the second sentence, \"internationally\" is a postpositive adverb that modifies the clause, \"There is\u00a0...\" By contrast, the third sentence contains \"international\" as a prepositive adjective that modifies the noun, \"shortage.\" \nAdverbs can sometimes be used as predicative expressions; in English, this applies especially to adverbs of location:\nWhen the function of an adverb is performed by an expression consisting of more than one word, it is called an adverbial phrase or adverbial clause, or simply an adverbial.\nFormation and comparison.\nIn English, adverbs of manner (answering the question \"how?\") are often formed by adding \"-ly\" to adjectives, but flat adverbs (such as in \"drive fast\", \"drive slow\", and \"drive friendly\") have the same form as the corresponding adjective. Other languages often have similar methods for deriving adverbs from adjectives (French, for example, uses the suffix \"-ment\"), or else use the same form for both adjectives and adverbs, as in German and Dutch, where for example \"schnell\" or \"snel\", respectively, mean either \"quick\" or \"quickly\" depending on the context. Many other adverbs, however, are not related to adjectives in this way; they may be derived from other words or phrases, or may be single morphemes. Examples of such adverbs in English include \"here, there, together, yesterday, aboard, very, almost\", etc.\nWhere the meaning permits, adverbs may undergo comparison, taking comparative and superlative forms. In English this is usually done by adding \"more\" and \"most\" before the adverb (\"more slowly, most slowly\"), although there are a few adverbs that take inflected forms, such as \"well\", for which \"better\" and \"best\" are used.\nFor more information about the formation and use of adverbs in English, see English adverbs. For other languages, see below, and the articles on individual languages and their grammars.\nAs a \"catch-all\" category.\nAdverbs are considered a part of speech in traditional English grammar, and are still included as a part of speech in grammar taught in schools and used in dictionaries. However, modern grammarians recognize that words traditionally grouped together as adverbs serve a number of different functions. Some describe adverbs as a \"catch-all\" category that includes all words that do not belong to one of the other parts of speech.\nA logical approach to dividing words into classes relies on recognizing which words can be used in a certain context. For example, the only type of word that can be inserted in the following template to form a grammatical sentence is a noun:\nThe _____ is red. (For example, \"The hat is red\".)\nWhen this approach is taken, it is seen that adverbs fall into a number of different categories. For example, some adverbs can be used to modify an entire sentence, whereas others cannot. Even when a sentential adverb has other functions, the meaning is often not the same. For example, in the sentences \"She gave birth naturally\" and \"Naturally, she gave birth\", the word \"naturally\" has different meanings: in the first sentence, as a verb-modifying adverb, it means \"in a natural manner\", while in the second sentence, as a sentential adverb, it means something like \"of course\".\nWords like \"very\" afford another example. \"Perry is very fast\" is grammatical, but not \"Perry very won the race\". These words can modify adjectives but not verbs. On the other hand, there are words like \"here\" and \"there\" that cannot modify adjectives. \"The sock looks good there\" is grammatical, but not \"It is a there beautiful sock\". The fact that many adverbs can be used in more than one of these functions can confuse the issue, and it may seem like splitting hairs to say that a single adverb is really two or more words that serve different functions. However, this distinction can be useful, especially when considering adverbs like \"naturally\" that have different meanings in their different functions. Rodney Huddleston distinguishes between a \"word\" and a \"lexicogrammatical-word\".\nGrammarians find difficulty categorizing negating words, such as the English \"not\". Although traditionally listed as an adverb, this word does not behave grammatically like any other, and it probably should be placed in a class of its own."}
{"id": "37514", "revid": "50712997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37514", "title": "Depleted uranium", "text": "Uranium with lower content of 235U\nDepleted uranium (DU), also referred to in the past as Q-metal, depletalloy, or D-38, is uranium with a lower content of the fissile isotope 235U than natural uranium. The less radioactive and non-fissile 238U is the main component of depleted uranium.\nUranium is notable for the extremely high density of its metallic form: at , uranium is more dense than lead. Because depleted uranium has nearly the same density as natural uranium but far less radioactivity, it is desirable for applications that demand high mass without added radiation hazards. Civilian uses include counterweights in aircraft, radiation shielding in medical radiation therapy, research and industrial radiography equipment, and containers for transporting radioactive materials. Military uses include armor plating and armor-piercing projectiles.\nThe use of DU in munitions is controversial because of concerns about potential long-term health effects. Normal functioning of the kidney, brain, liver, heart, and numerous other systems can be affected by exposure to uranium, a toxic metal. It is only weakly radioactive because of the long radioactive half-life of 238U (4.468 billion years) and the low amounts of 234U (half-life about 246,000 years) and 235U (half-life 700 million years). The biological half-life (the average time it takes for the human body to eliminate half the amount in the body) for uranium is about 15 days. The aerosol or spallation frangible powder produced by impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions (or armour) can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites, leading to possible inhalation by human beings.\nThe actual level of acute and chronic toxicity of DU is also controversial. Several studies using cultured cells and laboratory rodents suggest the possibility of leukemogenic, genetic, reproductive, and neurological effects from chronic exposure. According to Al Jazeera, DU from American artillery is suspected to be one of the major causes of an increase in the general mortality rate in Iraq since 1991. A 2005 epidemiology review concluded \"In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU.\" A 2021 study concluded that DU from exploding munitions did not lead to Gulf War illness in American veterans deployed in the Gulf War. A 2011 study found elevated levels of uranium in soil and hair samples from Fallujah, Iraq, but it was from slightly enriched uranium instead of DU.\nDefinition.\nNatural uranium contains about 235U. Depleted uranium has lower mass fractions\u2014up to three times less\u2014of 235U and 234U than natural uranium. Since 238U has a much longer half-life than the lighter isotopes, DU is about 40% less radioactive than natural uranium. Most of the alpha radiation comes from 238U and 234U whereas beta radiation comes from decay products 234Th and 234Pa that are formed within a few weeks.\nThe United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) defines \"depleted uranium\" as uranium with a percentage of the 235U isotope that is less than by weight (see https://). The military specifications designate that the DU used by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) contain less than 235U. In actuality, DoD uses only DU that contains approximately 235U.\nHistory.\nEnriched uranium was first manufactured in the early 1940s when the United States and the United Kingdom began their nuclear weapons programs. Later in the decade, France and the Soviet Union began their nuclear weapons and nuclear power programs. Depleted uranium was originally stored as an unusable waste product (uranium hexafluoride) in the hope that improved enrichment processes could extract additional quantities of the fissionable 235U isotope. This re-enrichment recovery of the residual uranium-235 is now in practice in some parts of the world; e.g. in 1996 over were upgraded in a Russian plant.\nIn the 1970s, the Pentagon reported that the Soviet military had developed armor plating for Warsaw Pact tanks that NATO ammunition could not penetrate. The Pentagon began searching for material to make denser armor-piercing projectiles. After testing various metals, ordnance researchers settled on depleted uranium.\nThe US and NATO militaries used DU penetrator rounds in the 1991 Gulf War, the Bosnia war, bombing of Serbia, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and 2015 airstrikes on ISIS in Syria. It is estimated that between of DU were used in the 1991 Gulf War.\nProduction.\nMost depleted uranium arises as a by-product of the production of enriched uranium for use as fuel in nuclear reactors and in the manufacture of nuclear weapons. Enrichment processes generate uranium with a higher-than-natural concentration of lower-mass-number uranium isotopes (in particular 235U, which is the uranium isotope supporting the fission chain reaction) with the bulk of the feed ending up as depleted uranium.\nNatural uranium metal contains about 235U, 238U, and about 234U. The production of enriched uranium using isotope separation creates \"depleted uranium\" containing only 0.2% to 0.4% 235U. Because natural uranium begins with such a low percentage of 235U, enrichment produces large quantities of depleted uranium. For example, producing of enriched uranium requires of natural uranium, and leaves about of depleted uranium having only 235U.\nDepleted uranium is further produced by recycling spent nuclear fuel, in which case it contains traces of neptunium and plutonium. These quantities are so small that they are not considered to be of serious radiological significance by the European Committee on Radiation Risk. DU from nuclear reprocessing has different isotopic ratios from enrichment-by-product DU, from which it can be distinguished by the presence of 236U.\nThe only known natural source of uranium with a 235U content significantly different from 0.71% is found in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo, Gabon. It can be \"fingerprinted\" as different in origin from manmade depleted uranium by the 234U content, which is 55 ppm in uranium from the Oklo Mine as well as all other natural sources, but will be lower in depleted uranium in accordance with the degree of depletion.\nStorage.\nAbout 95% of the depleted uranium produced until now is stored as uranium hexafluoride, or (D), in steel cylinders in open air storage yards close to enrichment plants. Each cylinder typically holds up to of . In the U.S. of depleted had accumulated by 1993. In 2008, in 57,122 storage cylinders were located near Portsmouth, Ohio; Oak Ridge, Tennessee; and Paducah, Kentucky.\nThe storage of (D) presents environmental, health, and safety risks because of its chemical instability. When is exposed to water vapor in the air, it reacts with the moisture to produce (uranyl fluoride), a solid, and (hydrogen fluoride), a gas, both of which are highly soluble and toxic. The uranyl fluoride solid acts to plug the leak, limiting further escape of depleted . Release of the hydrogen fluoride gas to the atmosphere is also slowed by the plug formation. Like any other uranium compound, it is radioactive, and precautions should be taken. It is also highly toxic. Whether ingested, inhaled, or absorbed through the skin, uranyl fluoride is corrosive and may harm internal organs, potentially resulting in death. Effects of exposure may be delayed.\nThe U.S. government has been converting depleted to solid uranium oxides for use or disposal. Such disposal of the entire D inventory could cost anywhere from US$ million to US$ million.\nThe vulnerability of DUF6 storage cylinders to terrorist attack is also a matter of concern.\nMilitary applications.\nDepleted uranium is very dense; at 19,050\u00a0kg/m3, it is 1.67 times as dense as lead, only slightly less dense than tungsten and gold, and only 16% less than osmium or iridium, which are the densest known substances under standard (i.e., Earth-surface) pressures. Consequently, a DU projectile of given mass has a smaller diameter than an equivalent lead projectile with the same kinetic energy, with less aerodynamic drag and deeper penetration because of a higher pressure at point of impact. DU projectiles are inherently incendiary because they become pyrophoric upon impact with the target.\nArmor plate.\nBecause of its high density, depleted uranium can also be used in tank armor, sandwiched between sheets of steel armor plate. For instance, some late-production M1A1 and M1A2 Abrams tanks built after 1998 have DU modules integrated into their Chobham armor, as part of the armor plating in the front of the turret, and there is a program to upgrade older tanks.\nNuclear weapons.\nDepleted uranium can be used as a tamper, or neutron reflector, in fission bombs. A high density tamper like DU makes for a longer-lasting, more energetic, and more efficient explosion.\nAmmunition.\nMost military use of depleted uranium has been as 30 mm ordnance, primarily the 30\u00a0mm PGU-14/B armor-piercing incendiary round from the GAU-8 Avenger cannon of the A-10 Thunderbolt II used by the United States Air Force. 25\u00a0mm DU rounds have been used in the M242 gun mounted on the U.S. Army's Bradley Fighting Vehicle and the Marine Corps's LAV-25.\nThe U.S. Marine Corps uses DU in the 25\u00a0mm PGU-20 round fired by the GAU-12 Equalizer cannon of the AV-8B Harrier, and in the 20\u00a0mm M197 gun mounted on AH-1 Cobra helicopter gunships. The United States Navy's Phalanx CIWS's M61 Vulcan Gatling gun used 20\u00a0mm armor-piercing penetrator rounds with discarding plastic sabots and a core made using depleted uranium, however they later changed to using tungsten penetrators.\nAnother use of depleted uranium is in kinetic energy penetrators, anti-armor rounds such as the 120\u00a0mm sabot rounds fired from the British Challenger 1, Challenger 2, M1A1 and M1A2 Abrams. Kinetic energy penetrator rounds consist of a long, relatively thin penetrator surrounded by a discarding sabot. Staballoys are metal alloys of depleted uranium with a very small proportion of other metals, usually titanium or molybdenum. One formulation has a composition of 99.25% by mass of depleted uranium and 0.75% by mass of titanium. Staballoys are approximately 1.67 times as dense as lead and are designed for use in kinetic energy penetrator armor-piercing ammunition. The US Army uses DU in an alloy with around 3.5% titanium.\nDepleted uranium is favored for the penetrator because it is self-sharpening and flammable. On impact with a hard target, such as an armored vehicle, the tip of the projectile will be \"mushroomed\", while the back of the projectile is still a rigid solid. This leads to adiabatic shearing, and together with the spin of the projectile results in a shedding of the mushroomed plastic phase in such a way that it forms a new sharp tip. This shedding of the mushroomed tip improves penetration properties compared to the complete dispersal that takes place with tungsten penetrators, therefore DU penetrators are 20% more effective than tungsten rounds. The impact and subsequent release of heat energy causes it to ignite when in contact with oxygen. When a DU penetrator reaches the interior of an armored vehicle, it catches fire, often igniting ammunition and fuel and possibly causing the vehicle to explode. DU is used by the U.S. Army in 120\u00a0mm or 105\u00a0mm cannons employed on the M1 Abrams tank.\nThe DU content in various ammunition is in 20\u00a0mm, in 25\u00a0mm, in 30\u00a0mm, in 105\u00a0mm, and in 120\u00a0mm penetrators. DU was used during the mid-1990s in the U.S. to make hand grenades, and land mines, but those applications have been discontinued, according to Alliant Techsystems. The US Navy used DU in its 20\u00a0mm Phalanx CIWS guns, but switched in the late 1990s to armor-piercing tungsten.\nOnly the US and the UK have acknowledged using DU weapons. The Soviet Union and Russia have used DU weaponry since the 3BM-32 Vant, designed for the 125 mm tank cannons. In 2018, TASS reported that Russia was arming some of its T-80 models with 3BM60 Svinets-2 DU rounds. 782,414 DU rounds were fired during the 1991 war in Iraq, mostly by US forces. In a three-week period of conflict in Iraq during 2003, it was estimated that between 1,000 and 2,000 tonnes of depleted uranium munitions were used. More than 300,000 DU rounds were fired during the 2003 war, the vast majority by US troops. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) estimates that between 170 and 1,700\u2009tonnes of depleted uranium was dropped in Iraq by the US military since 2003, whereas the UK reported firing 1.9\u2009tonnes of depleted uranium weapons in Iraq\nIn March 2023, the UK government confirmed it was sending DU rounds to Ukraine along with its Challenger 2 tanks with its 120mm ammunition during the Russian invasion.\nLegal status in weapons.\nIn 1996, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) gave an advisory opinion on the \"legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons\". This made it clear, in paragraphs 54\u201356, that international law on poisonous weapons\u2014the Second Hague Declaration of 29 July 1899, Hague Convention IV of 18 October 1907 and the Geneva Protocol of 17 June 1925\u2014did not cover nuclear weapons, because their prime or exclusive use was not to poison or asphyxiate. This ICJ opinion was about nuclear weapons, but the sentence \"The terms have been understood, in the practice of States, in their ordinary sense as covering weapons whose prime, or even exclusive, effect is to poison or asphyxiate,\" also removes depleted uranium weaponry from coverage by the same treaties as their primary use is not to poison or asphyxiate, but to destroy materiel and kill soldiers through kinetic energy.\nThe Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, passed two motions\u2014the first in 1996 and the second in 1997. They listed weapons of mass destruction, or weapons with indiscriminate effect, or of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering and urged all states to curb the production and the spread of such weapons. Included in the list was weaponry containing depleted uranium. The committee authorized a working paper, in the context of human rights and humanitarian norms, of the weapons.\nThe requested UN working paper was delivered in 2002 by Y. K. J. Yeung Sik Yuen in accordance with Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights resolution 2001/36. He argues that the use of DU in weapons, along with the other weapons listed by the Sub\u2011Commission, may breach one or more of the following treaties: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Charter of the United Nations, the Genocide Convention, the United Nations Convention Against Torture, the Geneva Conventions including Protocol I, the Convention on Conventional Weapons of 1980, and the Chemical Weapons Convention. Yeung Sik Yuen writes in Paragraph 133 under the title \"Legal compliance of weapons containing DU as a new weapon\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Annex II to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 1980 (which became operative on 8 February 1997) classifies DU as a category II nuclear material. Storage and transport rules are set down for that category which indicates that DU is considered sufficiently \"hot\" and dangerous to warrant these protections. But since weapons containing DU are relatively new weapons no treaty exists yet to regulate, limit or prohibit its use. The legality or illegality of DU weapons must therefore be tested by recourse to the general rules governing the use of weapons under humanitarian and human rights law which have already been analysed in Part I of this paper, and more particularly at paragraph 35 which states that parties to Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 have an obligation to ascertain that new weapons do not violate the laws and customs of war or any other international law. As mentioned, the International Court of Justice considers this rule binding customary humanitarian law.\nLouise Arbour, chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia led a committee of staff lawyers to investigate possible treaty prohibitions against the use of DU in weapons. Their findings were that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no specific treaty ban on the use of DU projectiles. There is a developing scientific debate and concern expressed regarding the impact of the use of such projectiles and it is possible that, in future, there will be a consensus view in international legal circles that use of such projectiles violate general principles of the law applicable to use of weapons in armed conflict. No such consensus exists at present.According to the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, depleted uranium does not meet the legal definitions of nuclear, radiological, toxin, chemical, poison or incendiary weapons, as far as DU ammunition is not designed nor intended to kill or wound by its chemical or radiological effects.\nRequests for a moratorium on military use.\nA number of anti-war activists specializing in international humanitarian law have questioned the legality of the continued use of depleted uranium weapons, highlighting that the effects may breach the principle of distinction (between civilians and military personnel). Some states and the International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons, a coalition of more than 155 non-governmental organizations, have asked for a ban on the production and military use of depleted uranium weapons.\nThe European Parliament has repeatedly passed resolutions requesting an immediate moratorium on the further use of depleted uranium ammunition, but France and Britain \u2013 the only European states that are permanent members of the United Nations Security Council\u2014have consistently rejected calls for a ban, maintaining that its use continues to be legal, and that the health risks are unsubstantiated.\nIn 2007, France, Britain, the Netherlands, and the Czech Republic voted against a United Nations General Assembly resolution to hold a debate in 2009 about the effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium. All other European Union nations voted in favour or abstained. The ambassador from the Netherlands explained his negative vote as being due to the reference in the preamble to the resolution \"to potential harmful effects of the use of depleted uranium munitions on human health and the environment [which] cannot, in our view, be supported by conclusive scientific studies conducted by relevant international organizations.\" None of the other permanent members of the United Nations Security Council supported the resolution as China was absent for the vote, Russia abstained and the United States voted against the resolution.\nIn September 2008, and in response to the 2007 General Assembly resolution, the UN Secretary General published the views of 15 states alongside those of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and World Health Organization (WHO). The IAEA and WHO evidence differed little from previous statements on the issue. The report was largely split between states concerned about depleted uranium's use, such as Finland, Cuba, Japan, Serbia, Argentina, and predominantly NATO members, who do not consider the use of depleted uranium munitions problematic.\nIn December 2008, 141 states supported a resolution requesting that three UN agencies: United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), WHO and IAEA update their research on the impact of uranium munitions by late 2010\u2014to coincide with the General Assembly's 65th Session, four voted against, 34 abstained and 13 were absent. As before Britain and France voted against the resolution. All other European Union nations voted in favour or abstained: the Netherlands, which voted against a resolution in 2007, voted in favour, as did Finland and Norway, both of which had abstained in 2007, while the Czech Republic, which voted against the resolution in 2007, abstained. The two other states that voted against the resolution were Israel and the United States (both of which voted against in 2007), while as before China was absent for the vote, and Russia abstained.\nIn June 2009, Belgium became the first country in the world to ban: \"inert ammunition and armour that contains depleted uranium or any other industrially manufactured uranium.\" The move followed a unanimous parliamentary vote on the issue on 22 March 2007. The text of the 2007 law allowed for two years to pass until it came into force. In April 2009, the Belgian Senate voted unanimously to restrict investments by Belgian banks into the manufacturers of depleted uranium weapons.\nIn September 2009, the Latin American Parliament passed a resolution calling for a regional moratorium on the use, production and procurement of uranium weapons. It also called on the Parlatino's members to work towards an international uranium weapons treaty.\nIn November 2010 the Irish Senate passed a bill seeking to outlaw depleted uranium weapons, but it lapsed before approval by the D\u00e1il.\nIn December 2010, 148 states supported a United Nations' General Assembly resolution calling for the states that use depleted uranium weapons in conflict to reveal where the weapons have been fired when asked to do so by the country upon whose territory they have been used.\nIn April 2011, the Congress of Costa Rica passed a law prohibiting uranium weapons in its territories, becoming the second country in the world to do so.\nIn December 2012, 155 states supported a United Nations' General Assembly resolution that recalled that, because of the ongoing uncertainties over the long-term environmental impacts of depleted uranium identified by the United Nations Environment Programme, states should adopt a precautionary approach to its use.\nIn December 2014, 150 states supported a United Nations' General Assembly resolution encouraging states to provide assistance to states affected by the use of depleted uranium weapons, in particular in identifying and managing contaminated sites and material. In contrast to the previous biennial resolutions, Germany moved to an abstention from supporting to the resolutions. Prior to the vote, in a report to the United Nations Secretary General requested by 2012's resolution published in June 2014, Iraq had called for a global treaty ban on depleted uranium weapons.\nCivilian applications.\nDepleted uranium has a very high density and is primarily used as shielding material for other radioactive material, and as ballast. Examples include sailboat keels, as counterweights and as shielding in industrial radiography cameras.\nEnergy.\nMost civilian nuclear reactors, as well as all naval reactors, require fuel containing concentrated 235U, and production of that fuel generates depleted uranium as residue. Some power-generating reactors design are able to use unenriched fuel, for example the pressurized heavy-water reactors such as the CANDU design. However, as of 2013, about 10% of those built use that technology. Travelling wave reactors are a proposed type of reactor which can use depleted uranium as fuel.\nRadiation shielding.\nDepleted uranium is the best radiation shielding by weight, due to the high atomic weight of the uranium atoms; materials are more able to block radioactivity the higher their atomic weight, and uranium is one of the heaviest natural elements. Lead, the heaviest stable element, is the most common low-cost alternative, but a lead shield needs to be about three times as thick as a DU shield to provide the equivalent protection. Uranium also has by far a higher melting point , and its tensile strength is similar to that of steel.\nIndustrial radiography cameras include a very high activity gamma radiation source (typically Ir-192 with an activity above 10 TBq). Depleted uranium is often used in the cameras as a shield to protect individuals from the gamma source. Typically, the uranium shield is supported and enclosed in polyurethane foam for thermal, mechanical and oxidation protection.\nColoring in consumer products.\nConsumer product uses have included incorporation into dental porcelain, used for false teeth to simulate the fluorescence of natural teeth, and uranium-bearing reagents used in chemistry laboratories (e.g. uranyl acetate, used in analytical chemistry and as a stain in electron microscopy). Uranium (both depleted uranium and natural uranium) was widely used as a coloring matter for porcelain and glass in the 19th and early-to-mid-20th century. The practice was largely discontinued in the late 20th century. In 1999, concentrations of 10% depleted uranium were being used in \"jaune no.17\" a yellow enamel powder that was being produced in France by Cristallerie de Saint-Paul, a manufacturer of enamel pigments. The depleted uranium used in the powder was sold by Cog\u00e9ma's Pierrelatte facility. In February 2000, Cogema discontinued the sale of depleted uranium to producers of enamel and glass.\nTrim weights in aircraft.\nAircraft that contain depleted uranium trim weights for stabilizing wings and control surfaces (such as the Boeing 747\u2013100) may contain between of DU. This application is controversial because the DU might enter the environment if the aircraft crashes. The metal can also oxidize to a fine powder in a fire. Its use has been phased out in many newer aircraft. Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas discontinued using DU counterweights in the 1980s. Depleted uranium was released during the crash of El Al Flight 1862 on 4 October 1992, in which was lost, but a case study concluded that there was no evidence to link depleted uranium from the plane to any health problems. DU counterweights manufactured with cadmium plating are considered non-hazardous as long as the plating is intact.\nUS NRC general license.\nUS Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations at https:// establish a general license for the use of depleted uranium contained in industrial products or devices for mass-volume applications. This general license allows anyone to possess or use depleted uranium for authorized purposes. Generally, a registration form is required, along with a commitment to not abandon the material. Agreement states may have similar, or more stringent, regulations.\nSailboat keel.\n\"Pen Duick VI\", a boat designed by Andr\u00e9 Mauric and used for racing, was equipped with a keel of depleted uranium. The benefit is that, because of the very high density of uranium, the keel could be thinner for a given weight, and so have less resistance than a normal keel. It was later replaced by a standard lead keel.\nSampling calorimeters for detectors in high-energy particle physics.\nDepleted uranium has been used in a number of sampling calorimeters (such as in the D0 and ZEUS detectors) because of its high density and natural radioactivity.\nHealth considerations.\nNormal functioning of the kidney, brain, liver, heart, and numerous other systems can be affected by uranium exposure because uranium is a toxic metal, although less toxic than other heavy metals, such as arsenic and mercury. It is weakly radioactive and is 'persistently' so because of its very long half-life. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry states that: \"to be exposed to radiation from uranium, you have to eat, drink, or breathe it, or get it on your skin.\" If DU particles do enter an individual, the type of danger presented\u2014toxic vs. radiological\u2014and the organ most likely to be affected depend on the solubility of the particles.\nIn military conflicts involving DU munitions, the major concern is inhalation of DU particles in aerosols arising from the impacts of DU-enhanced projectiles with their targets. When depleted uranium munitions penetrate armor or burn, they create depleted uranium oxides in the form of dust that can be inhaled or contaminate wounds. The Institute of Nuclear Technology-Radiation Protection of Attiki, Greece, has noted that \"the aerosol produced during impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites or can be inhaled by civilians and military personnel\". The use of DU in incendiary ammunition is controversial because of potential adverse health effects and its release into the environment.\nThe U.S. Department of Defense claims that no human cancer of any type has been seen as a result of exposure to either natural or depleted uranium. Militaries have long had risk-reduction procedures for their troops to follow, and studies are in consistent agreement that veterans who used DU-enhanced munitions have not suffered, so far, from an increased risk of cancer (see the Gulf War and Balkans sections below). The effects of DU on civilian populations are, however, a topic of intense and ongoing controversy.\nAs early as 1997, British Army doctors warned the Ministry of Defence that exposure to depleted uranium increased the risk of developing lung, lymph and brain cancer, and recommended a series of safety precautions. According to a report issued summarizing the advice of the doctors, \"Inhalation of insoluble uranium dioxide dust will lead to accumulation in the lungs with very slow clearance\u2014if any. ... Although chemical toxicity is low, there may be localised radiation damage of the lung leading to cancer.\" The report warns that \"All personnel ... should be aware that uranium dust inhalation carries a long-term risk ... [the dust] has been shown to increase the risks of developing lung, lymph and brain cancers.\"\nIn 2003, the Royal Society called, again, for urgent attention to be paid to the possible health and environmental impact of depleted uranium, and added its backing to the United Nations Environment Programme's call for a scientific assessment of sites struck with depleted uranium. In early 2004, the UK Pensions Appeal Tribunal Service attributed birth defect claims from a February 1991 Gulf War combat veteran to depleted uranium poisoning. A 2005 epidemiology review concluded: \"In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU.\" Studies using cultured cells and laboratory rodents continue to suggest the possibility of leukemogenic, genetic, reproductive, and neurological effects from chronic exposure.\nChemical toxicity.\nThe chemical toxicity of depleted uranium is identical to that of natural uranium and about a million times greater \"in vivo\" than DU's radiological hazard, with the kidney considered to be the main target organ. Health effects of DU are determined by factors such as the extent of exposure and whether it was internal or external. Three main pathways exist by which internalization of uranium may occur: inhalation, ingestion, and embedded fragments or shrapnel contamination. Properties such as phase (e.g. particulate or gaseous), oxidation state (e.g. metallic or ceramic), and the solubility of uranium and its compounds influence their absorption, distribution, translocation, elimination and the resulting toxicity. For example, metallic uranium is less toxic compared to hexavalent uranium(VI) uranyl compounds such as uranium trioxide ().\nUranium is pyrophoric when finely divided. It will corrode under the influence of air and water producing insoluble uranium(IV) and soluble uranium(VI) salts. Soluble uranium salts are toxic. Uranium slowly accumulates in several organs, such as the liver, spleen, and kidneys. The World Health Organization has established a daily \"tolerated intake\" of soluble uranium salts for the general public of body weight, or for a adult.\nEpidemiological studies and toxicological tests on laboratory animals point to it as being immunotoxic, teratogenic, neurotoxic, with carcinogenic and leukemogenic potential. A 2005 report by epidemiologists concluded: \"the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU.\"\nEarly studies of depleted uranium aerosol exposure assumed that uranium combustion product particles would quickly settle out of the air and thus could not affect populations more than a few kilometers from target areas, and that such particles, if inhaled, would remain undissolved in the lung for a great length of time and thus could be detected in urine. Violently burning uranium droplets produce a gaseous vapor comprising about half of the uranium in their original mass. Uranyl ion contamination in uranium oxides has been detected in the residue of DU munitions fires.\nApproximately of natural uranium, on average, exist in the human body as a result of normal intake of water, food and air. Most is in the skeleton. The biochemistry of depleted uranium is the same as natural uranium.\nRadiological hazards.\nAvailable evidence suggests that the radiation risk is small relative to the chemical hazard. The primary radiation from pure depleted uranium is due to alpha particles, which do not travel far through air and do not penetrate clothing and skin. However, as uranium-238 decays into its daughter nuclei from its decay series, pure depleted uranium will generate thorium-234 (half-life of ~24 days) followed by protactinium-234 (half life of ~7 hours), which emit more penetrating beta particles at almost the same rate as the uranium emits alpha particles. Total activity then settles to a plateau as the more stable isotope uranium-234 accumulates. A quasi-steady state of roughly 3 times the initial activity is reached within months. Once an equilibrium level of uranium-234 (and its 11 shorter-lived daughter nuclei) has built up after about a million years there will be another radiation plateau at about 14 times the initial activity, finally reaching levels comparable to natural uranium.\nAccording to the World Health Organization, radiation dose from DU would be about 60% of that from purified natural uranium with the same mass; the radiological dangers are lower due to its longer half-life and the removal of the more radioactive isotopes.\nSurveying the veteran-related evidence pertaining to the Gulf War, a 2001 editorial in the \"BMJ\" concluded that it was not possible to justify claims of radiation-induced lung cancer and leukaemia in veterans of that conflict. While agreeing with the editorial's conclusion, a reply noted that its finding in the negative was guaranteed, given that \"global dose estimates or results of mathematical modelling are too inaccurate to be used as dose values for an individual veteran\", and that, as of April 2001, no practical method of measuring the expected small doses that each individual veteran would receive had been suggested. The author of the reply, a radiation scientist, went on to suggest a method that had been used several times before, including after the 1986 Chernobyl accident. Despite the widespread use of DU in the Iraq War, at least a year after the conflict began, testing of UK troops was still only in the discussion phase.\nThe Royal Society Working Group on the Health Hazards of Depleted Uranium Munitions (RSDUWG) concluded in 2002 that there were \"very low\" health risks associated with the use of depleted uranium, though it also ventured that, \"[i]n extreme conditions and under worst-case assumptions\" lung and kidney damage could occur, and that in \"worst-case scenarios high local levels of uranium could occur in food or water that could have adverse effects on the kidney\". In 2003, the Royal Society issued another urgent call to investigate the actual health and environmental impact of depleted uranium. The same year, a cohort study of Gulf War veterans found no elevated risks of cancer generally, nor of any specific cancers in particular, though recommended follow up studies.\nStudies indicating negligible effects.\nStudies in 2005 and earlier have concluded that DU ammunition has no measurable detrimental health effects.\nA 1999 literature review conducted by the Rand Corporation stated: \"No evidence is documented in the literature of cancer or any other negative health effect related to the radiation received from exposure to depleted or natural uranium, whether inhaled or ingested, even at very high doses,\" and a RAND report authored by the U.S. Defense department undersecretary charged with evaluating DU hazards considered the debate to be more political than scientific.\nA 2001 oncology study concluded that \"the present scientific consensus is that DU exposure to humans, in locations where DU ammunition was deployed, is very unlikely to give rise to cancer induction\". Former NATO Secretary General Lord Robertson stated in 2001 that \"the existing medical consensus is clear. The hazard from depleted uranium is both very limited, and limited to very specific circumstances\".\nA 2002 study from the Australian defense ministry concluded that \"there has been no established increase in mortality or morbidity in workers exposed to uranium in uranium processing industries... studies of Gulf War veterans show that, in those who have retained fragments of depleted uranium following combat related injury, it has been possible to detect elevated urinary uranium levels, but no kidney toxicity or other adverse health effects related to depleted uranium after a decade of follow-up.\" Pier Roberto Danesi, then-director of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Seibersdorf +Laboratory, stated in 2002 that \"There is a consensus now that DU does not represent a health threat\".\nThe IAEA reported in 2003 that, \"based on credible scientific evidence, there is no proven link between DU exposure and increases in human cancers or other significant health or environmental impacts,\" although \"Like other heavy metals, DU is potentially poisonous. In sufficient amounts, if DU is ingested or inhaled it can be harmful because of its chemical toxicity. High concentration could cause kidney damage.\" The IAEA concluded that, while depleted uranium is a potential carcinogen, there is no evidence that it has been carcinogenic in humans.\nA 2005 study by the U.S. Sandia National Laboratories' Al Marshall used mathematical models to analyze potential health effects associated with accidental exposure to depleted uranium during the 1991 Gulf War. Marshall's study concluded that the reports of cancer risks from DU exposure are not supported by his analysis nor by veteran medical statistics. Marshall also examined possible genetic effects due to radiation from depleted uranium. Chemical effects, including potential reproductive issues, associated with depleted uranium exposure were discussed in some detail in a subsequent journal paper.\nGulf War syndrome and soldier complaints.\nSince 1991, the year the Gulf War ended, veterans and their families voiced concern about subsequent health problems. In 1999, an assessment of the first 1,000 veterans involved in the Ministry of Defence's Gulf War medical assessment programme found \"no evidence\" of a single illness, physical or mental, that would explain the pattern of symptoms observed in the group. In 1999, MEDACT petitioned for the WHO to conduct an investigation into illnesses in veterans and Iraqi civilians. A major 2006 review of peer-reviewed literature by a US Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee concluded that, \"[b]ecause the symptoms vary greatly among individuals\", they do not point to a syndrome unique to Gulf War veterans, though their report conceded that the lack of objective pre-deployment health data meant definitive conclusions were effectively impossible.\nSimon Wessely praised the IOM's review, and noted that, despite its central conclusion that no novel syndrome existed, its other findings made it \"equally clear that service in the Gulf war did aversely affect health in some personnel\". Aside from the lack of baseline data to guide analysis of the veterans' postwar health, because no detailed health screening was carried out when the veterans entered service, another major stumbling block with some studies, like the thousand-veteran one, is that the subjects are self-selected, rather than a random sample, making general conclusions impossible.\nIncreased rates of immune system disorders and other wide-ranging symptoms, including chronic pain, fatigue and memory loss, have been reported in over one quarter of combat veterans of the 1991 Gulf War. Combustion products from depleted uranium munitions are being considered as one of the potential causes by the Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses, as DU was used in 30\u00a0mm and 25\u00a0mm cannon rounds on a large scale for the first time in the Gulf War. Veterans of the conflicts in the Persian Gulf, Bosnia and Kosovo have been found to have up to 14 times the usual level of chromosome abnormalities in their genes. Serum-soluble genotoxic teratogens produce congenital disorders, and in white blood cells causes immune system damage.\nA 2005 epidemiology review concluded: \"In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU.\" A 2001 study of 15,000 February 1991 U.S. Gulf War combat veterans and 15,000 control veterans found that the Gulf War veterans were 1.8 (fathers) to 2.8 (mothers) times as likely to have children with birth defects. After examination of children's medical records two years later, the birth defect rate increased by more than 20%:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dr. Kang found that male Gulf War veterans reported having infants with likely birth defects at twice the rate of non-veterans. Furthermore, female Gulf War veterans were almost three times more likely to report children with birth defects than their non-Gulf counterparts. The numbers changed somewhat with medical records verification. However, Dr. Kang and his colleagues concluded that the risk of birth defects in children of deployed male veterans still was about 2.2 times that of non-deployed veterans.\nIn early 2004, the UK Pensions Appeal Tribunal Service attributed birth defect claims from a February 1991 Gulf War combat veteran to depleted uranium poisoning. Looking at the risk of children of UK Gulf War veterans suffering genetic diseases such as congenital malformations, commonly called \"birth defects\", one study found that the overall risk of any malformation was 50% higher in Gulf War veterans as compared to other veterans.\nThe U.S. Army has commissioned ongoing research into potential risks of depleted uranium and other projectile weapon materials like tungsten, which the U.S. Navy has used in place of DU since 1993. Studies by the U.S. Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute conclude that moderate exposures to either depleted uranium or uranium present a significant toxicological threat.\nIn 2003, Professor Brian Spratt FRS, chairman of the Royal Society's working group on depleted uranium, said: \"The question of who carries out the initial monitoring and clean-up is a political rather than scientific question,\" and \"the coalition needs to acknowledge that depleted uranium is a potential hazard and make in-roads into tackling it by being open about where and how much depleted uranium has been deployed.\"\nA 2008 review of all relevant articles appearing in the peer-reviewed journals on MEDLINE through to the end of 2007, including multiple cohort studies of veterans, found no consistent evidence of excess risks of neoplasms that could have some link to DU, and that \"[t]he overall incidence of cancers is not increased in the cohort studies of Gulf war and Balkans veterans\".\nOne particular subgroup of veterans that may be at higher risk comprises those who have internally retained fragments of DU from shrapnel wounds. A laboratory study on rats produced by the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute showed that, after a study period of 6 months, rats treated with depleted uranium coming from implanted pellets, comparable to the average levels in the urine of Desert Storm veterans with retained DU fragments, had developed a significant tendency to lose weight with respect to the control group.\nSubstantial amounts of uranium were accumulating in their brains and central nervous systems, and showed a significant reduction of neuronal activity in the hippocampus in response to external stimuli. The conclusions of the study show that brain damage from chronic uranium intoxication is possible at lower doses than previously thought. Results from computer-based neurocognitive tests performed in 1997 showed an association between uranium in the urine and \"problematic performance on automated tests assessing performance efficiency and accuracy.\"\nA 2021 report concluded that uranium from exploding munitions did not lead to Gulf War illness (GWI) in veterans deployed in the 1991 Persian Gulf War. The study found no differences in secretion of uranium isotopic ratios from those meeting the standard-case definitions of GWI and control veterans without GWI. The researchers say that the most likely remaining causes for GWI are widespread low-level exposure to sarin nerve gas released by the destruction of Iraqi chemical weapons storage facilities in January 1991. This was possibly compounded by the use of anti-nerve agent medications and the use of pesticides to prevent insect-borne diseases in coalition forces.\nIraqi population.\nSince 2001, medical personnel working for the Iraqi state health service controlled by Saddam Hussein at the Basra hospital in southern Iraq have reported a sharp increase in the incidence of child leukemia and genetic malformation among babies born in the decade following the Gulf War. Iraqi doctors attributed these malformations to possible long-term effects of DU, an opinion that was echoed by several newspapers. In 2004, Iraq had the highest mortality rate due to leukemia of any country. In 2003, the Royal Society called for Western militaries to disclose where and how much DU they had used in Iraq so that rigorous, and hopefully conclusive, studies could be undertaken in affected areas. The International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons (ICBUW) likewise urged that an epidemiological study be made in the Basra region, as requested by Iraqi doctors, but no peer-reviewed study has yet been undertaken in Basra.\nA medical survey, \"Cancer, Infant Mortality and Birth Sex Ratio in Fallujah, Iraq 2005\u20132009\" published in July 2010, states that the \"...increases in cancer and birth defects...are alarmingly high\" and that infant mortality 2009/2010 has reached 13.6%. The group compares the dramatic increase, five years after wartime exposure in 2004, with the lymphoma that Italian peacekeepers developed after the Balkan wars and the increased cancer risk in certain parts of Sweden because of the Chernobyl fallout. The origin and time of introduction of the carcinogenic agent causing the genetic stress was expected to be addressed by the group in a separate report. The report mentions depleted uranium as one \"potentially relevant exposure\" but makes no conclusions on the source.\nFour studies investigating links between the use of depleted uranium by Coalition forces during the Second Battle of Fallujah were conducted in 2012, one of which described the people of Fallujah as having \"the highest rate of genetic damage in any population ever studied.\" In response to these studies, Ross Caputi, a former U.S. Marine who participated in the battle, wrote a Guardian newspaper article calling for the United States government to conduct its own study into the matter.\nThe Balkans.\nIn 2001, the World Health Organization reported that data from Kosovo was inconclusive and called for further studies. That same year, governments of several European countries, particularly Italy, reported an increase in illnesses and developments of cancers among veterans that served in Balkan peacekeeping missions.\nA 2003 study by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in Bosnia and Herzegovina stated that low levels of contaminant were found in drinking water and air particulate at DU penetrator impact points. The levels were stated as not a cause for alarm. Yet, Pekka Haavisto, chairman of the UNEP DU projects stated, \"The findings of this study stress again the importance of appropriate clean-up and civil protection measures in a post-conflict situation.\"\nA team of Italian scientists from the University of Siena reported in 2005 that, although DU was \"clearly\" added to the soil in the study area, \"the phenomenon was very limited spatially and the total uranium concentrations fell within the natural range of the element in soils. Moreover, the absolute uranium concentrations indicate that there was no contamination of the earthworm species studied.\"\nThough a more comprehensive assessment is possible, a 2011 update on a cancer scare regarding Italian soldiers who had served in the Balkans found lower than expected incidence rates for all cancers, a finding \"consistent with lacking evidence of an increased cancer incidence among troops of other countries deployed in the areas of Iraq, Bosnia, and Kosovo, where armour-penetrating depleted uranium shells have been used.\"\nIn 2018, Serbia set up a commission of inquiry into the consequences of the use of depleted uranium during the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in southern Serbia and its link to the rise of diseases and tumors among citizens, particularly in young children born after 1999. Zoran Radovanovic, an epidemiologist and the chairman of the Serbian Medical Association's ethics committee, denied that there had been a rise in cancer cases in areas where bombings had taken place. He continued by saying that Serbians frequently worry about a cancer epidemic that does not exist. NATO has repeatedly claimed that depleted uranium found in the ammunition used in the 1999 bombardments cannot be linked to adverse health effects.\nOkinawa, Japan.\nBetween 1995 and 1996, U.S. Marine AV-8B Harrier jets accidentally fired more than 1,500 DU rounds at the Tori Shima gunnery range. The military did not notify the Japanese government until January 1997.\nSardinia, Italy.\nDepleted uranium has been named as a possible contributing factor to a high incidence of birth defects and cancer near the Salto di Quirra weapons testing range on the Italian island of Sardinia.\nAfghan War.\nThe Canadian Uranium Medical Research Centre obtained urine samples from bombed civilian areas in Jalalabad that showed concentrations of of undepleted uranium, far higher than the typical concentration in the British population of \u2248.\nRemscheid, Germany.\nOn 8 December 1988, an A-10 Thunderbolt II attack jet of the United States Air Force crashed onto a residential area in the city of Remscheid, West Germany. The aircraft crashed into the upper floor of an apartment complex. In addition to the pilot, five people were killed. Fifty others were injured, many of them seriously. When the number of cancer cases in the vicinity of the accident rose disproportionately in the years after, suspicion rose that the depleted uranium ballast in the jet may have been the cause.\nThis was denied by the US military. However, 70 tons of top soil from the accident scene was removed and taken away to a depot. Film material taken during the top-soil removal show radiation warning signs. 120 residents and rescue workers reported skin diseases. Medical diagnosis concluded that these symptoms related to toxic irritative dermatitis.\nAtmospheric contamination.\nElevated radiation levels consistent with very low level atmospheric depleted uranium contamination have been found in air samples taken by the UK Atomic Weapons Establishment at several monitoring sites in Britain. These elevated readings appear to coincide with Operation Anaconda in Afghanistan, and the Shock and Awe bombing campaign at the start of the Second Gulf War.\nOther contamination cases.\nOn 4 October 1992, an El Al Boeing 747-F cargo aircraft (Flight 1862) crashed into an apartment building in Amsterdam, Netherlands. Local residents and rescue workers complained of various unexplained health issues, which were being attributed to the release of hazardous materials during the crash and subsequent fires. Authorities conducted an epidemiological study in 2000 of those believed to be affected by the accident. The study concluded that there was no evidence to link depleted uranium (used as counterbalance weights on the elevators of the plane) to any of the reported health complaints.\nThere have been accidents involving uranium hexafluoride in the United States, including one in which 32 workers were exposed to a cloud of and its reaction products in 1986 at a Gore, Oklahoma, commercial uranium conversion facility. One person died; while a few workers with higher exposure experienced short-term kidney damage (e.g., protein in the urine), none of them showed lasting damage from the exposure to uranium.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nScientific bodies"}
{"id": "37515", "revid": "48411851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37515", "title": "Shaped charge", "text": "Explosive with focused effect\nA shaped charge, commonly also hollow charge if shaped with a cavity, is an explosive charge shaped to focus the effect of the explosive's energy. Different types of shaped charges are used for various purposes such as cutting and forming metal, initiating nuclear weapons, penetrating armor, or perforating wells in the oil and gas industry.\nA typical modern shaped charge, with a metal liner on the charge cavity, can penetrate armor steel to a depth of seven or more times the diameter of the charge (charge diameters, CD), though depths of 10\u00a0CD and above have been achieved. Contrary to a misconception, possibly resulting from the acronym \"HEAT\" (high-explosive anti-tank), the shaped charge does not depend in any way on heating or melting for its effectiveness; that is, the jet from a shaped charge does not melt its way through armor, as its effect is purely kinetic in nature; however, the process creates significant heat and often has a significant secondary incendiary effect \"after\" penetration.\nHow it works.\nThe shock wave from an explosive is perpendicular to the surface of the explosive. The inside of a cone focuses and concentrates the shock wave to points along the axis of the cone. As the explosion progresses from the point of detonation, the concentrated shock wave progresses along the axis of the cone, gathering energy along the way.\nThe addition of a liner increases the effect of the explosion by providing a heavy mass that is ejected as a high velocity jet from the cone.\nMunroe effect.\nThe Munroe or Neumann effect is the focusing of blast energy by a hollow or void cut on a surface of an explosive. The earliest mention of hollow charges were mentioned in 1792. Franz Xaver von Baader (1765\u20131841) was a German mining engineer at that time; in a mining journal, he advocated a conical space at the forward end of a blasting charge to increase the explosive's effect and thereby save powder. About 1805, the idea was adopted, for a time, in Norway and in the mines of the Harz mountains of Germany, although the only available explosive at the time was gunpowder, which is not a high explosive and hence incapable of producing the shock wave that the shaped-charge effect requires.\nThe first true hollow charge effect was achieved in 1883, by Max von Foerster (1845\u20131905), chief of the nitrocellulose factory of Wolff &amp; Co. in Walsrode, Germany.\nBy 1886, Gustav Bloem of D\u00fcsseldorf, Germany, had filed https:// for hemispherical cavity metal detonators to concentrate the effect of the explosion in an axial direction. The Munroe effect is named after Charles E. Munroe, who discovered it in 1888. As a civilian chemist working at the U.S. Naval Torpedo Station at Newport, Rhode Island, he noticed that when a block of explosive guncotton with the manufacturer's name stamped into it was detonated next to a metal plate, the lettering was cut into the plate. Conversely, if letters were raised in relief above the surface of the explosive, then the letters on the plate would also be raised above its surface. In 1894, Munroe constructed his first crude shaped charge:\nAmong the experiments made... was one upon a safe twenty-nine inches cube, with walls four inches and three quarters thick, made up of plates of iron and steel... When a hollow charge of dynamite nine pounds and a half in weight and untamped was detonated on it, a hole three inches in diameter was blown clear through the wall\u00a0... The hollow cartridge was made by tying the sticks of dynamite around a tin can, the open mouth of the latter being placed downward.\nAlthough Munroe's experiment with the shaped charge was widely publicized in 1900 in \"Popular Science Monthly\", the importance of the tin can \"liner\" of the hollow charge remained unrecognized for another 44 years. Part of that 1900 article was reprinted in the February 1945 issue of \"Popular Science\", describing how shaped-charge warheads worked. It was this article that at last revealed to the general public how the United States Army \"bazooka\" actually worked against armored vehicles during WWII.\nIn 1910, Egon Neumann of Germany discovered that a block of TNT, which would normally dent a steel plate, punched a hole through it if the explosive had a conical indentation. The military usefulness of Munroe's and Neumann's work was unappreciated for a long time. Between the world wars, academics in several countries\u00a0\u2013 Myron Yakovlevich Sukharevskii (\u041c\u0438\u0440\u043e\u043d \u042f\u043a\u043e\u0432\u043b\u0435\u0432\u0438\u0447 \u0421\u0443\u0445\u0430\u0440\u0435\u0432\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439) in the Soviet Union, William H. Payment and Donald Whitley Woodhead in Britain, and Robert Williams Wood in the U.S.\u00a0\u2013 recognized that projectiles could form during explosions.\nIn 1932 Franz Rudolf Thomanek, a student of physics at Vienna's \"Technische Hochschule\", conceived an anti-tank round that was based on the hollow charge effect. When the Austrian government showed no interest in pursuing the idea, Thomanek moved to Berlin's \"Technische Hochschule\", where he continued his studies under the ballistics expert Carl Julius Cranz. There in 1935, he and Hellmuth von Huttern developed a prototype anti-tank round. Although the weapon's performance proved disappointing, Thomanek continued his developmental work, collaborating with Hubert Schardin at the \"Waffeninstitut der Luftwaffe\" (Air Force Weapons Institute) in Braunschweig.\nBy 1937, Schardin believed that hollow-charge effects were due to the interactions of shock waves. It was during the testing of this idea that, on February 4, 1938, Thomanek conceived the shaped-charge explosive (or \"Hohlladungs-Auskleidungseffekt\" (hollow-charge liner effect)). (It was Gustav Adolf Thomer who in 1938 first visualized, by flash radiography, the metallic jet produced by a shaped-charge explosion.) Meanwhile, Henry Hans Mohaupt, a chemical engineer in Switzerland, had independently developed a shaped-charge munition in 1935, which was demonstrated to the Swiss, French, British, and U.S. militaries.\nDuring World War II, shaped-charge munitions were developed by Germany (Panzerschreck, Panzerfaust, Panzerwurfmine, Mistel), Britain (No. 68 AT grenade, PIAT, Beehive cratering charge), the Soviet Union (RPG-43, RPG-6), the U.S. (M9 rifle grenade, bazooka), and Italy (\"Effetto Pronto Speciale\" shells for various artillery pieces). The development of shaped charges revolutionized anti-tank warfare. Tanks faced a serious vulnerability from a weapon that could be carried by an infantryman or aircraft.\nOne of the earliest uses of shaped charges was by German glider-borne troops against the Belgian Fort Eben-Emael in 1940. These demolition charges \u2013 developed by Dr. Wuelfken of the German Ordnance Office \u2013 were \"unlined\" explosive charges and did not produce a metal jet like the modern HEAT warheads.\nDue to the lack of metal liner they shook the turrets but they did not destroy them, and other airborne troops were forced to climb on the turrets and smash the gun barrels.\nApplications.\nModern military.\nThe common term in military terminology for shaped-charge warheads is high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) warhead. HEAT warheads are frequently used in anti-tank guided missiles, unguided rockets, gun-fired projectiles (both spun (spin stabilized) and unspun), rifle grenades, land mines, bomblets, torpedoes, and various other weapons.\nProtection.\nDuring World War II, the precision of the charge's construction and its detonation mode were both inferior to modern warheads. This lower precision caused the jet to curve and to break up at an earlier time and hence at a shorter distance. The resulting dispersion decreased the penetration depth for a given cone diameter and also shortened the optimum standoff distance. Since the charges were less effective at larger standoffs, side and turret skirts (known as \"Sch\u00fcrzen\") fitted to some German tanks to protect against ordinary anti-tank rifles were found to give the jet room to disperse and hence also reduce HEAT penetration.\nThe use of add-on spaced armor skirts on armored vehicles may have the opposite effect and \"increase\" the penetration of shaped-charge warheads in some cases. Due to constraints in the length of the projectile/missile, the built-in stand-off on many warheads is less than the optimum distance. In such cases, the skirting effectively increases the distance between the armor and the target, and the warhead detonates closer to its optimum standoff. Skirting should not be confused with cage armor which is primarily used to damage the fusing system of RPG-7 projectiles, but can also cause a HEAT projectile to pitch up or down on impact, lengthening the penetration path for the shaped charge's penetration stream. If the nose probe strikes one of the cage armor slats, the warhead will function as normal.\nNon-military.\nIn non-military applications shaped charges are used in explosive demolition of buildings and structures, in particular for cutting through metal piles, columns and beams and for boring holes. In steelmaking, small shaped charges are often used to pierce taps that have become plugged with slag. They are also used in quarrying, breaking up ice, breaking log jams, felling trees, and drilling post holes.\nShaped charges are used most extensively in the petroleum and natural gas industries, in particular in the completion of oil and gas wells, in which they are detonated to perforate the metal casing of the well at intervals to admit the influx of oil and gas. Another use in the industry is to put out oil and gas fires by depriving the fire of oxygen.\nA shaped charge was used on the Hayabusa2 mission on asteroid 162173 Ryugu. The spacecraft dropped the explosive device onto the asteroid and detonated it with the spacecraft behind cover. The detonation dug a crater about 10 meters wide, to provide access to a pristine sample of the asteroid.\nFunction.\nA typical device consists of a solid cylinder of explosive with a metal-lined conical hollow in one end and a central detonator, array of detonators, or detonation wave guide at the other end. Explosive energy is released directly away from (normal to) the surface of an explosive, so shaping the explosive will concentrate the explosive energy in the void. If the hollow is properly shaped, usually conically, the enormous pressure generated by the detonation of the explosive drives the liner in the hollow cavity inward to collapse upon its central axis.\nThe resulting collision forms and projects a high-velocity jet of metal particles forward along the axis. Most of the jet material originates from the innermost part of the liner, a layer of about 10% to 20% of the thickness. The rest of the liner forms a slower-moving slug of material, which, because of its appearance, is sometimes called a \"carrot\".\nBecause of the variation along the liner in its collapse velocity, the jet's velocity also varies along its length, decreasing from the front. This variation in jet velocity stretches it and eventually leads to its break-up into particles. Over time, the particles tend to fall out of alignment, which reduces the depth of penetration at long standoffs.\nAt the apex of the cone, which forms the very front of the jet, the liner does not have time to be fully accelerated before it forms its part of the jet. This results in a small part of the jet being projected at a lower velocity than the jet formed later behind it. As a result, the initial parts of the jet coalesce to form a pronounced wider tip portion.\nMost of the jet travels at hypersonic speed. The tip moves at 7 to 14\u00a0km/s, the jet tail at a lower velocity (1 to 3\u00a0km/s), and the slug at a still lower velocity (less than 1\u00a0km/s). The exact velocities depend on the charge's configuration and confinement, explosive type, materials used, and the explosive-initiation mode. At typical velocities, the penetration process generates such enormous pressures that it may be considered hydrodynamic; to a good approximation, the jet and armor may be treated as inviscid, compressible fluids (see, for example,), with their material strengths ignored.\nA recent technique using magnetic diffusion analysis showed that the temperature of the outer 50% by volume of a copper jet tip while in flight was between 1100K and 1200K, much closer to the melting point of copper (1358 K) than previously assumed. This temperature is consistent with a hydrodynamic calculation that simulated the entire experiment. In comparison, two-color radiometry measurements from the late 1970s indicate lower temperatures for various shaped-charge liner material, cone construction and type of explosive filler.\nA Comp-B loaded shaped charge with a copper liner and pointed cone apex had a jet tip temperature ranging from 668 K to 863 K over a five shot sampling. Octol-loaded charges with a rounded cone apex generally had higher surface temperatures with an average of 810 K, and the temperature of a tin-lead liner with Comp-B fill averaged 842 K. While the tin-lead jet was determined to be liquid, the copper jets are well below the melting point of copper. However, these temperatures are not completely consistent with evidence that soft recovered copper jet particles show signs of melting at the core while the outer portion remains solid and cannot be equated with bulk temperature.\nThe location of the charge relative to its target is critical for optimum penetration for two reasons. If the charge is detonated too close there is not enough time for the jet to fully develop. But the jet disintegrates and disperses after a relatively short distance, usually well under two meters. At such standoffs, it breaks into particles which tend to tumble and drift off the axis of penetration, so that the successive particles tend to widen rather than deepen the hole. At very long standoffs, velocity is lost to air drag, further degrading penetration.\nThe key to the effectiveness of the hollow charge is its diameter. As the penetration continues through the target, the width of the hole decreases leading to a characteristic \"fist to finger\" action, where the size of the eventual \"finger\" is based on the size of the original \"fist\". In general, shaped charges can penetrate a steel plate as thick as 150% to 700% of their diameter, depending on the charge quality. The figure is for basic steel plate, not for the composite armor, reactive armor, or other types of modern armor.\nLiner.\nThe most common shape of the liner is conical, with an internal apex angle of 40 to 90 degrees. Different apex angles yield different distributions of jet mass and velocity. Small apex angles can result in jet bifurcation, or even in the failure of the jet to form at all; this is attributed to the collapse velocity being above a certain threshold, normally slightly higher than the liner material's bulk sound speed. Other widely used shapes include hemispheres, tulips, trumpets, ellipses, and bi-conics; the various shapes yield jets with different velocity and mass distributions.\nLiners have been made from many materials, including various metals and glass. The deepest penetrations are achieved with a dense, ductile metal, and a very common choice has been copper. For some modern anti-armor weapons, molybdenum and pseudo-alloys of tungsten filler and copper binder (9:1, thus density is \u224818\u00a0Mg/m3) have been adopted. Nearly every common metallic element has been tried, including aluminum, tungsten, tantalum, depleted uranium, lead, tin, cadmium, cobalt, magnesium, titanium, zinc, zirconium, molybdenum, beryllium, nickel, silver, and even gold and platinum. The selection of the material depends on the target to be penetrated; for example, aluminum has been found advantageous for concrete targets.\nIn early antitank weapons, copper was used as a liner material. Later, in the 1970s, it was found tantalum is superior to copper, due to its much higher density and very high ductility at high strain rates. Other high-density metals and alloys tend to have drawbacks in terms of price, toxicity, radioactivity, or lack of ductility.\nFor the deepest penetrations, pure metals yield the best results, because they display the greatest ductility, which delays the breakup of the jet into particles as it stretches. In charges for oil well completion, however, it is essential that a solid slug or \"carrot\" not be formed, since it would plug the hole just penetrated and interfere with the influx of oil. In the petroleum industry, therefore, liners are generally fabricated by powder metallurgy, often of pseudo-alloys which, if unsintered, yield jets that are composed mainly of dispersed fine metal particles.\nUnsintered cold pressed liners, however, are not waterproof and tend to be brittle, which makes them easy to damage during handling. Bimetallic liners, usually zinc-lined copper, can be used; during jet formation the zinc layer vaporizes and a slug is not formed; the disadvantage is an increased cost and dependency of jet formation on the quality of bonding the two layers. Low-melting-point (below 500\u00a0\u00b0C) solder- or braze-like alloys (e.g., Sn50Pb50, Zn97.6Pb1.6, or pure metals like lead, zinc, or cadmium) can be used; these melt before reaching the well casing, and the molten metal does not obstruct the hole. Other alloys, binary eutectics (e.g. Pb88.8Sb11.1, Sn61.9Pd38.1, or Ag71.9Cu28.1), form a metal-matrix composite material with ductile matrix with brittle dendrites; such materials reduce slug formation but are difficult to shape.\nA metal-matrix composite with discrete inclusions of low-melting material is another option; the inclusions either melt before the jet reaches the well casing, weakening the material, or serve as crack nucleation sites, and the slug breaks up on impact. The dispersion of the second phase can be achieved also with castable alloys (e.g., copper) with a low-melting-point metal insoluble in copper, such as bismuth, 1\u20135% lithium, or up to 50% (usually 15\u201330%) lead; the size of inclusions can be adjusted by thermal treatment. Non-homogeneous distribution of the inclusions can also be achieved. Other additives can modify the alloy properties; tin (4\u20138%), nickel (up to 30% and often together with tin), up to 8% aluminium, phosphorus (forming brittle phosphides) or 1\u20135% silicon form brittle inclusions serving as crack initiation sites. Up to 30% zinc can be added to lower the material cost and to form additional brittle phases.\nOxide glass liners produce jets of low density, therefore yielding less penetration depth. Double-layer liners, with one layer of a less dense but pyrophoric metal (e.g. aluminum or magnesium), can be used to enhance incendiary effects following the armor-piercing action; explosive welding can be used for making those, as then the metal-metal interface is homogeneous, does not contain significant amount of intermetallics, and does not have adverse effects to the formation of the jet.\nThe penetration depth is proportional to the maximum length of the jet, which is a product of the jet tip velocity and time to particulation. The jet tip velocity depends on bulk sound velocity in the liner material, the time to particulation is dependent on the ductility of the material. The maximum achievable jet velocity is roughly 2.34 times the sound velocity in the material. The speed can reach 10\u00a0km/s, peaking some 40 microseconds after detonation; the cone tip is subjected to acceleration of about 25\u00a0million g. The jet tail reaches about 2\u20135\u00a0km/s. The pressure between the jet tip and the target can reach one terapascal. The immense pressure makes the metal flow like a liquid, though x-ray diffraction has shown the metal stays solid; one of the theories explaining this behavior proposes molten core and solid sheath of the jet. The best materials are face-centered cubic metals, as they are the most ductile, but even graphite and zero-ductility ceramic cones show significant penetration.\nExplosive charge.\nFor optimal penetration, a high explosive with a high detonation velocity and pressure is normally chosen. The most common explosive used in high performance anti-armor warheads is HMX (octogen), although never in its pure form, as it would be too sensitive. It is normally compounded with a few percent of some type of plastic binder, such as in the polymer-bonded explosive (PBX) LX-14, or with another less-sensitive explosive, such as TNT, with which it forms Octol. Other common high-performance explosives are RDX-based compositions, again either as PBXs or mixtures with TNT (to form Composition B and the Cyclotols) or wax (Cyclonites). Some explosives incorporate powdered aluminum to increase their blast and detonation temperature, but this addition generally results in decreased performance of the shaped charge. There has been research into using the very high-performance but sensitive explosive CL-20 in shaped-charge warheads, but, at present, due to its sensitivity, this has been in the form of the PBX composite LX-19 (CL-20 and Estane binder).\nOther features.\nA 'waveshaper' is a body (typically a disc or cylindrical block) of an inert material (typically solid or foamed plastic, but sometimes metal, perhaps hollow) inserted within the explosive for the purpose of changing the path of the detonation wave. The effect is to modify the collapse of the cone and resulting jet formation, with the intent of increasing penetration performance. Waveshapers are often used to save space; a shorter charge with a waveshaper can achieve the same performance as a longer charge without a waveshaper. Given that the space of possible waveshapes is infinite, machine learning methods have been developed to engineer more optimal waveshapers that can enhance the performance of a shaped charge via computational design.\nAnother useful design feature is \"sub-calibration\", the use of a liner having a smaller diameter (caliber) than the explosive charge. In an ordinary charge, the explosive near the base of the cone is so thin that it is unable to accelerate the adjacent liner to sufficient velocity to form an effective jet. In a sub-calibrated charge, this part of the device is effectively cut off, resulting in a shorter charge with the same performance.\nVariants.\nThere are several forms of shaped charge.\nLinear shaped charges.\nA linear shaped charge (LSC) has a lining with V-shaped profile and varying length. The lining is surrounded with explosive, the explosive then encased within a suitable material that serves to protect the explosive and to confine (tamp) it on detonation. \"At detonation, the focusing of the explosive high pressure wave as it becomes incident to the side wall causes the metal liner of the LSC to collapse\u2013creating the cutting force.\" The detonation projects into the lining, to form a continuous, knife-like (planar) jet. The jet cuts any material in its path, to a depth depending on the size and materials used in the charge. Generally, the jet penetrates around 1 to 1.2 times the charge width. For the cutting of complex geometries, there are also flexible versions of the linear shaped charge, these with a lead or high-density foam sheathing and a ductile/flexible lining material, which also is often lead. LSCs are commonly used in the cutting of rolled steel joists (RSJ) and other structural targets, such as in the controlled demolition of buildings. LSCs are also used to separate the stages of multistage rockets, and destroy them when they go errant.\nExplosively formed penetrator.\nThe explosively formed penetrator (EFP) is also known as the self-forging fragment (SFF), explosively formed projectile (EFP), self-forging projectile (SEFOP), plate charge, and Misnay-Schardin (MS) charge. An EFP uses the action of the explosive's detonation wave (and to a lesser extent the propulsive effect of its detonation products) to project and deform a plate or dish of ductile metal (such as copper, iron, or tantalum) into a compact high-velocity projectile, commonly called the slug. This slug is projected toward the target at about two kilometers per second. The chief advantage of the EFP over a conventional (e.g., conical) shaped charge is its effectiveness at very great standoffs, equal to hundreds of times the charge's diameter (perhaps a hundred meters for a practical device).\nThe EFP is relatively unaffected by first-generation reactive armor and can travel up to perhaps 1000 charge diameters (CD)s before its velocity becomes ineffective at penetrating armor due to aerodynamic drag, or successfully hitting the target becomes a problem. The impact of a ball or slug EFP normally causes a large-diameter but relatively shallow hole, of, at most, a couple of CDs. If the EFP perforates the armor, spalling and extensive behind armor effects (BAE, also called behind armor damage, BAD) will occur.\nThe BAE is mainly caused by the high-temperature and high-velocity armor and slug fragments being injected into the interior space and the blast overpressure caused by this debris. More modern EFP warhead versions, through the use of advanced initiation modes, can also produce long-rods (stretched slugs), multi-slugs and finned rod/slug projectiles. The long-rods are able to penetrate a much greater depth of armor, at some loss to BAE, multi-slugs are better at defeating light or area targets and the finned projectiles are much more accurate.\nThe use of this warhead type is mainly restricted to lightly armored areas of main battle tanks (MBT) such as the top, belly and rear armored areas. It is well suited for the attack of other less heavily protected armored fighting vehicles (AFV) and in the breaching of material targets (buildings, bunkers, bridge supports, etc.). The newer rod projectiles may be effective against the more heavily armored areas of MBTs. Weapons using the EFP principle have already been used in combat; the \"smart\" submunitions in the CBU-97 cluster bomb used by the US Air Force and Navy in the 2003 Iraq war employed this principle, and the US Army is reportedly experimenting with precision-guided artillery shells under Project SADARM (Seek And Destroy ARMor). There are also various other projectile (BONUS, DM 642) and rocket submunitions (Motiv-3M, DM 642) and mines (MIFF, TMRP-6) that use EFP principle. Examples of EFP warheads are US patents 5038683 and US6606951.\nTandem warhead.\nSome modern anti-tank rockets (RPG-27, RPG-29) and missiles (TOW-2, TOW-2A, Eryx, HOT, MILAN) use a tandem warhead shaped charge, consisting of two separate shaped charges, one in front of the other, typically with some distance between them. TOW-2A was the first to use tandem warheads in the mid-1980s, an aspect of the weapon which the US Army had to reveal under news media and Congressional pressure resulting from the concern that NATO antitank missiles were ineffective against Soviet tanks that were fitted with the new ERA boxes. The Army revealed that a 40\u00a0mm precursor shaped-charge warhead was fitted on the tip of the TOW-2 and TOW-2A collapsible probe.\nUsually, the front charge is somewhat smaller than the rear one, as it is intended primarily to disrupt ERA boxes or tiles. Examples of tandem warheads are US patents 7363862 and US 5561261. The US Hellfire antiarmor missile is one of the few that have accomplished the complex engineering feat of having two shaped charges of the same diameter stacked in one warhead. Recently, a Russian arms firm revealed a 125mm tank cannon round with two same diameter shaped charges one behind the other, but with the back one offset so its penetration stream will not interfere with the front shaped charge's penetration stream. The reasoning behind both the Hellfire and the Russian 125\u00a0mm munitions having tandem same diameter warheads is not to increase penetration, but to increase the beyond-armour effect.\nVoitenko compressor.\nIn 1964 a Soviet scientist proposed that a shaped charge originally developed for piercing thick steel armor be adapted to the task of accelerating shock waves. The resulting device, looking a little like a wind tunnel, is called a Voitenko compressor. The Voitenko compressor initially separates a test gas from a shaped charge with a malleable steel plate. When the shaped charge detonates, most of its energy is focused on the steel plate, driving it forward and pushing the test gas ahead of it. Ames Laboratory translated this idea into a self-destroying shock tube. A 66-pound shaped charge accelerated the gas in a 3-cm glass-walled tube 2 meters in length. The velocity of the resulting shock wave was 220,000 feet per second (67\u00a0km/s). The apparatus exposed to the detonation was completely destroyed, but not before useful data was extracted.\nIn a typical Voitenko compressor, a shaped charge accelerates hydrogen gas which in turn accelerates a thin disk up to about 40\u00a0km/s. A slight modification to the Voitenko compressor concept is a super-compressed detonation, a device that uses a compressible liquid or solid fuel in the steel compression chamber instead of a traditional gas mixture. A further extension of this technology is the explosive diamond anvil cell, utilizing multiple opposed shaped-charge jets projected at a single steel encapsulated fuel, such as hydrogen. The fuels used in these devices, along with the secondary combustion reactions and long blast impulse, produce similar conditions to those encountered in fuel-air and thermobaric explosives.\nNuclear shaped charges.\nThe proposed Project Orion nuclear propulsion system would have required the development of nuclear shaped charges for reaction acceleration of spacecraft. Shaped-charge effects driven by nuclear explosions have been discussed speculatively, but are not known to have been produced in fact. For example, the early nuclear weapons designer Ted Taylor was quoted as saying, in the context of shaped charges, \"A one-kiloton fission device, shaped properly, could make a hole in diameter a thousand feet (305 m) into solid rock.\" Also, a nuclear driven explosively formed penetrator was apparently proposed for terminal ballistic missile defense in the 1960s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37517", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37517", "title": "Anti-tank guided missile", "text": "Guided missile for combat against armored targets\nAn anti-tank guided missile (ATGM), anti-tank missile, anti-tank guided weapon (ATGW) or anti-armor guided weapon is a guided missile primarily designed to hit and destroy heavily armored military vehicles. ATGMs range in size from shoulder-launched weapons, which can be transported by a single soldier, to larger tripod-mounted weapons, which require a squad or team to transport and fire, to vehicle and aircraft mounted missile systems.\nEarlier man-portable anti-tank weapons, like anti-tank rifles and magnetic anti-tank mines, generally had very short range, sometimes on the order of metres or tens of metres. Rocket-propelled high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) systems appeared in World War II and extended range to the order of hundreds of metres, but accuracy was low and hitting targets at these ranges was largely a matter of luck. It was the combination of rocket propulsion and remote wire guidance that made the ATGM much more effective than these earlier weapons, and gave light infantry real capability on the battlefield against post-war tank designs. The introduction of semi-automatic guidance in the 1960s further improved the performance of ATGMs.\nAs of 2016,[ [update]] ATGMs were used by over 130 countries and many non-state actors around the world. Post-Cold-War main battle tanks (MBTs) using composite and reactive armors have proven to be resistant to smaller ATGMs.\nHistory.\nWorld War II.\nGermany developed a design for a wire-guided anti tank missile derived from the Ruhrstahl X-4 air to air missile concept in the closing years of World War II. Known as the X-7, it was probably never used in combat and allegedly had serious guidance to target issues. It never entered service, though a few were produced.\nEarly Cold War: first generation ATGMs.\nFirst-generation ATGMs use a type of command guidance termed \"manual command to line of sight\" (MCLOS). This requires continuous input from an operator using a joystick or similar control system to steer the missile to a target. One disadvantage of this is that an operator must keep the sight's reticle cross hairs on a target and then steer the missile into the cross hairs, i.e., the line-of-sight. To do this, an operator must be well trained (spending many hours on a simulator) and must remain stationary and in view of a target during the flight time of the missile. Because of this, the operator is vulnerable while guiding the missile. In addition to the low kill probability, other problems with first generation ATGMs include slow missile speed, high minimum effective range, and an inability to use top attack missiles.\nThe first system to become operational and to see combat was the French Nord SS.10 during the early 1950s. It entered service in the French Army in 1955. It was also the first anti-tank missile used by the US Army and Israeli Defense Forces. The Malkara missile (named from an Aboriginal Australian word for \"shield\") was another of the earliest ATGMs. It was jointly developed by Australia and the United Kingdom between 1951 and 1954, and was in service from 1958 until gradually replaced by the Vickers Vigilant missile in the late 1960s. It was intended to be light enough to deploy with airborne forces, yet powerful enough to knock out any tank then in service. It used a high-explosive squash head (HESH) warhead. Other early first generation ATGMs include the West German Cobra and the Soviet 9M14 Malyutka.\nIn 2012, first-generation systems were described as obsolete due to low hit probability, a limited ability to penetrate modern armour, and other issues. Still, many countries maintain significant stockpiles. Approximately, first generation ATGMs have an effective range of 1500m and the ability to penetrate 500mm of rolled homogeneous armor.\nLate Cold War: second generation ATGMs.\nSecond-generation semi-automatically command guided to line-of-sight, or semi-automatic command to line of sight (SACLOS) missiles require an operator to only keep the sights on the target until impact. Automatic guidance commands are sent to the missile through wires or radio, or the missile relies on laser marking or a TV camera view from the nose of the missile. Examples are the Russian 9M133 Kornet, Israeli LAHAT, the NLOS version of Spike, and the American Hellfire I missiles. The operator must remain stationary during the missile's flight. The most widely used ATGM of all time, the American BGM-71 TOW, with hundreds of thousands of missiles built, is a second-generation system.\nSecond generation ATGMs are significantly easier to use than first generation systems, and accuracy rates may exceed 90%. Generally they have an effective range of between 2,500 and 5,500 meters and penetration of up to 900\u00a0mm of armor. Cost is around $10,000 USD per missile.\nPost Cold War: third generation ATGMs and later.\nThird-generation \"fire-and-forget\" missiles rely on a laser, electro-optical imager (IIR) seeker or a W band radar seeker in the nose of the missile. Once the target is identified, the missile needs no further guidance during flight; it is \"fire-and-forget\", and the missile operator is free to retreat. However, fire-and-forget missiles are more subject to electronic countermeasures than MCLOS and SACLOS missiles. Examples include the German PARS 3 LR and the Israeli Spike.\nMost modern ATGMs have shaped charge HEAT warheads, designed specifically for penetrating tank armor. Tandem-charge missiles attempt to defeat explosive reactive armour (ERA): the small initial charge sets off the ERA while the follow-up main charge attempts to penetrate the main armor. Top-attack weapons such as the US Javelin, the Swedish Bill and the Indian Nag and MPATGM are designed to strike vehicles from above, where their armor is usually much weaker. MPATGM incorporates a dual-mode RF/IIR, AI-enabled uncooled seeker. Third generation systems and beyond are generally much more expensive than second generation systems.\nFourth generation ATGMs.\nFourth generation fire-and-forget anti tank guided missiles have larger range and rely on a combination of seeker for guidance. Examples include India's SANT, which has a stand-off range of , uses dual seeker configuration of electro-optical thermal imager (EO/IR) and millimeter-wave active radar homing for control and guidance with lock-on before launch and lock-on after launch capabilities.\nFifth generation ATGMs.\nSome ATGMs, notably the French Akeron MP and the latest variants of the Israeli Spike (such as the Spike LR2 and ER2), have been called \"5th generation\" by their manufacturers and marketed as such. They appear to have the following additional or amplified attributes:\nCountermeasures.\nCountermeasures against ATGMs include newer armors such as spaced, perforated, composite or explosive reactive armor, jammers like the Russian Shtora, active protection systems (APS) like the Israeli Trophy and the Russian Arena, and other methods.\nNewer armor.\nArmor systems have continued in development alongside ATGMs, and the most recent generations of armor are specifically tested to be effective against ATGM strikes, either by deforming the missile warhead or fusing to prevent proper detonation (such as in slat armor) or using some form of reactive armor to 'attack' the missile upon impact, disrupting the shaped charge that makes the warhead effective. Both come with the downside of significant weight and bulk. Reactive armor works best when a vehicle is specifically designed with the system integrated and while developments continue to make armor lighter, any vehicle that includes such a system necessitates a powerful engine and often will still be relatively slow. Inclusion of such armor in older vehicles as a part of a re-design is possible, as in the numerous types derived from the T-72. Slat armor is lighter and as such can be added to many vehicles after construction but still adds both bulk and weight. Particularly for vehicles that are designed to be transported by cargo aircraft, slat armor has to be fitted in the field after deployment. Either approach can never offer complete coverage over the vehicle, leaving tracks or wheels particularly vulnerable to attack.\nJamming.\nJamming is potentially an effective countermeasure to specific missiles that are radar guided, however, as a general purpose defense, it is of no use against unguided anti-tank weapons, and as such it is almost never the only defense. If jamming is used continually, it can be extremely difficult for a missile to acquire the target, locking on to the much larger return from the jammer, with the operator unlikely noticing the difference without a radar screen to see the return. However, any missile that has a backup tracking system can defeat jamming.\nActive.\nActive protection systems show a great deal of promise, both in counteracting ATGMs and unguided weapons. Compared to armor systems, they are very lightweight, can be fitted to almost any vehicle with the internal space for the control system and could, in the future, be a near-perfect defense against any missiles. The weaknesses of the systems include potential developments in missile design such as radar or IR decoys, which would drastically reduce their chance to intercept a missile, as well as technical challenges such as dealing with multiple missiles at once and designing a system that can cover a vehicle from any angle of attack. While these may be answered and allow for lightweight, highly maneuverable vehicles that are strongly defended against missiles and rockets that are extremely well suited for urban and guerrilla warfare, such a system is unlikely to be as effective against kinetic energy projectiles, making it a poor choice for fighting against tanks. As kinetic energy projectiles move faster than guided missiles, this often means that the sensors attached to an active protection system can not keep up.\nOther.\nTraditionally, before \"fire-and-forget\" ATGMs were used, the most effective countermeasure was to open fire at the location where the missile was fired from, to either kill the operator or force them to take cover, thus sending the missile off course. Smoke screens can also be deployed from an MBT's smoke discharger, and used to obscure an ATGM operator's line of sight. Other improvised methods used by the Israel Defense Forces to defeat the Saggers involved firing in front of the tank to create dust. While fire-and-forget missiles have definitive advantages in terms of guidance and operator safety, and include abilities such as top attack mode, older missiles continue in use, both in the front line armies of less developed countries, and in reserve service the world over, due to their lower cost or existing stockpiles of less advanced weapons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37518", "revid": "57873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37518", "title": "Indian Institute of Science Bangalore", "text": ""}
{"id": "37519", "revid": "486612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37519", "title": "Hassan", "text": "Hassan, Hasan, Hassane, Haasana, Hassaan, Asan, Hassun, Hasun, Hassen, Hasson or Hasani may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37520", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37520", "title": "Belur", "text": "Belur may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37521", "revid": "16938479", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37521", "title": "Hoysala architecture", "text": "Medieval Hindu temple style\nHoysala architecture is the building style in Hindu temple architecture developed under the rule of the Hoysala Empire between the 11th and 14th centuries, in the region known today as Karnataka, a state of India. Hoysala influence was at its peak in the 13th century, when it dominated the Southern Deccan Plateau region. Large and small temples built during this era remain as examples of the Hoysala architectural style, including the Chennakesava Temple at Belur, the Hoysaleswara Temple at Halebidu, and the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura. These three temples were accorded UNESCO world heritage site status in 2023. Other examples of Hoysala craftsmanship are the temples at Belavadi, Amruthapura, Hosaholalu, Mosale, Arasikere, Basaralu, Kikkeri and Nuggehalli. Study of the Hoysala architectural style has revealed a negligible North Indian influence while the impact of Southern Indian style is more distinct.\nTemples built prior to Hoysala independence in the mid-12th century reflect significant Western Chalukya influences, while later temples retain some features salient to Western Chalukya architecture but have additional inventive decoration and ornamentation, features unique to Hoysala artisans. Some three hundred temples are known to survive in present-day Karnataka state and many more are mentioned in inscriptions, though only about seventy have been documented. The greatest concentration of these are in the Malnad (hill) districts, the native home of the Hoysala kings.\nHoysala architecture is classified by the influential scholar Adam Hardy as part of the \"Karnata Dravida\" tradition, a trend within Dravidian architecture in the Deccan that is distinct from the Tamil style of further south. Other terms for the tradition are Vesara, and Chalukya architecture, divided into early Badami Chalukya architecture and the Western Chalukya architecture which immediately preceded the Hoysalas. The whole tradition covers a period of about seven centuries began in the 7th century under the patronage of the Chalukya dynasty of Badami, developed further under the Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta during the 9th and 10th centuries and the Western Chalukyas (or Later Chalukyas) of Basavakalyan in the 11th and 12th centuries. Its final development stage and transformation into an independent style was during the rule of the Hoysalas in the 12th and 13th centuries. Medieval inscriptions displayed prominently at temple locations give information about donations made toward the maintenance of the temple, details of consecration and on occasion, even architectural details.\nTemple deities.\nHinduism is a combination of secular and sacred beliefs, rituals, daily practices and traditions that has evolved over the course of over two thousand years and embodies complex symbolism combining the natural world with philosophy.\nHindu temples began as simple shrines housing a deity and by the time of the Hoysalas had evolved into well-articulated edifices in which worshippers sought transcendence of the daily world. Hoysala temples were not limited to any specifically organised tradition of Hinduism and encouraged pilgrims of different Hindu devotional movements. The Hoysalas usually dedicated their temples to Shiva or Vishnu (two of the popular Hindu gods), but they occasionally built some temples dedicated to the Jain faith as well. Worshippers of Shiva are called Shaivas and worshippers of Vishnu are called Vaishnavas. While King Vishnuvardhana and his descendants were Vaishnava by faith, records show that the Hoysalas maintained religious harmony by building as many temples dedicated to Shiva as they did to Vishnu.\nMost of these temples have secular features with broad themes depicted in their sculptures. This can be seen in the famous Chennakesava Temple at Belur dedicated to Vishnu and in the Hoysaleswara temple at Halebidu dedicated to Shiva. The Kesava temple at Somanathapura is different in that its ornamentation is strictly Vaishnava. Generally Vaishnava temples are dedicated to Keshava (or to Chennakeshava, meaning \"Beautiful Vishnu\") while a small number are dedicated to Lakshminarayana and Lakshminarasimha (Narayana and Narasimha both being Avatars, or physical manifestations, of Vishnu) with Lakshmi, consort of Vishnu, seated at his feet. Temples dedicated to Vishnu are always named after the deity.\nThe Shaiva temples have a Shiva linga, symbol of fertility and the universal symbol of Shiva, in the shrine. The names of Shiva temples can end with the suffix \"eshwara\" meaning \"Lord of\". The name \"Hoysaleswara\", for instance, means \"Lord of Hoysala\". The temple can also be named after the devotee who commissioned the construction of the temple, an example being the Bucesvara temple at Koravangala, named after the devotee Buci. The most striking sculptural decorations are the horizontal rows of mouldings with detailed relief, and intricately carved images of gods, goddesses and their attendants on the outer temple wall panels.\nThe Doddagaddavalli Lakshmi Devi (\"Goddess of Wealth\") Temple is an exception as it is dedicated to neither Vishnu nor Shiva. The defeat of the Jain Western Ganga Dynasty (of present-day south Karnataka) by the Cholas in the early 11th century and the rising numbers of followers of Vaishnava Hinduism and Virashaivism in the 12th century was mirrored by a decreased interest in Jainism. However, two notable locations of Jain worship in the Hoysala territory were Shravanabelagola and Kambadahalli. The Hoysalas built Jain temples to satisfy the needs of its Jain population, a few of which have survived in Halebidu containing icons of Jain tirthankaras. They constructed stepped wells called \"Pushkarni\" or \"Kalyani\", the ornate tank at Hulikere being an example. The tank has twelve minor shrines containing Hindu deities.\nThe two main deities found in Hoysala temple sculpture are Shiva and Vishnu in their various forms and avatars (incarnations). Shiva is usually shown with four arms holding a trident and a small drum among other emblems that symbolise objects worshiped independently of the divine image with which they are associated. Any male icon portrayed in this way is Shiva although a female icon may sometimes be portrayed with these attributes as Shiva's consort, Parvati. Various depictions of Shiva exist: showing him naked (fully or partially), in activities such as slaying a demon (Andhaka) or dancing on the head of a slain elephant (Gajasura) and holding its skin up behind his back. He is often accompanied by his consort Parvati or shown with Nandi the bull. He may be represented as Bhairava, another of Shiva's many manifestations.\nA male figure depicted holding certain objects such as a conch (symbol of eternal, heavenly space) and a wheel (eternal time and destructive power) is Vishnu. If a female figure is depicted holding these objects, she is seen as his consort, Lakshmi. In all of the depictions Vishnu is holding four objects: a conch, a wheel, a lotus and a Kaumodaki (mace). These can be held in any of the icon's hands, making possible twenty-four different forms of Vishnu, each with a unique name. Apart from these, Vishnu is depicted in any of his \"ten avataras\", which include Vishnu sitting on Anantha (the celestial snake and keeper of life energy also known as Shesha), Vishnu with Lakshmi seated on his lap (Lakshminarayana), with the head of a lion disembowelling a demon on his lap (Lakshminarasimha), with head of a boar walking over a demon (Varaha), in the Krishna avatar (as Venugopala or the cow herder playing the Venu (flute), dancing on the head of the snake Kaliya, lifting a hill such as Govardhana), with his feet over head of a small figure (\"Vamana\"), along with Indra riding an elephant, with Lakshmi seated on Garuda, and the eagle (stealing the parijata tree).\nTemple complex.\nThe focus of a temple is the centre or sanctum sanctorum (garbhagriha) where the image of the deity resides, so temple architecture is designed to move the devotee from outside to the garbhagriha through ambulatory passageways for circumambulation and halls or chambers (\"mantapas\") that become increasingly sacred as the deity is approached.\nHoysala temples have distinct parts that are merged to form a unified organic whole, in contrast to the temples of Tamil country where different parts of a temple stand independently. Although superficially unique, Hoysala temples resemble each other structurally. They are characterised by a complex profusion of sculpture decorating all the temple parts chiselled of soft soapstone (chloritic schist), a good material for intricate carving, executed mostly by local craftsmen, and exhibit architectural features that distinguish them from other temple architectures of South India.\nMost Hoysala temples have a plain covered entrance porch supported by lathe turned (circular or bell-shaped) pillars which were sometimes further carved with deep fluting and moulded with decorative motifs. The temples may be built upon a platform raised by about a metre called a \"jagati\". The \"jagati\", apart from giving a raised look to the temple, serves as a \"pradakshinapatha\" or \"circumambulation path\" for circumambulation around the temple, as the \"garbagriha\" (inner sanctum) provides no such feature. Such temples will have an additional set of steps leading to an open \"mantapa\" (open hall) with parapet walls. A good example of this style is the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura. The \"jagati\" which is in unity with the rest of the temple follows a star-shaped design and the walls of the temple follow a zig-zag pattern, a Hoysala innovation.\nDevotees can first complete a ritual circumambulation on the \"jagati\" starting from the main entrance by walking in a clockwise direction (towards the left) before entering the \"mantapa\", following the sculptural clockwise-sequenced reliefs on the outer temple walls depicting a sequence of epic scenes from the Hindu epics. Temples that are not built on a \"jagati\" can have steps flanked by elephant balustrades (parapets) that lead to the \"mantapa\" from ground level. An example of a temple that does not exhibit the raised platform is the \"Bucesvara\" temple in Korvangla, Hassan District. In temples with two shrines (\"dvikuta\"), the \"vimanas\" (the shrines or cellae) may be placed either next to each other or on opposite sides. The Lakshmidevi temple at Doddagaddavalli is unique to Hoysala architecture as it has four shrines around a common centre and a fifth shrine within the same complex for the deity Bhairava (a form of Shiva). In addition, four minor shrines exist at each corner of the courtyard (\"prakaram\").\nArchitectural elements.\nMantapa.\nThe \"mantapa\" is the hall where groups of people gather during prayers. The entrance to the \"mantapa\" normally has a highly ornate overhead lintel called a \"makaratorana\" (\"makara\" is an imaginary beast and \"torana\" is an overhead decoration). The open \"mantapa\" which serves the purpose of an outer hall (outer \"mantapa\") is a regular feature in larger Hoysala temples leading to an inner small closed \"mantapa\" and the shrines. The open \"mantapas\" which are often spacious have seating areas (\"asana\") made of stone with the \"mantapa's\" parapet wall acting as a back rest. The seats may follow the same staggered square shape of the parapet wall. The ceiling here is supported by numerous pillars that create many bays. The shape of the open \"mantapa\" is best described as staggered-square and is the style used in most Hoysala temples. Even the smallest open \"mantapa\" has 13 bays. The walls have parapets that have half pillars supporting the outer ends of the roof which allow plenty of light making all the sculptural details visible. The \"mantapa\" ceiling is generally ornate with sculptures, both mythological and floral. The ceiling consists of deep and domical surfaces and contains sculptural depictions of banana bud motifs and other such decorations.\nIf the temple is small it will consist of only a closed \"mantapa\" (enclosed with walls extending all the way to the ceiling) and the shrine. The closed \"mantapa\", well decorated inside and out, is larger than the vestibule connecting the shrine and the \"mantapa\" and has four lathe-turned pillars to support the ceiling, which may be deeply domed. The four pillars divide the hall into nine bays. The nine bays result in nine decorated ceilings. Pierced stone screens (\"Jali\" or Latticework) that serve as windows in the \"navaranga\" (hall) and \"Sabhamantapa\" (congregation hall) is a characteristic Hoysala stylistic element.\nA porch adorns the entrance to a closed \"mantapa\", consisting of an awning supported by two half-pillars (engaged columns) and two parapets, all richly decorated. The closed \"mantapa\" is connected to the shrines by a vestibule, a square area that also connects the shrines. Its outer walls are decorated, but as the size the vestibule is not large, this may not be a conspicuous part of the temple. The vestibule also has a short tower called the \"sukanasi\" or \"nose\" upon which is mounted the Hoysala emblem. In Belur and Halebidu, these sculptures are quite large and are placed at all doorways.\nThe outer and inner \"mantapa\" (open and closed) have circular lathe-turned pillars having four brackets at the top. Over each bracket stands sculptured figures called \"salabhanjika\" or \"madanika\". The pillars may also exhibit ornamental carvings on the surface and no two pillars are alike. This is how Hoysala art differs from the work of their early overlords, the Western Chalukyas, who added sculptural details to the circular pillar base and left the top plain. The lathe-turned pillars are 16, 32, or 64-pointed; some are bell-shaped and have properties that reflect light. The Parsvanatha Basadi at Halebidu is a good example. According to Brown, the pillars with four monolithic brackets above them carry images of \"salabhanjikas\" and \"madanikas\" (sculpture of a woman, displaying stylised feminine features). This is a common feature of Chalukya-Hoysala temples. According to Sastri, the shape of the pillar and its capital, the base of which is square and whose shaft is a monolith that is lathe turned to render different shapes, is a \"remarkable feature\" of Hoysala art.\nVimana.\nThe \"vimana\", also called the cella, contains the most sacred shrine wherein resides the image of the presiding deity. The \"vimana\" is often topped by a tower which is quite different on the outside than on the inside. Inside, the vimana is plain and square, whereas outside it is profusely decorated and can be either stellate (\"star-shaped\") or shaped as a staggered square, or feature a combination of these designs, giving it many projections and recesses that seem to multiply as the light falls on it. Each projection and recess has a complete decorative articulation that is rhythmic and repetitive and composed of blocks and mouldings, obscuring the tower profile. Depending on the number of shrines (and hence on the number of towers), the temples are classified as \"ekakuta\" (one), \"dvikuta\" (two), \"trikuta\" (three), \"chatushkuta\" (four) and \"panchakuta\" (five). Most Hoysala temples are \"ekakuta\", \"dvikuta\" or \"trikuta\", the Vaishnava ones mostly being \"trikuta\". There are cases where a temple is \"trikuta\" but has only one tower over the main shrine (in the middle). So the terminology \"trikuta\" may not be literally accurate. In temples with multiple disconnected shrines, such as the twin temples at Mosale, all essential parts are duplicated for symmetry and balance.\nThe highest point of the temple (\"kalasa\") has the shape of a water pot and stands on top of the tower. This portion of the \"vimana\" is often lost due to age and has been replaced with a metallic pinnacle. Below the \"kalasa\" is a large, highly- sculptured structure resembling a dome which is made from large stones and looks like a helmet. It may be 2\u00a0m by 2\u00a0m in size and follows the shape of the shrine. Below this structure are domed roofs in a square plan, all of them much smaller and crowned with small \"kalasas\". They are mixed with other small roofs of different shapes and are ornately decorated. The tower of the shrine usually has three or four tiers of rows of decorative roofs while the tower on top of the \"sukanasi\" has one less tier, making the tower look like an extension of the main tower (Foekema calls it the \"nose\"). One decorated roof tier runs on top of the wall of a closed \"mantapa\" above the heavy eaves of an open \"mantapa\" and above the porches.\nBelow the superstructure of the \"vimana\" are temple \"eaves\" projecting half a meter from the wall. Below the eaves two different decorative schemes may be found, depending on whether a temple was built in the early or the later period of the empire. In the early temples built prior to the 13th century, there is one eave and below this are decorative miniature towers. A panel of Hindu deities and their attendants are below these towers, followed by a set of five different mouldings forming the base of the wall. In the later temples there is a second eave running about a metre below the upper eaves with decorative miniature towers placed between them. The wall images of gods are below the lower eaves, followed by six different mouldings of equal size. This is broadly termed \"horizontal treatment\". The six mouldings at the base are divided in two sections. Going from the very base of the wall, the first horizontal layer contains a procession of elephants, above which are horsemen and then a band of foliage. The second horizontal section has depictions of the Hindu epics and \"Puranic\" scenes executed with detail. Above this are two friezes of \"yali\"s or \"makara\"s (imaginary beasts) and \"hamsas\" (swans). The \"vimana\" (tower) is divided into three horizontal sections and is even more ornate than the walls.\nSculpture.\nIn Hoysala art Hardy identifies two conspicuous departures from the more austere Western (Later) Chalukya art:ornamental elaboration and a profusion of iconography with figure sculptures, both of which are found in abundance even on the superstructure over the shrine. Their medium, the soft chlorite schist (Soapstone) enabled a virtuoso carving style. Hoysala artists are noted for their attention to sculptural detail be it in the depiction of themes from the Hindu epics and deities or in their use of motifs such as \"yali\", \"kirtimukha\" (gargoyles), aedicula (miniature decorative towers) on pilaster, \"makara\" (aquatic monster), birds (\"hamsa\"), spiral foliage, animals such as lions, elephants and horses, and even general aspects of daily life such as hair styles in vogue.\n\"Salabhanjika\", a common form of Hoysala sculpture, is an old Indian tradition going back to Buddhist sculpture. \"Sala\" is the sala tree and is the chaste maiden. In the Hoysala idiom, \"madanika\" figures are decorative objects put at an angle on the outer walls of the temple near the roof so that worshipers circumambulating the temple can view them.\nThe are pillar images that show traces of Chola art in the Chalukyan touches. Some of the artists working for the Hoysalas may have been from Chola country, a result of the expansion of the empire into Tamil-speaking regions of Southern India. The image of \"mohini\" on one of the pillars in the \"mantapa\" (closed hall) of the Chennakeshava temple is an example of Chola art.\nGeneral life themes are portrayed on wall panels such as the way horses were reined, the type of stirrup used, the depiction of dancers, musicians, instrumentalists, and rows of animals such as lions and elephants (where no two animals are identical). Perhaps no other temple in the country depicts the Ramayana and Mahabharata epics more effectively than the Hoysaleshwara temple at Halebidu.\nErotica was a subject the Hoysala artist handled with discretion. There is no exhibitionism in this, and erotic themes were carved into recesses and niches, generally miniature in form, making them inconspicuous. These erotic representations are associated with the \"Shakta\" practice.\nApart from these sculptures, entire sequences from the Hindu epics (commonly the Ramayana and the Mahabharata) have been sculpted in a clockwise direction starting at the main entrance. The right to left sequence is the same direction taken by the devotees in their ritual circumambulation as they wind inward toward the inner sanctum. Depictions from mythology such as the epic hero Arjuna shooting fish, the elephant-headed god Ganesha, the Sun god Surya, the weather and war god Indra, and Brahma with Sarasvati are common. Also frequently seen in these temples is Durga, with several arms holding weapons given to her by other gods, in the act of killing a buffalo (a demon in a buffalo's form) and Harihara (a fusion of Shiva and Vishnu) holding a conch, wheel, and trident. Many of these friezes were signed by the artisans, the first known instance of signed artwork in India.\nResearch.\nAccording to Settar, surveys in modern times have indicated that 1000\u20131500 structures were built by the Hoysalas, of which about a hundred temples have survived to date. The Hoysala style is an offshoot of the Western Chalukya style, which was popular in the 10th and 11th centuries. It is distinctively Dravidian, and according to Brown, owing to its features, Hoysala architecture qualifies as an independent style. While the Hoysalas introduced innovative features into their architecture, they also borrowed features from earlier builders of \"Karnata\" like the Kadambas, Western Chalukyas. These features included the use of chloritic schist or soapstone as a basic building material.\nOther features were the stepped style of \"vimana\" tower called the \"Kadamba shikhara\", which was inherited from the Kadambas. Hoysala sculptors made use of the effect of light and shade on carved walls, which poses a challenge for photography of the temples. The artistry of the Hoysalas in stone has been compared to the finesse of an ivory worker or a goldsmith. The abundance of jewellery worn by the sculpted figures and the variety of hairstyles and headdresses depicted give a fair idea of the lifestyles of the Hoysala times.\nNotable craftsmen.\nWhile medieval Indian artisans preferred to remain anonymous, Hoysala artisans signed their works, which has given researchers details about their lives, families, guilds, etc. Apart from the architects and sculptors, people of other guilds such as goldsmiths, ivory carvers, carpenters, and silversmiths also contributed to the completion of temples. The artisans were from diverse geographical backgrounds and included famous locals. Prolific architects included Amarashilpi Jakanachari, a native of Kaidala in Tumkur district, who also built temples for the Western Chalukyas. Ruvari Malithamma built the Kesava Temple at Somanathapura and worked on forty other monuments, including the Amruteshwara temple at Amruthapura. Malithamma specialised in ornamentation, and his works span six decades. His sculptures were typically signed in shorthand as \"Malli\" or simply \"Ma\".\nDasoja and his son Chavana from Balligavi were the architects of Chennakesava Temple at Belur; Kedaroja was the chief architect of the Hoysaleswara Temple at Halebidu. Their influence is seen in other temples built by the Hoysalas as well. Names of other locals found in inscriptions are Maridamma, Baicoja, Caudaya, Nanjaya and Bama, Malloja, Nadoja, Siddoja, Masanithamma, Chameya and Rameya. Artists from Tamil country included Pallavachari and Cholavachari.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nBook.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37522", "revid": "49871587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37522", "title": "Hoysala Kingdom", "text": "Medieval Kingdom in South India\nThe Hoysala Kingdom was a prominent South Indian dynasty that ruled most of what is now Karnataka, as well as parts of Tamil Nadu and southwestern Telangana, between the 11th and 14th centuries CE. The capital was initially located at Belur and was later moved to Halebidu. \nThe origins of the Hoysala dynasty are traced to the Malnad region of Karnataka. Initially, the Hoysalas served as feudatories of the Western Chalukyas of Kalyana. The dynasty gained prominence under King Vishnuvardhana particularly after the defeat of the Cholas in the Battle of Talakad, which consolidated Hoysala authority in the Deccan. Taking advantage of the conflict between the Western Chalukyas and the Kalachuris of Kalyani in the 12th century, the Hoysalas expanded their domain, eventually controlling large parts of Karnataka, and parts of northwestern Tamil Nadu and western Andhra Pradesh (now Telangana). \nThe Hoysala period was a significant era for the development of South Indian art, architecture, and literature. Over 100 temples from this period survive, showcasing intricate Hoysala architecture. Well-known temples which exhibit what the historian Sailendra Sen has called \"an amazing display of sculptural exuberance\" include the Chennakeshava Temple in Belur, the Hoysaleswara Temple in Halebidu, and the Chennakesava Temple in Somanathapura. These three temples were inscribed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 2023. The Hoysala rulers also patronised the fine arts encouraging the literature to flourish in Kannada and Sanskrit with notable contributions made by Jain and Brahmin poets.\nHistory.\nOrigin of the clan.\nEarly inscriptions, dated 1078 and 1090, have implied that the Hoysalas were descendants of the Yadu by referring to the Yadava \"vamsa\" (or clan) as the \"Hoysala \"vamsa\"\". But there are no early records directly linking the Hoysalas to the Yadavas of North India.\nLegendary beginnings.\nKannada folklore tells a legend of a young man, Sala (also known as Poysala), who saved his Jain guru Sudatta by killing a tiger (sometimes described as a lion) that they encountered whilst in a forest, at \"Sosevur\" located at present-day Angadi Village in Chikkamagaluru district, the original home of the Hoysala family. The word \"strike\" translates to \"hoy\" in Old Kannada, hence the name 'Hoy-sala'. The legend purporting to show how Sala became the founder of the Hoysala dynasty is shown in the Belur inscription of the Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana, dated c.\u20091117, but owing to several inconsistencies in the story it remains in the realm of folklore. Their inscriptions refer to the founders of the Hoysala dynasty as \"Maleparolganda\" ('Lord of the hills'), which makes their original home the Malenadu region of modern southern Karnataka. Vishnuvardhana achieved a victory over the Cholas at Talakadu in 1116, and the legend may have arisen or gained popularity after this event, as the Hoysala emblem depicts Sala fighting a tiger, the tiger being the emblem of the Cholas.\nEstablishment of the Kingdom.\nThe earliest record of the Hoysala family dates to about c.\u202f950\u202fCE, naming Arekalla as a local chieftain. He was succeeded by Maruga, Nripa Kama I (c.\u202f976\u202fCE), and Munda (1006\u20131026\u202fCE). Nripa Kama I is described with the title \"Permanadi\" indicating an early alliance with the Western Ganga dynasty. The Hoysalas emerged from the Malnad region in the Western Ghats as feudatories of the Western Chalukyas of Kalyani, gradually expanding their territory during the conflict between the Chalukyas and the Cholas and eventually gaining independence as the Chalukya power declined.\nWars with the Cholas and Chalukyas.\nDuring the reign of King Vishnuvardhana (r.\u202fc.\u202f1108\u20131152\u202fCE), the Hoysalas fought decisive campaigns against the Cholas. Chola incursions into Gangavadi reportedly included the destruction of Jain Basadis around Talakadu. Vishnuvardhana\u2019s general Ganggaraj led the counter-offensive defeating the Chola general Adiyamma near Talakadu and recovering lost territory. After this victory Vishnuvardhana earned the title \"Talakadugonda\" (\"Conqueror of Talakadu\"), while inscriptions highlighted Gangaraja\u2019s leading role in these campaigns.\nKing Vishnuvardhana fought the Western (Kalyani) Chalukyas in Nolambavadi asserting his independence from them. In a second Chola campaign, the Hoysala armies chased the Chola forces to Vellore which was deep inside Tamil territory. For these victories, Vishnuvardhana made significant land grants to his general at Kambadahalli which would become an important center for Jainism. These campaigns weakened Chola influence and consolidated Hoysala power in the Deccan, and historians credit the successes of King Vishnuvardhana as pivotal in establishing Hoysala independence and the military leadership of his general Gangaraj as a major factor in these victories.\nVishnuvardhana's grandson Veera Ballala II further strengthened the kingdom and expanded its influence. He declared war against the Yadavas and defeated the Kadambas. He declared independence in 1193. During the establishment of the Hoysala Kingdom, the Deccan Plateau saw a four-way struggle for hegemony between four dynasties: the Hoysalas, the Pandyans, the Kakatiyas, and the Seunas. In 1217, Veera Ballala II defeated the aggressive Pandya after they invaded the Chola Kingdom, helped to restore the Chola king on his throne and assumed the title \"Dakshina Chakravarthi\" (\"Emperor of the south\").\nIncreased influence and later eclipse.\nThe Hoysalas extended their foothold in modern-day Tamil Nadu around 1225, making the city of Kannanur Kuppam near Srirangam a provincial capital and taking control over the southern Deccan region. Vira Narasimha II's son Vira Someshwara earned the honorific \"Mamadi\" (uncle) from the Pandyas and Cholas. From 1220 to 1245 the dynasty's hegemony increased southwards to cover both the Chola and Pandya Kingdoms. Toward the end of the 13th century, Veera Ballala III recaptured territory in the Tamil country which had been lost during a Pandya uprising, thus uniting the northern and southern portions of the Kingdom.\nIn the early part of the 14th century, major political changes took place in the Deccan region during a period when large areas of northern India were under Muslim rule. Alauddin Khalji, the Sultan of Delhi, was determined to control southern India. In 1311 he sent his commander Malik Kafur on an expedition to plunder Devagiri, the capital city of the Seuna Kingdom By 1318 the Seuna Kingdom had been subjugated. The Hoysala capital Halebidu was besieged and sacked twice, in 1311 and 1327. By 1336, the Sultan had conquered the Pandyas of Madurai, the Kakatiyas of Warangal and the tiny Kingdom of Kampili. The Hoysalas were the only remaining Hindu Kingdom who resisted the invading armies. Veera Ballala III stationed himself at Tiruvannamalai and offered stiff resistance to invasions from the north and the Madurai Sultanate to the south. Then, after nearly three decades of resistance, Veera Ballala III was killed at the battle of Madurai in 1343, and the sovereign territories of the Hoysala Kingdom were merged with the areas administered by Harihara I in the Tungabhadra River region. This new Hindu Kingdom resisted the northern invasions and would later prosper and come to be known as the Vijayanagara Empire.\nEconomy.\nThe empire consisted of the valleys of three main rivers, the Krishna, the Tungabhadra, and the Kaveri, whose systems facilitated the growth of crops and generated an agricultural output that was immense. The highlands (\"malnad\" regions) with its temperate climate was suitable for raising cattle and the planting of orchards and spices. Paddy and corn were staple crops in the tropical plains (\"Bailnad\"). As agricultural land was scarce, forests, waste land and previously unfarmed land was reclaimed, and new settlements were established. Large areas of forest were cleared to bring lands under cultivation and build villages. The Hoysala kings gave grants of land as rewards for service to the heads of families, who then became landlords (\"gavunda\") to tenants who worked on the land and in the forests. The \"praja gavunda\" (\"the \"gavunda\" of the people\") had a lower status than the wealthier \"prabhu gavunda\" (\"of the lord\")\nThe Hoysala administration supported itself through revenues from an agrarian economy. Land was assessed as being wet land, dry land or garden land for the purposes of taxation, and judged according to the quality of the soil. Taxes on commodities (gold, precious stones, perfumes, sandalwood, ropes, yarn, housing, hearths, shops, cattle pans, sugarcane presses) as well as produce (black pepper, betel leaves, ghee, paddy, spices, palm leaves, coconuts, sugar) are noted in village records. The Hoysalas encouraged people to move to newly-built villages by means of land grants and tax concessions.\nTaxes, collected in the form of cash, from trade and commerce generated considerable wealth for the Hoysala state, and enabled it to buy armaments, elephants, horses and precious goods. The state and the merchant class became interdependent, with some more prosperous merchants being known as \"Rajasresthigal\" (royal merchants), officially recognised on account of their wealth. They were seen as \"puramulasthamba\" ('the pillars of the towns'). The increased prosperity and prestige of some merchants encouraged them to open markets and weekly fairs, with some becoming \"Pattanaswami\" (town administrators), who had the authority to collect tolls on goods that entered the town. Merchants engaged in minting activities, sometimes producing the coins and supplying them to the state.\nTanks (large reservoirs) were created at the expense of the state. The Hoysalas put resources into repairing breached tanks and broken sluices, easily damaged by heavy rainfall. They collected taxes on irrigation systems, canals and wells, all of which were built and maintained at the expense of local villagers. Repairs were undertaken by the landlords as well as their workers; such repairs were considered to be a duty and a pious act.\nImporting horses for use as general transportation and in army cavalries of Indian Kingdoms was a flourishing business on the western seaboard. Song dynasty records from China mention the presence of Indian merchants in ports of South China, indicating active trade with overseas Kingdoms. South India exported textiles, spices, medicinal plants, precious stones, pottery, salt made from salt pans, jewels, gold, ivory, rhino horn, ebony, aloe wood, perfumes, sandalwood, camphor and condiments to China, Dhofar, Aden, and Siraf (the port of entry to Egypt, Arabia, and Persia).\nAdministration.\nIn its administrative practices, the Hoysala Empire followed some of the well-established and proven methods of its predecessors covering administrative functions such as cabinet organisation and command, the structure of local governing bodies and the division of territory. Several of their major feudatories were Gavundas of the peasant extraction. Records show the names of many high-ranking positions reporting directly to the king. Senior ministers were called \"Pancha Pradhanas\", ministers responsible for foreign affairs were designated \"Sandhivigrahi\" and the chief treasurer was \"Mahabhandari\" or \"Hiranyabhandari\". \"Dandanayakas\" were in charge of armies and the chief justice of the Hoysala court was the \"Dharmadhikari\".\nThe Kingdom was divided into provinces named \"Nadu\", \"Vishaya\", \"Kampana\" and \"Desha\", listed in descending order of geographical size. Each province had a local governing body consisting of a minister (\"Mahapradhana\") and a treasurer (\"Bhandari\") that reported to the ruler of that province (\"Dandanayaka\"). Under this local ruler were officials called \"Heggaddes\" and \"Gavundas\" who hired and supervised the local farmers and labourers recruited to till the land. Subordinate ruling clans such as Alupas continued to govern their respective territories while following the policies set by the empire.\nAn elite and well-trained force of bodyguards known as \"Garudas\" protected the members of the royal family at all times. These servants moved closely yet inconspicuously by the side of their master, their loyalty being so complete that they committed suicide after his death. Hero stones (\"virgal\") erected in memory of these bodyguards are called Garuda pillars. The Garuda pillar at the Hoysaleswara temple in Halebidu was erected in honor of Kuvara Lakshma, a minister and bodyguard of King Veera Ballala II.\nKing Vishnuvardhana's coins had the legends \"victor at Nolambavadi\" (\"Nolambavadigonda\"), \"victor at Talakad\" (\"Talakadugonda\"), \"chief of the Malepas\" (\"Maleparolganda\"), \"Brave of Malepa\" (\"malapavira\") in Hoysala style Kannada script. Their gold coin was called \"Honnu\" or \"Gadyana\" and weighed 62\u00a0grains of gold. \"Pana\" or \"Hana\" was a tenth of the \"Honnu\", \"Haga\" was a fourth of the \"Pana\" and \"Visa\" was fourth of \"Haga\". There were other coins called \"Bele\" and \"Kani\".\nCapitals.\nThe earliest Hoysala capital was at Sosevur (also called Sasakapura or Sosavurpattana), located at present-day Angadi in Chikkamagaluru district. At the time, it was a prominent Jain religious centre and is traditionally regarded as the original home of the Hoysala family. Sosevur served as the capital from around 1026 to 1048\u202fCE. Even after the capital was moved to Belur, Sosevur remained an important commercial, administrative, and Jain religious centre.\nIn 1048, the Hoysala capital was moved to Belur. Several factors made Belur an attractive site as a capital: first, its location on the Yagachi River provided a good supply of water year-round. Second, its location in hilly terrain made it easily defended. Third, it lay on an important trade route, helping both commerce and communications. However, Belur was barely capital for a decade before it was moved again.\nThe third and longest-lasting Hoysala capital was Dwarasamudra (also called Dorasamudra or Dvaravatipur), at the present-day site of Halebid. It became capital in 1062 and remained capital until the dynasty's end. The reason for the shift is unknown, but it may have been for administrative convenience. Canals were dug connecting Dwarasamudra with Belur and bringing water from the Yagachi to Dwarasamudra. Two trade routes passed through the city, and scores of temples were built in it. The city declined in the 14th century.\nCulture.\nReligion.\nThe Hoysala rulers were originally patrons of Jainism. In the early period of the dynasty, Hoysala kings and ministers supported Jain institutions, temples, and scholars. King Vishnuvardhana began his reign as a Jain when he was known as Bitti Deva and continued to patronize Jain institutions before his conversion. He granted lands to his general Ganggaraj who supported Jain temples at Shravanabelagola and Kambadahalli thus expanding Jain religious infrastructure in the region.\nVishnuvardhana later converted to Vaishnavism under the influence of the philosopher Ramanujacharya. His queen Shantala Devi and his Family however remained Devotees of Jainism. She spent her later years at Shravanabelagola and, after the death of her son, took the Jain vow of \"Sallekhana\" (Jain ritual fasting to death) at Shivagange in 1131\u202fCE. An inscription from 1131\u202fCE at Chandragiri Hill in Shravanabelagola records her death through \"Sallekhana\" in the presence of her guru Prabhachandra Siddhanta Deva, King Vishnuvardhana and her mother Machikabbe. This inscription praises her piety, details her family lineage, and mentions grants made to Jain temples. Ganggaraj is also recorded as having retired to Shravanabelagola after his military career, continuing his patronage of Jain institutions.\nSeveral prominent Jain, Brahmin and Shaiva poets and scholars flourished under the Hoysalas, and important Jain and Hindu monuments were built during this era including shrines and other structures at Shravanabelagola.\nLater Some Hoysala rulers increasingly supported Vaishnavism. Kings such as Narasimha I and Veera Ballala II are known for their patronage of major Hindu temples and monasteries. However, successors continued the family legacy of patronising Jainism. Inscriptions suggest that king Narasimha III worshiped Parshvanatha, the 23rd Jain Tirthankara, and his spiritual advisor was Meghanandi Siddhanta, (a Digambar Jain monk). However, with the decline of the Hoysala Kingdom Jains influence began to steadily decline in the modern Karnataka region.\nSociety.\nHoysala society was marked by a highly stratified social order, religious pluralism, and rich cultural development. The empire was predominantly agrarian, with villages serving as the basic unit of administration and economy. Land grants to temples, monasteries, and scholars were common, helping sustain religious institutions and local elites.\nUrban centers such as Halebidu, Shravanbelgola, Belur, and Somanathapura became important hubs of trade, craft production, and temple-building activity. The Hoysalas supported merchant guilds (nagaram), artisans, and sculptors, contributing to the development of the distinctive Hoysala architectural style known for its intricate ornamentation. Caste divisions were significant, with Brahmins receiving patronage for education and ritual services, while other occupational groups included agriculturists, artisans, merchants, and laborers. Inscriptions reveal a degree of social mobility through state service, military merit, and religious endowments. Religiously, society was diverse, with Jainism, Shaivism, Vaishnavism, and local traditions coexisting. Hoysala rulers were notable patrons of Jainism, granting lands and building basadis at Shravanabelagola, Halebidu, and elsewhere throughout their domains. Later kings, particularly after Vishnuvardhana\u2019s conversion under Ramanujacharya\u2019s influence, also supported Vaishnavism, leading to the construction of temples such as Chennakeshava at Belur and Hoysaleswara at Halebidu.\nSociety during this period became increasingly sophisticated. The status of women was varied. Some royal women were involved in administration, as shown in records describing Queen Umadevi\u2019s management of Halebidu during Veera Ballala II\u2019s military campaigns. She is also credited with suppressing rebellious feudatories. Women also participated in the fine arts, with Queen Shantala Devi renowned for her skill in dance and music. Shantala Devi remained a devout Jain and is said to have performed the Jain rite of Sallekhana at Shivagange. This pluralistic, temple-centered society encouraged art, literature, and learning, leaving behind a legacy of sculpture, inscriptions, and Kannada literary works that flourished under royal patronage. After the 12th century, Vachana Sahitya poets and Lingayat mystics such as Akka Mahadevi also contributed to the bhakti movement. Temple dancers (Devadasis) were common, often well-educated and accomplished in the arts, which gave them comparatively more freedom than other women. However, social norms remained hierarchical, with the caste system conspicuously present.\nTrade on the west coast brought Arabs, Jews, Persians, Europeans, Chinese, and people from the Malay Peninsula to South India. The empire\u2019s expansion encouraged migration, introducing new cultures and skills. Towns (Pattana or Pattanam) and marketplaces (Nagara or Nagaram) served as the nuclei of urban life. Shravanabelagola, for example, developed from a religious settlement in the 7th century into an important trading center by the 12th century with the arrival of wealthy merchants. Belur also grew into a regal city with the construction of the Chennakesava Temple under Vishnuvardhana. Large temples supported by royal patronage served not only religious but also social, economic, and judicial functions, employing artisans, sculptors, priests, and administrators. Temple building was a shared activity across religions and regions, with merchants and landlords financing temples to serve fiscal, political, cultural, and religious needs of agrarian communities, helping sustain local economies and social structures.\nLiterature.\nThe Hoysala period was marked by significant literary activity in Kannada, with notable contributions from Jain, Shaiva and Vaishnava Brahmin writers. Janna the court poet of Veera Ballala II gained renown for his \"Yashodhara Charite\", a classic of Kannada literature. Keshiraja, the Kannada gramarian and author of \"Shabdamanidarpana\" also flourished under Hoysala patronage.\nJain centers at Shravanabelagola and Kambadahalli, where astronomy and mathematics were taught, were important centers of learning. Jain mathematicians such as Rajaditya wrote seminal works on arithmetic and geometry including \"Vyavaharaganita\", and Mahaviracharya's \"Ganitasarasangraha\" became a standard mathematical text. Inscriptions attest to Jain Saints maintaining centers for astronomical and mathematical studies under Hoysala patronage. This period saw a particularly strong Jain contribution to Kannada literature. The historian R. Narasimhacharya notes that more Jains wrote in Kannada during this period than in any other Dravidian language. \nThe period also saw innovation in Kannada poetic forms. The \"Sangatya\" metre became popular in compositions, while the Shatpadi (six-line), Tripadi (three-line) metres, and \"Ragale\" (lyrical blank verse) became fashionable, allowing greater variety and expressiveness in verse. Jain works continued to extol the virtues of Jain Tirthankaras, preserving religious and ethical themes.\nBrahminical writers also contributed significantly. Rudrabhatta, patronized by Chandramouli, a minister of Veera Ballala II, wrote \"Jagannatha Vijaya\" in the Champu style, narrating the life of Krishna up to his battle with Banasura, drawing on the Vishnu Purana and similar traditions. Harihara (also known as Harisvara), a poet patronized by King Narasimha I, wrote \"Girijakalyana\" in the Champu style, recounting the marriage of Shiva and Parvati in ten sections. A native of Halebidu from a family of accountants (\"Karanikas\"), Harihara wrote over one hundred \"ragales\" in praise of Virupaksha (a form of Shiva). Raghavanka introduced the Shatpadi metre into Kannada literature with his \"Harishchandra Kavya\", which is considered a classic despite occasional departures from strict grammatical rules.\nArchitecture.\nThe modern interest in the Hoysalas is due to their patronage of art and architecture rather than their military conquests. The brisk temple building throughout the Kingdom was accomplished despite constant threats from the Pandyas to the south and the Seunas Yadavas to the north. Their architectural style, an offshoot of the Western Chalukya style, shows distinct Dravidian influences. The Hoysala architecture style is described as \"Karnata Dravida\" as distinguished from the traditional \"Dravida\", and is considered an independent architectural tradition with many unique features.\nA feature of Hoysala temple architecture is its attention to exquisite detail and skilled craftsmanship. The tower over the temple shrine (\"vimana\") is delicately finished with intricate carvings, showing attention to the ornate and elaborately detailed rather than to a tower form and height. The stellate design of the base of the shrine with its rhythmic projections and recesses is carried through the tower in an orderly succession of decorated tiers. Hoysala temple sculpture replicates this emphasis on delicacy and craftsmanship in its focus on depicting feminine beauty, grace and physique. The Hoysala artists achieved this with the use of Soapstone (Chloritic schist), a soft stone as basic building and sculptural material.\nThe Chennakesava Temple at Belur (1117), the Hoysaleswara Temple at Halebidu (1121), the Chennakesava Temple at Somanathapura (1279), the temples at Arasikere (1220), Amruthapura (1196), Belavadi (1200), Nuggehalli (1246), Hosaholalu (1250), Aralaguppe (1250), Korvangla (1173), Haranhalli (1235), Mosale and Basaralu (1234) are some of the notable examples of Hoysala art. While the temples at Belur and Halebidu are the best known because of the beauty of their sculptures, the Hoysala art finds more complete expression in the smaller and lesser known temples. The outer walls of all these temples contain an intricate array of stone sculptures and horizontal friezes (decorative mouldings) that depict the Hindu epics. These depictions are generally clockwise in the traditional direction of circumambulation (\"pradakshina\"). The temple of Halebidu has been described as an outstanding example of Hindu architecture and an important milestone in Indian architecture. The temples at Belur, Halebidu and Somanathapura were designated as UNESCO world heritage sites in 2023.\nLanguage.\nThe Hoysala rulers strongly supported the Kannada language, as seen in their inscriptions often composed in polished, poetic Kannada with decorative floral designs in the margins. According to historian Sheldon Pollock, the Hoysala era marked the near-complete displacement of Sanskrit in favor of Kannada as the primary courtly and administrative language.\nJain and Buddhist monasteries educated novice monks, while schools of higher learning were called \"ghatikas\". Temples often served as local schools where learned Brahmins taught in Sanskrit. The local Kannada language, however, was widely used in the devotional movements that emphasized an intimate experience of the divine. Literary works were written on palm leaves bound together. While earlier centuries had seen Jain works dominate Kannada literature, the Hoysala period also witnessed the rise of Hindu and early Brahminical works.\nSanskrit continued to be used for poetry, grammar, lexicons, manuals, rhetoric, commentaries, prose fiction, and drama. Inscriptions on stone (\"shilashasana\") and copper plates (\"tamarashasana\") were mostly in Kannada, though some were in Sanskrit or bilingual. Typically, the titles, genealogies, origin myths, and benedictions appeared in Sanskrit, while the terms of grants\u2014including land boundaries, participation of local authorities, rights and obligations, taxes, and witnesses\u2014were in Kannada to ensure clarity for local communities.\nList of Monarchs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
