{"id": "38930", "revid": "45894395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38930", "title": "Jupiter", "text": "Fifth planet from the Sun\nJupiter is the fifth planet from the Sun and the largest in the Solar System. It is a gas giant with a mass nearly 2.5 times that of all the other planets in the Solar System combined and slightly less than one-thousandth the mass of the Sun. Its diameter is 11 times that of Earth and a tenth that of the Sun. Jupiter orbits the Sun at a distance of , with an orbital period of . It is the third-brightest natural object in the Earth's night sky, after the Moon and Venus, and has been observed since prehistoric times. Its name derives from that of Jupiter, the chief deity of ancient Roman religion.\nJupiter was the first of the Sun's planets to form, and its inward migration during the primordial phase of the Solar System affected much of the formation history of the other planets. Jupiter's atmosphere consists of 76% hydrogen and 24% helium by mass, with a denser interior. It contains traces of the elements carbon, oxygen, sulfur, neon, and compounds such as ammonia, water vapour, phosphine, hydrogen sulfide, and hydrocarbons. Jupiter's helium abundance is 80% of the Sun's, similar to Saturn's composition.\nThe outer atmosphere is divided into a series of latitudinal bands, with turbulence and storms along their interacting boundaries; the most obvious result of this is the Great Red Spot, a giant storm that has been recorded since 1831. Because of its rapid rotation rate, one turn in ten hours, Jupiter is an oblate spheroid; it has a slight but noticeable 6.5% bulge around the equator compared to its poles. Its internal structure is believed to consist of an outer mantle of fluid metallic hydrogen and a diffuse inner core of denser material. The ongoing contraction of Jupiter's interior generates more heat than the planet receives from the Sun. Jupiter's magnetic field is the strongest and second-largest contiguous structure in the Solar System, generated by eddy currents within the fluid, metallic hydrogen core. The solar wind interacts with the magnetosphere, extending it outward and affecting Jupiter's orbit.\nAt least 97 moons orbit the planet; the four largest moons\u2014Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto\u2014orbit within the magnetosphere and are visible with common binoculars. Ganymede, the largest of the four, is larger than the planet Mercury. Jupiter is surrounded by a faint system of planetary rings. The rings of Jupiter consist mainly of dust and have three main segments: an inner torus of particles known as the halo, a relatively bright main ring, and an outer gossamer ring. The rings have a reddish colour in visible and near-infrared light. The age of the ring system is unknown, possibly dating back to Jupiter's formation. Since 1973, Jupiter has been visited by nine robotic probes: seven flybys and two dedicated orbiters (with two more en route). Jupiter-like exoplanets have also been found in other planetary systems.\nName and symbol.\nIn both the ancient Greek and Roman civilizations, Jupiter was named after the chief god of the divine pantheon: Zeus to the Greeks and Jupiter to the Romans. The International Astronomical Union formally adopted the name Jupiter for the planet in 1976 and has since named its newly discovered satellites for the god's lovers, favourites, and descendants. The planetary symbol for Jupiter, , descends from a Greek zeta with a horizontal stroke, \u27e8\u01b5\u27e9, as an abbreviation for \"Zeus\".\nIn Latin, \"Iovis\" is the genitive case of \"Iuppiter\", i.e. Jupiter. It is associated with the etymology of \"Zeus\" ('sky father'). The English equivalent, \"Jove\", is known to have come into use as a poetic name for the planet around the 14th century.\nJovian is the adjectival form of Jupiter. The older adjectival form \"jovial\", employed by astrologers in the Middle Ages, has come to mean 'happy' or 'merry', moods ascribed to Jupiter's influence in astrology.\nThe original Greek deity \"Zeus\" supplies the root \"zeno-\", which is used to form some Jupiter-related words, such as \"zenography\".\nFormation and migration.\nJupiter is believed to be the oldest planet in the Solar System, having formed just one million years after the Sun and roughly 50 million years before Earth. Current models of Solar System formation suggest that Jupiter formed at or beyond the snow line: a distance from the early Sun where the temperature was sufficiently cold for volatiles such as water to condense into solids. First forming a solid core, the planet then accumulated its gaseous atmosphere. Therefore, the planet must have formed before the solar nebula was fully dispersed. During its formation, Jupiter's mass gradually increased until it had 20 times the mass of the Earth, approximately half of which was made up of silicates, ices and other heavy-element constituents. When the proto-Jupiter grew larger than 50 Earth masses it created a gap in the solar nebula. Thereafter, the growing planet reached its final mass in 3\u20134million years.\nAccording to the \"grand tack hypothesis\", Jupiter began to form at a distance of roughly from the Sun. As the young planet accreted mass, its interaction with the gas disk orbiting the Sun and the orbital resonances from Saturn caused it to migrate inwards. This upset the orbits of several super-Earths orbiting closer to the Sun, causing them to collide destructively. Saturn would later have begun to migrate inwards at a faster rate than Jupiter until the two planets became captured in a 3:2 mean motion resonance at approximately from the Sun. This changed the direction of migration, causing them to migrate away from the Sun and out of the inner system to their current locations. All of this happened over a period of 3\u20136million years, with the final migration of Jupiter occurring over several hundred thousand years. Jupiter's migration from the inner Solar System eventually allowed the inner planets\u2014including Earth\u2014to form from the rubble.\nThere are several unresolved issues with the grand tack hypothesis. The resulting formation timescales of terrestrial planets appear to be inconsistent with the measured elemental composition. Jupiter would likely have settled into an orbit much closer to the Sun if it had migrated through the solar nebula. Some competing models of Solar System formation predict the formation of Jupiter with orbital properties that are close to those of the present-day planet. Other models predict Jupiter forming at distances much further out, such as .\nAccording to the Nice model, the infall of proto-Kuiper belt objects over the first 600 million years of Solar System history caused Jupiter and Saturn to migrate from their initial positions into a 1:2 resonance, which caused Saturn to shift into a higher orbit, disrupting the orbits of Uranus and Neptune, depleting the Kuiper belt, and triggering the Late Heavy Bombardment.\nAccording to the Jumping-Jupiter scenario, Jupiter's migration through the early Solar System could have led to the ejection of a fifth gas giant. This hypothesis suggests that during its orbital migration, Jupiter's gravitational influence disrupted the orbits of other gas giants, potentially casting one planet out of the Solar System entirely. The dynamics of such an event would have dramatically altered the formation and configuration of the Solar System, leaving behind only the four gas giants humans observe today.\nBased on Jupiter's composition, researchers have made the case for an initial formation outside the molecular nitrogen (N2) snow line, which is estimated at from the Sun, and possibly even outside the argon snow line, which may be as far as . Having formed at one of these extreme distances, Jupiter would then have, over a roughly 700,000-year period, migrated inwards to its current location, during an epoch approximately 2\u20133\u00a0million years after the planet began to form. In this model, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune would have formed even further out than Jupiter, and Saturn would also have migrated inwards.\nPhysical characteristics.\nJupiter is a gas giant, meaning its chemical composition is primarily hydrogen and helium. These materials are classified as \"gasses\" in planetary geology, a term that does not denote the state of matter. It is the largest planet in the Solar System, with a diameter of at its equator, giving it a volume 1,321 times that of the Earth. Its average density, 1.326\u00a0g/cm3, is lower than those of the four terrestrial planets.\nComposition.\nThe atmosphere of Jupiter is approximately 76% hydrogen and 24% helium by mass. By volume, the upper atmosphere is about 90% hydrogen and 10% helium, with the lower proportion owing to the individual helium atoms being more massive than the molecules of hydrogen formed in this part of the atmosphere. The atmosphere contains trace amounts of elemental carbon, oxygen, sulfur, and neon, as well as ammonia, water vapour, phosphine, hydrogen sulfide, and hydrocarbons like methane, ethane and benzene. Its outermost layer contains crystals of frozen ammonia. The planet's interior is denser, with a composition of roughly 71% hydrogen, 24% helium, and 5% other elements by mass.\nThe atmospheric proportions of hydrogen and helium are close to the theoretical composition of the primordial solar nebula. Neon in the upper atmosphere consists of 20 parts per million by mass, which is about a tenth as abundant as in the Sun. Jupiter's helium abundance is about 80% that of the Sun due to the precipitation of these elements as helium-rich droplets, a process that happens deep in the planet's interior.\nBased on spectroscopy, Saturn is thought to be similar in composition to Jupiter, but the other giant planets Uranus and Neptune have relatively less hydrogen and helium and relatively more of the next most common elements, including oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur. These planets are known as ice giants because during their formation, these elements are thought to have been incorporated into them as ice; however, they probably contain very little ice.\nSize and mass.\nJupiter is about eleven times wider than the Earth (); while its mass is 318 times that of Earth which is 2.5 times the mass of all the other planets in the Solar System combined. It is so massive that its barycentre with the Sun lies above the Sun's surface at 1.068\u00a0solar radii from the Sun's centre. Jupiter's radius is about one tenth the radius of the Sun (), and its mass is one thousandth the mass of the Sun, of which the densities of the two bodies are similar. A \"Jupiter mass\" (MJ or MJup) is used as a unit to describe masses of other objects, particularly extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs. For example, the extrasolar planet HD 209458 b has a mass of 0.69\u00a0MJ, while the brown dwarf Gliese 229 b has a mass of 60.4\u00a0MJ.\nJupiter radiates more heat than it receives through solar radiation, due to the Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz mechanism within its contracting interior. This process causes Jupiter to shrink by about per year. At the time of its formation, Jupiter was hotter and was about twice its current diameter.\nTheoretical models indicate that if Jupiter had over 40% more mass, the interior would be so compressed that its volume would \"decrease\" despite the increasing amount of matter. For smaller changes in its mass, the radius would not change appreciably. As a result, Jupiter is thought to have about as large a diameter as a planet of its composition and evolutionary history can achieve. The process of further shrinkage with increasing mass would continue until appreciable stellar ignition was achieved. Although Jupiter would need to be about 75 times more massive to fuse hydrogen and become a star, its diameter is sufficient as the smallest red dwarf may be slightly larger in radius than Saturn.\nInternal structure.\nBefore the early 21st century, most scientists proposed one of two scenarios for the formation of Jupiter. If the planet accreted first as a solid body, it would consist of a dense core, a surrounding layer of fluid metallic hydrogen (with some helium) extending outward to about 80% of the radius of the planet, and an outer atmosphere consisting primarily of molecular hydrogen. Alternatively, if the planet collapsed directly from the gaseous protoplanetary disk, it was expected to completely lack a core, consisting instead of a denser and denser fluid (predominantly molecular and metallic hydrogen) all the way to the centre. Data from the \"Juno\" mission showed that Jupiter has a diffuse core that mixes into its mantle, extending for 30\u201350% of the planet's radius, and comprising heavy elements with a combined mass 7\u201325 times the Earth. This mixing process could have arisen during formation, while the planet accreted solids and gases from the surrounding nebula. Alternatively, it could have been caused by an impact from a planet of about ten Earth masses a few million years after Jupiter's formation, which would have disrupted an originally compact Jovian core.\nOutside the layer of metallic hydrogen lies a transparent interior atmosphere of hydrogen. At this depth, the pressure and temperature are above molecular hydrogen's critical pressure of 1.3 MPa and critical temperature of . In this state, there are no distinct liquid and gas phases\u2014hydrogen is said to be in a supercritical fluid state. The hydrogen and helium gas extending downward from the cloud layer gradually transitions to a liquid in deeper layers, possibly resembling something akin to an ocean of liquid hydrogen and other supercritical fluids. Physically, the gas gradually becomes hotter and denser as depth increases.\nRain-like droplets of helium and neon precipitate downward through the lower atmosphere, depleting the abundance of these elements in the upper atmosphere. Calculations suggest that helium drops separate from metallic hydrogen at a radius of ( below the cloud tops) and merge again at ( beneath the clouds). Rainfalls of diamonds have been suggested to occur, as well as on Saturn and the ice giants Uranus and Neptune.\nThe temperature and pressure inside Jupiter increase steadily inward as the heat of planetary formation can only escape by convection. At a surface depth where the atmospheric pressure level is about one standard Earth atmosphere (about ), the temperature is around . The region where supercritical hydrogen changes gradually from a molecular fluid to a metallic fluid spans pressure ranges of with temperatures of , respectively. The temperature of Jupiter's diluted core is estimated to be with a pressure of around .\nAtmosphere.\nThe atmosphere of Jupiter is primarily composed of molecular hydrogen and helium, with a smaller amount of other compounds such as water, methane, hydrogen sulfide, and ammonia. Jupiter's atmosphere extends to a depth of approximately below the cloud layers.\nCloud layers.\nJupiter is perpetually covered with clouds of ammonia crystals, which may contain ammonium hydrosulfide as well. The clouds are located in the tropopause layer of the atmosphere, forming bands at different latitudes, known as tropical regions. These are subdivided into lighter-hued \"zones\" and darker \"belts\". The interactions of these conflicting circulation patterns cause storms and turbulence. Wind speeds of are common in zonal jet streams. The zones have been observed to vary in width, colour and intensity from year to year, but they have remained stable enough for scientists to name them.\nThe cloud layer is about deep and consists of at least two decks of ammonia clouds: a thin, clearer region on top and a thicker, lower deck. There may be a thin layer of water clouds underlying the ammonia clouds, as suggested by flashes of lightning detected in the atmosphere of Jupiter. These electrical discharges can be up to a thousand times as powerful as lightning on Earth. The water clouds are assumed to generate thunderstorms in the same way as terrestrial thunderstorms, driven by the heat rising from the interior. The Juno mission revealed the presence of \"shallow lightning\" which originates from ammonia-water clouds relatively high in the atmosphere. These discharges carry \"mushballs\" of water-ammonia slushes covered in ice, which fall deep into the atmosphere. Upper-atmospheric lightning has been observed in Jupiter's upper atmosphere, bright flashes of light that last around 1.4milliseconds. These are known as \"elves\" or \"sprites\" and appear blue or pink due to the hydrogen.\nThe orange and brown colours in the clouds of Jupiter are caused by upwelling compounds that change colour when they are exposed to ultraviolet light from the Sun. The exact makeup remains uncertain, but the substances are thought to be made up of phosphorus, sulfur or possibly hydrocarbons. These colourful compounds, known as chromophores, mix with the warmer clouds of the lower deck. The light-coloured zones are formed when rising convection cells form crystallising ammonia that hides the chromophores from view.\nJupiter has a low axial tilt, thus ensuring that the poles always receive less solar radiation than the planet's equatorial region. Convection within the interior of the planet transports energy to the poles, balancing out temperatures at the cloud layer.\nGreat Red Spot and other vortices.\nA well-known feature of Jupiter is the Great Red Spot, a persistent anticyclonic storm located 22\u00b0 south of the equator. It was first observed in 1831, and possibly as early as 1665. Images by the Hubble Space Telescope have shown two more \"red spots\" adjacent to the Great Red Spot. The storm is visible through Earth-based telescopes with an aperture of 12\u00a0cm or larger. The storm rotates counterclockwise, with a period of about six days. The maximum altitude of this storm is about above the surrounding cloud tops. The Spot's composition and the source of its red colour remain uncertain, although photodissociated ammonia reacting with acetylene is a likely explanation.\nThe Great Red Spot is larger than the Earth. Mathematical models suggest that the storm is stable and will be a permanent feature of the planet. However, it has significantly decreased in size since its discovery. Initial observations in the late 1800s showed it to be approximately across. As of 2015[ [update]], the storm was measured at approximately , and was decreasing in length by about per year. In October 2021, a \"Juno\" flyby mission measured the depth of the Great Red Spot, putting it at around .\n\"Juno\" missions found several cyclone groups at Jupiter's poles. The northern group contains nine cyclones, with a large one in the centre and eight others around it, while its southern counterpart also consists of a centre vortex but is surrounded by five large storms and a single smaller one for a total of seven storms.\nIn 2000, an atmospheric feature formed in the southern hemisphere that is similar in appearance to the Great Red Spot, but smaller. This was created when smaller, white oval-shaped storms merged to form a single feature\u2014these three smaller white ovals were formed in 1939\u20131940. The merged feature was named Oval BA. It has since increased in intensity and changed from white to red, earning it the nickname \"Little Red Spot\".\nIn April 2017, a \"Great Cold Spot\" was discovered in Jupiter's thermosphere at its north pole. This feature is across, wide, and cooler than surrounding material. While this spot changes form and intensity over the short term, it has maintained its general position in the atmosphere for more than 15 years. It may be a giant vortex similar to the Great Red Spot, and appears to be quasi-stable like the vortices in Earth's thermosphere. This feature may be formed by interactions between charged particles generated from Io and the strong magnetic field of Jupiter, resulting in a redistribution of heat flow.\nMagnetosphere.\nJupiter's magnetic field is the strongest of any planet in the Solar System, with a dipole moment of that is tilted at an angle of 10.31\u00b0 to the pole of rotation. The surface magnetic field strength varies from up to . This field is thought to be generated by eddy currents\u2014swirling movements of conducting materials\u2014within the fluid, metallic hydrogen core. At about 75 Jupiter radii from the planet, the interaction of the magnetosphere with the solar wind generates a bow shock. Surrounding Jupiter's magnetosphere is a magnetopause, located at the inner edge of a magnetosheath\u2014a region between it and the bow shock. The solar wind interacts with these regions, elongating the magnetosphere on Jupiter's lee side and extending it outward until it nearly reaches the orbit of Saturn. The four largest moons of Jupiter all orbit within the magnetosphere, which protects them from solar wind.\nThe volcanoes on the moon Io emit large amounts of sulfur dioxide, forming a gas torus along its orbit. The gas is ionized in Jupiter's magnetosphere, producing sulfur and oxygen ions. They, together with hydrogen ions originating from the atmosphere of Jupiter, form a plasma sheet in Jupiter's equatorial plane. The plasma in the sheet co-rotates with the planet, causing deformation of the dipole magnetic field into that of a magnetodisk. Electrons within the plasma sheet generate a strong radio signature, with short, superimposed bursts in the range of 0.6\u201330\u00a0MHz that are detectable from Earth with consumer-grade shortwave radio receivers. As Io moves through this torus, the interaction generates Alfv\u00e9n waves that carry ionized matter into the polar regions of Jupiter. As a result, radio waves are generated through a cyclotron maser mechanism, and the energy is transmitted out along a cone-shaped surface. When Earth intersects this cone, the radio emissions from Jupiter can exceed the radio output of the Sun.\nPlanetary rings.\nJupiter has a faint planetary ring system composed of three main segments: an inner torus of particles known as the halo, a relatively bright main ring, and an outer gossamer ring. These rings appear to be made of dust, whereas Saturn's rings are made of ice. The main ring is most likely made out of material ejected from the satellites Adrastea and Metis, which is drawn into Jupiter because of the planet's strong gravitational influence. New material is added by additional impacts. In a similar way, the moons Thebe and Amalthea are believed to produce the two distinct components of the dusty gossamer ring. There is evidence of a fourth ring that may consist of collisional debris from Amalthea that is strung along the same moon's orbit.\nOrbit and rotation.\nJupiter is the only planet whose barycentre with the Sun lies outside the volume of the Sun, though by 7% of the Sun's radius. The average distance between Jupiter and the Sun is and it completes an orbit every 11.86\u00a0years. This is approximately two-fifths the orbital period of Saturn, forming a near orbital resonance. The orbital plane of Jupiter is inclined 1.30\u00b0 compared to Earth. Because the eccentricity of its orbit is 0.049, Jupiter is slightly over 75\u00a0million\u00a0km nearer the Sun at perihelion than aphelion, which means that its orbit is nearly circular. This low eccentricity is at odds with exoplanet discoveries, which have revealed Jupiter-sized planets with very high eccentricities. Models suggest this may be due to there being two giant planets in the Solar System, as the presence of a third or more giant planets tends to induce larger eccentricities.\nThe axial tilt of Jupiter is 3.13\u00b0, which is relatively small, so its seasons are insignificant compared to those of Earth and Mars.\nJupiter's rotation is the fastest of all the Solar System's planets, completing a rotation on its axis in slightly less than ten hours; this creates an equatorial bulge easily seen through an amateur telescope. Because Jupiter is not a solid body, its upper atmosphere undergoes differential rotation. The rotation of Jupiter's polar atmosphere is about five minutes longer than that of the equatorial atmosphere. The planet is an oblate spheroid, meaning that the diameter across its equator is longer than the diameter measured between its poles. On Jupiter, the equatorial diameter is longer than the polar diameter.\nThree systems are used as frames of reference for tracking planetary rotation, particularly when graphing the motion of atmospheric features. System I applies to latitudes from 7\u00b0\u00a0N to 7\u00b0\u00a0S; its period is the planet's shortest, at 9h\u00a050\u00a0m\u00a030.0s. System II applies at latitudes north and south of these; its period is 9h\u00a055\u00a0m\u00a040.6s. System III was defined by radio astronomers and corresponds to the rotation of the planet's magnetosphere; its period is Jupiter's official rotation.\nObservation.\nJupiter is usually the fourth-brightest object in the sky (after the Sun, the Moon, and Venus), although at opposition Mars can appear brighter than Jupiter. Depending on Jupiter's position with respect to the Earth, it can vary in visual magnitude from as bright as \u22122.94 at opposition down to \u22121.66 during conjunction with the Sun. The mean apparent magnitude is \u22122.20 with a standard deviation of 0.33. The angular diameter of Jupiter likewise varies from 50.1 to 30.5 arc seconds. Favourable oppositions occur when Jupiter is passing through the perihelion of its orbit, bringing it closer to Earth. Near opposition, Jupiter will appear to go into retrograde motion for a period of about 121 days, moving backward through an angle of 9.9\u00b0 before returning to prograde movement.\nBecause the orbit of Jupiter is outside that of Earth, the phase angle of Jupiter as viewed from Earth is always less than 11.5\u00b0; thus, Jupiter always appears nearly fully illuminated when viewed through Earth-based telescopes. It was during spacecraft missions to Jupiter that crescent views of the planet were obtained. A small telescope will usually show Jupiter's four Galilean moons and the cloud belts across Jupiter's atmosphere. A larger telescope with an aperture of will show Jupiter's Great Red Spot when it faces Earth.\nHistory.\nPre-telescopic research.\nObservations of Jupiter are attested with the Babylonian astronomers during the 7th\u20138th centuries\u00a0BC. The ancient Chinese knew Jupiter as the ' star' ( ) and established their cycle of twelve earthly branches based on the approximate number of years it takes Jupiter to revolve around the Sun; the Chinese language still uses its name (; simplified as ) when referring to years of age. By the 4th century\u00a0BC, these observations had developed into the Chinese zodiac, and each year became associated with a Tai Sui star and god controlling the region of the heavens opposite Jupiter's position in the night sky. These beliefs survive in some Taoist and folk religious practices and in the East Asian zodiac's twelve animals. The Chinese historian Xi Zezong has claimed that Gan De, an ancient Chinese astronomer, reported a small star \"in alliance\" with the planet, which may indicate a sighting of one of Jupiter's moons with the unaided eye. If true, this would predate Galileo's discovery by nearly two millennia.\nA 2016 paper reports that trapezoidal rule was used by Babylonians before 50 BC for integrating the velocity of Jupiter along the ecliptic. In his 2nd century work the \"Almagest\", the Hellenistic astronomer Claudius Ptolemaeus constructed a geocentric planetary model based on deferents and epicycles to explain Jupiter's motion relative to Earth, giving its orbital period around Earth as 4332.38\u00a0days, or 11.86\u00a0years.\nGround-based telescope research.\nIn 1610, Italian polymath Galileo Galilei discovered the four largest moons of Jupiter (now known as the Galilean moons) using a telescope. This is thought to be the first telescopic observation of moons other than Earth's. Just one day after Galileo, Simon Marius independently discovered moons around Jupiter, though he did not publish his discovery in a book until 1614. It was Marius's names for the major moons, however, that stuck: Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. The discovery was a major point in favour of the heliocentric theory of the motions of the planets by Nicolaus Copernicus; Galileo's outspoken support of the Copernican theory led to him being tried and condemned by the Inquisition.\nIn the autumn of 1639, the Neapolitan optician Francesco Fontana tested a 22-palm telescope of his own making and discovered the characteristic bands of the planet's atmosphere.\nDuring the 1660s, Giovanni Cassini used a new telescope to discover spots in Jupiter's atmosphere, observe that the planet appeared oblate, and estimate its rotation period. In 1692, Cassini noticed that the atmosphere undergoes a differential rotation.\nThe Great Red Spot may have been observed as early as 1664 by Robert Hooke and in 1665 by Cassini, although this is disputed. The pharmacist Heinrich Schwabe produced the earliest known drawing to show details of the Great Red Spot in 1831. The Red Spot was reportedly lost from sight on several occasions between 1665 and 1708 before becoming quite conspicuous in 1878. It was recorded as fading again in 1883 and at the start of the 20th century.\nBoth Giovanni Borelli and Cassini made careful tables of the motions of Jupiter's moons, which allowed predictions of when the moons would pass before or behind the planet. By the 1670s, Cassini observed that when Jupiter was on the opposite side of the Sun from Earth, these events would occur about 17\u00a0minutes later than expected. Ole R\u00f8mer deduced that light does not travel instantaneously (a conclusion that Cassini had earlier rejected), and this timing discrepancy was used to estimate the speed of light.\nIn 1892, E. E. Barnard observed a fifth satellite of Jupiter with the refractor at Lick Observatory in California. This moon was later named \"Amalthea\". It was the last planetary moon to be discovered directly by a visual observer through a telescope. An additional eight satellites were discovered before the flyby of the \"Voyager 1\" probe in 1979.\nIn 1932, Rupert Wildt identified absorption bands of ammonia and methane in the spectra of Jupiter. Three long-lived anticyclonic features called \"white ovals\" were observed in 1938. For several decades, they remained as separate features in the atmosphere that approach each other but never merge. Finally, two of the ovals merged in 1998, then absorbed the third in 2000, becoming Oval BA.\nRadiotelescope research.\nIn 1955, Bernard Burke and Kenneth Franklin discovered that Jupiter emits bursts of radio waves at a frequency of 22.2\u00a0MHz. The period of these bursts matched the rotation of the planet, and they used this information to determine a more precise value for Jupiter's rotation rate. Radio bursts from Jupiter were found to come in two forms: long bursts (or L-bursts) lasting up to several seconds, and short bursts (or S-bursts) lasting less than a hundredth of a second.\nScientists have discovered three forms of radio signals transmitted from Jupiter:\nExploration.\nJupiter has been visited by automated spacecraft since 1973, when the space probe \"Pioneer 10\" passed close enough to Jupiter to send back revelations about its properties and phenomena. Missions to Jupiter are accomplished at a cost in energy, which is described by the net change in velocity of the spacecraft, or delta-v. Entering a Hohmann transfer orbit from Earth to Jupiter from low Earth orbit requires a delta-v of 6.3\u00a0km/s, which is comparable to the 9.7\u00a0km/s delta-v needed to reach low Earth orbit. Gravity assists through planetary flybys can be used to reduce the energy required to reach Jupiter.\nFlyby missions.\nBeginning in 1973, several spacecraft performed planetary flyby manoeuvres that brought them within the observation range of Jupiter. The Pioneer missions obtained the first close-up images of Jupiter's atmosphere and several of its moons. They discovered that the radiation fields near the planet were much stronger than expected, but both spacecraft managed to survive in that environment. The trajectories of these spacecraft were used to refine the mass estimates of the Jovian system. Radio occultations by the planet resulted in better measurements of Jupiter's diameter and the amount of polar flattening.\nSix years later, the Voyager missions vastly improved the understanding of the Galilean moons and discovered Jupiter's rings. They also confirmed that the Great Red Spot was anticyclonic. Comparison of images showed that the Spot had changed hues since the Pioneer missions, turning from orange to dark brown. A torus of ionized atoms was discovered along Io's orbital path, which were found to come from erupting volcanoes on the moon's surface. As the spacecraft passed behind the planet, it observed flashes of lightning in the night side atmosphere.\nThe next mission to encounter Jupiter was the \"Ulysses\" solar probe. In February 1992, it performed a flyby manoeuvre to attain a polar orbit around the Sun. During this pass, the spacecraft studied Jupiter's magnetosphere, although it had no cameras to photograph the planet. The spacecraft passed by Jupiter six years later, this time at a much greater distance.\nIn 2000, the \"Cassini\" probe flew by Jupiter on its way to Saturn, and provided higher-resolution images.\nThe \"New Horizons\" probe flew by Jupiter in 2007 for a gravity assist en route to Pluto. The probe's cameras measured plasma output from volcanoes on Io and studied all four Galilean moons in detail.\n\"Galileo\" mission.\nThe first spacecraft to orbit Jupiter was the \"Galileo\" mission, which reached the planet on December 7, 1995. It remained in orbit for over seven years, conducting multiple flybys of all the Galilean moons and Amalthea. The spacecraft also witnessed the impact of Comet Shoemaker\u2013Levy 9 when it collided with Jupiter in 1994. Some of the goals for the mission were thwarted due to a malfunction in \"Galileo\"s high-gain antenna.\nA 340-kilogram titanium atmospheric probe was released from the spacecraft in July 1995, entering Jupiter's atmosphere on December 7. It parachuted through of the atmosphere at a speed of about and collected data for 57.6\u00a0minutes until the spacecraft was destroyed. The \"Galileo\" orbiter itself experienced a more rapid version of the same fate when it was deliberately steered into the planet on September 21, 2003. NASA destroyed the spacecraft to avoid any possibility of the spacecraft crashing into and possibly contaminating the moon Europa, which may harbour life.\nData from this mission revealed that hydrogen composes up to 90% of Jupiter's atmosphere. The recorded temperature was more than , and the wind speed measured more than 644\u00a0km/h (&gt;400\u00a0mph) before the probes vaporized.\n\"Juno\" mission.\nNASA's \"Juno\" mission arrived at Jupiter on July 4, 2016, with the goal of studying the planet in detail from a polar orbit. The spacecraft was originally intended to orbit Jupiter thirty-seven times over a period of twenty months. During the mission, the spacecraft will be exposed to high levels of radiation from Jupiter's magnetosphere, which may cause the failure of certain instruments. On August 27, 2016, the spacecraft completed its first flyby of Jupiter and sent back the first-ever images of Jupiter's north pole.\n\"Juno\" completed 12 orbits before the end of its budgeted mission plan, ending in July 2018. In June of that year, NASA extended the mission operations plan to July 2021, and in January of that year the mission was extended to September 2025 with four lunar flybys: one of Ganymede, one of Europa, and two of Io. When \"Juno\" reaches the end of the mission, it will perform a controlled deorbit and disintegrate into Jupiter's atmosphere to avoid the risk of colliding and contaminating Jupiter's moons.\nCancelled missions and future plans.\nThere is an interest in missions to study Jupiter's larger icy moons, which may have subsurface liquid oceans. Funding difficulties have delayed progress, causing NASA's \"JIMO\" (\"Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter\") to be cancelled in 2005. A subsequent proposal was developed for a joint NASA/ESA mission called EJSM/Laplace, with a provisional launch date around 2020. EJSM/Laplace would have consisted of the NASA-led Jupiter Europa Orbiter and the ESA-led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter. However, the ESA formally ended the partnership in April 2011, citing budget issues at NASA and the consequences on the mission timetable. Instead, ESA planned to go ahead with a European-only mission to compete in its L1 Cosmic Vision selection. These plans have been realized as the European Space Agency's Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer (JUICE), launched on April 14, 2023, followed by NASA's \"Europa Clipper\" mission, launched on October 14, 2024.\nOther proposed missions include the Chinese National Space Administration's \"Tianwen-4\" mission which aims to launch an orbiter to the Jovian system and possibly Callisto around 2035, and CNSA's \"Interstellar Express\" and NASA's \"Interstellar Probe\", which would both use Jupiter's gravity to help them reach the edges of the heliosphere.\nMoons.\nJupiter has 97 known natural satellites, and it is likely that this number will go up due to increasing telescopic observations. Of these, only 16 are larger than 10\u00a0km in diameter. The four largest moons, known as the Galilean moons, are Ganymede, Callisto, Io, and Europa (in order of decreasing size), and are visible from Earth with binoculars on a clear night.\nGalilean moons.\nThe moons discovered by Galileo\u2014Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto\u2014are among the largest in the Solar System. The orbits of Io, Europa, and Ganymede form a pattern known as a Laplace resonance; for every four orbits that Io makes around Jupiter, Europa makes exactly two orbits and Ganymede makes exactly one. This resonance causes the gravitational effects of the three large moons to distort their orbits into elliptical shapes, because each moon receives an extra tug from its neighbours at the same point in every orbit it makes. The tidal force from Jupiter, on the other hand, works to circularize their orbits.\nThe eccentricity of their orbits causes regular flexing of the three moons' shapes, with Jupiter's gravity stretching them out as they approach it and allowing them to spring back to more spherical shapes as they swing away. The friction created by this tidal flexing generates heat in the interior of the moons. This is seen most dramatically in the volcanic activity of Io (which is subject to the strongest tidal forces), and to a lesser degree in the geological youth of Europa's surface, which indicates recent resurfacing of the moon's exterior.\nClassification.\nJupiter's moons were classified into four groups of four, based on their similar orbital elements. This picture has been complicated by the discovery of numerous small outer moons since 1999. Jupiter's moons are divided into several different groups, although there are two known moons which are not part of any group (Themisto and Valetudo).\nThe eight innermost regular moons, which have nearly circular orbits near the plane of Jupiter's equator, are thought to have formed alongside Jupiter, while the remainder are irregular moons and are thought to be captured asteroids or fragments of captured asteroids. The irregular moons within each group may have a common origin, perhaps as a larger moon or captured body that broke up.\nInteraction with the Solar System.\nAs the most massive of the eight planets, the gravitational influence of Jupiter has helped shape the Solar System. With the exception of Mercury, the orbits of the system's planets lie closer to Jupiter's orbital plane than the Sun's equatorial plane. The Kirkwood gaps in the asteroid belt are mostly caused by Jupiter, and the planet may have been responsible for the Late Heavy Bombardment in the inner Solar System's history.\nIn addition to its moons, Jupiter's gravitational field controls numerous asteroids that have settled around the Lagrangian points that precede and follow the planet in its orbit around the Sun. These are known as the Trojan asteroids, and are divided into Greek and Trojan \"camps\" to honour the \"Iliad\". The first of these, 588 Achilles, was discovered by Max Wolf in 1906; since then more than two thousand have been discovered. The largest is 624 Hektor.\nThe Jupiter family is defined as comets that have a semi-major axis smaller than Jupiter's; most short-period comets belong to this group. Members of the Jupiter family are thought to form in the Kuiper belt outside the orbit of Neptune. During close encounters with Jupiter, they are perturbed into orbits with a smaller period, which then becomes circularized by regular gravitational interactions with the Sun and Jupiter.\nImpacts.\nJupiter has been called the Solar System's vacuum cleaner because of its immense gravity well and location near the inner Solar System. There are more impacts on Jupiter, such as comets, than on any other planet in the Solar System. For example, Jupiter experiences about 200 times more asteroid and comet impacts than Earth. Scientists used to believe that Jupiter partially shielded the inner system from cometary bombardment. However, computer simulations in 2008 suggest that Jupiter does not cause a net decrease in the number of comets that pass through the inner Solar System, as its gravity perturbs their orbits inward roughly as often as it accretes or ejects them. This topic remains controversial among scientists, as some think it draws comets towards Earth from the Kuiper belt, while others believe that Jupiter protects Earth from the Oort cloud.\nIn July 1994, the Comet Shoemaker\u2013Levy 9 comet collided with Jupiter. The impacts were closely observed by observatories around the world, including the Hubble Space Telescope and \"Galileo\" spacecraft. The event was widely covered by the media.\nSurveys of early astronomical records and drawings produced eight examples of potential impact observations between 1664 and 1839. However, a 1997 review determined that these observations had little or no possibility of being the results of impacts. Further investigation by this team revealed a dark surface feature discovered by astronomer Giovanni Cassini in 1690 may have been an impact scar.\nIn culture.\nThe existence of the planet Jupiter has been known since ancient times. It is visible to the naked eye in the night sky and can be seen in the daytime when the Sun is low. To the Babylonians, this planet represented their god Marduk, chief of their pantheon from the Hammurabi period. They used Jupiter's roughly 12-year orbit along the ecliptic to define the constellations of their zodiac.\nThe mythical Greek name for this planet is \"Zeus\" (\u0396\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2), also referred to as \"Dias\" (\u0394\u03af\u03b1\u03c2), the planetary name of which is retained in modern Greek. The ancient Greeks knew the planet as Phaethon (), meaning \"shining one\" or \"blazing star\". The Greek myths of Zeus from the Homeric period showed particular similarities to certain Near-Eastern gods, including the Semitic El and Baal, the Sumerian Enlil, and the Babylonian god Marduk. The association between the planet and the Greek deity Zeus was drawn from Near Eastern influences and was fully established by the fourth century BC, as documented in the \"Epinomis\" of Plato and his contemporaries.\nThe god Jupiter is the Roman counterpart of Zeus, and he is the principal god of Roman mythology. The Romans originally called Jupiter the \"star of Jupiter\" (\"Iuppiter Stella\"), as they believed it to be sacred to its namesake god. This name comes from the Proto-Indo-European vocative compound *\"Dy\u0113u-p\u0259ter\" (nominative: *\"Dy\u0113us-p\u0259t\u0113r\", meaning \"Father Sky-God\", or \"Father Day-God\"). As the supreme god of the Roman pantheon, Jupiter was the god of thunder, lightning, and storms, and was called the god of light and sky.\nIn Vedic astrology, Hindu astrologers named the planet after Brihaspati, the religious teacher of the gods, and called it \"Guru\", which means the \"Teacher\". In Central Asian Turkic myths, Jupiter is called \"Erendiz\" or \"Erent\u00fcz\", from \"eren\" (of uncertain meaning) and \"yultuz\" (\"star\"). The Turks calculated the period of the orbit of Jupiter as 11 years and 300 days. They believed that some social and natural events connected to Erent\u00fcz's movements in the sky. The Chinese, Vietnamese, Koreans, and Japanese called it the \"wood star\" (), based on the Chinese Five Elements. In China, it became known as the \"year star\" (), as Chinese astronomers noted that it jumped one zodiac constellation each year (with corrections). In some ancient Chinese writings, the years were, in principle, named in correlation with the Jovian zodiac signs.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38932", "revid": "3664477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38932", "title": "Phillis Wheatley", "text": "African-born American poet (1753\u20131784)\nPhillis Wheatley Peters, also spelled Phyllis and Wheatly (c.\u20091753 \u2013 December 5, 1784), was an American writer who is considered the first African-American author of a published book of poetry. Born in West Africa, she was sold into slavery at the age of seven or eight and transported to North America, where she was bought by the Wheatley family of Boston. After she learned to read and write, they encouraged her poetry when they saw her talent.\nOn a 1773 trip to London with the Wheatleys' son, seeking publication of her work, Wheatley met prominent people who became her patrons. The publication in London of her \"Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral\" on September 1, 1773, brought her fame both in England and the American colonies. Prominent figures, such as George Washington, praised her work. A few years later, African-American poet Jupiter Hammon praised her work in a poem of his own.\nWheatley was emancipated by the Wheatleys shortly after the publication of her book of poems. The Wheatleys died soon thereafter and Phillis Wheatley married John Peters, a poor grocer. They lost three children, who all died young. Wheatley-Peters died in poverty and obscurity at the age of 31.\nEarly life.\nAlthough the date and place of her birth are not documented, scholars believe that Wheatley was born in 1753 in West Africa, most likely in present-day Gambia or Senegal. She was sold by a local chief to a visiting trader, who took her to Boston in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, on July 11, 1761, on the slave ship \"Phillis\". The vessel was owned by Timothy Fitch and captained by Peter Gwinn.\nOn arrival in Boston, Wheatley was bought by the wealthy Boston merchant and tailor John Wheatley as a slave for his wife Susanna. The Wheatleys named her Phillis, after the ship that had transported her to North America. She was given their last name of Wheatley, as was a common custom if any surname was used for enslaved people.\nThe Wheatleys' 18-year-old daughter, Mary, was Phillis's first tutor in reading and writing. Their son, Nathaniel, also tutored her. John Wheatley was known as a progressive throughout New England; his family afforded Phillis an unprecedented education for an enslaved person, and one unusual for a woman of any race at the time. By the age of 12, Phillis was reading Greek and Latin classics in their original languages, as well as difficult passages from the Bible. At the age of 14, she wrote her first poem, \"To the University of Cambridge [Harvard], in New England\".\nRecognizing her literary ability, the Wheatley family supported Phillis's education and left household labor to their other domestic enslaved workers. The Wheatleys often exhibited Phillis's abilities to friends and family. Strongly influenced by her readings of the works of Alexander Pope, John Milton, Homer, Horace and Virgil, Phillis began to write poetry.\nLater life.\nIn 1773, at the age of 20, Phillis accompanied Nathaniel Wheatley to London in part for her health (she suffered from chronic asthma), but primarily because Susanna believed Phillis would have a better chance of publishing her book of poems there than in the colonies. Phillis had an audience with Frederick Bull, who was the Lord Mayor of London, and other prominent members of British society. (An audience with King George III was arranged, but Phillis had returned to Boston before it could take place.) Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon, became interested in the talented young African woman and subsidized the publication of Wheatley's volume of poems, which appeared in London in the summer of 1773. As Hastings was ill, the two never met.\nAfter Phillis's book was published, by November 1773, the Wheatleys manumitted Phillis. Susanna Wheatley died in the spring of 1774, and John in 1778. Shortly after, Phillis met and married John Peters, an impoverished free black grocer. They lived in poor conditions and two of their babies died.\nJohn was improvident and was imprisoned for debt in 1784. With a sickly infant son to provide for, Phillis became a scullery maid at a boarding house, doing work she had never done before; she developed pneumonia and died on December 5, 1784, at the age of 31, after giving birth to a daughter, who died the same day as her.\nOther writings.\nWheatley wrote a letter to Reverend Samson Occom, commending him on his ideas and beliefs stating that enslaved people should be given their natural-born rights in America. Wheatley also exchanged letters with the British philanthropist John Thornton, who discussed Wheatley and her poetry in correspondence with John Newton. Through her letter writing, Wheatley was able to express her thoughts, comments and concerns to others.\nIn 1775, she sent a copy of a poem entitled \"To His Excellency, George Washington\" to the then-military general. The following year, Washington invited Wheatley to visit him at his headquarters in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Thomas Paine republished the poem in \"The Pennsylvania Gazette\" in April 1776.\nIn 1779, Wheatley issued a proposal for a second volume of poems but was unable to publish it because she had lost her patrons after her emancipation; publication of books was often based on gaining subscriptions for guaranteed sales beforehand. The American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783) was also a factor. However, some of her poems that were to be included in the second volume were later published in pamphlets and newspapers.\nPoetry.\nIn 1768, Wheatley wrote \"To the King's Most Excellent Majesty\", in which she praised King George III for repealing the Stamp Act. But while discussing the idea of freedom, Wheatley was able subtly to raise the idea of freedom for enslaved subjects of the king as well:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nMay George, beloved by all the nations round,\nLive with heav\u2019ns choicest constant blessings crown'd!\nGreat God, direct, and guard him from on high,\nAnd from his head let ev\u2019ry evil fly!\nAnd may each clime with equal gladness see\nA monarch's smile can set his subjects free!\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAs the American Revolution gained strength, Wheatley's writing turned to themes that expressed ideas of the rebellious colonists.\nIn 1770, she wrote a poetic tribute to the evangelist George Whitefield. Her poetry expressed Christian themes, and many poems were dedicated to famous figures. Over one-third consist of elegies, the remainder being on religious, classical and abstract themes. She seldom referred to her own life in her poems. One example of a poem on slavery is \"On being brought from Africa to America\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nTwas mercy brought me from my Pagan land,\nTaught my benighted soul to understand\nThat there's a God, that there's a Saviour too:\nOnce I redemption neither sought nor knew.\nSome view our sable race with scornful eye,\n\"Their colour is a diabolic dye.\"\nRemember, Christians, Negroes, black as Cain,\nMay be refin'd, and join th' angelic train.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nMany colonists found it difficult to believe that an African slave was writing \"excellent\" poetry. Wheatley had to defend her authorship of her poetry in court in 1772. She was examined by a group of Boston luminaries, including John Erving, Reverend Charles Chauncey, John Hancock, Thomas Hutchinson, the governor of Massachusetts, and his lieutenant governor Andrew Oliver. They concluded she had written the poems ascribed to her and signed an attestation, which was included in the preface of her book of collected works: \"Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral,\" published in London in 1773. Publishers in Boston had declined to publish it, but her work was of great interest to influential people in London.\nThere, Selina, Countess of Huntingdon and the Earl of Dartmouth acted as patrons to help Wheatley gain publication. Her poetry received comment in \"The London Magazine\" in 1773, which published her poem \"Hymn to the Morning\" as a specimen of her work, writing: \"[t]hese poems display no astonishing power of genius; but when we consider them as the productions of a young untutored African, who wrote them after six months casual study of the English language and of writing, we cannot suppress our admiration of talents so vigorous and lively.\" \"Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral\" was printed in 11 editions until 1816.\nIn 1778, the African-American poet Jupiter Hammon wrote an ode to Wheatley (\"An Address to Miss Phillis Wheatley\"). His master Lloyd had temporarily moved with his slaves to Hartford, Connecticut, during the Revolutionary War. Hammon thought that Wheatley had succumbed to what he believed were pagan influences in her writing, and so his \"Address\" consisted of 21 rhyming quatrains, each accompanied by a related Bible verse, that he thought would compel Wheatley to return to a Christian path in life.\nIn 1838, Boston-based publisher and abolitionist Isaac Knapp published a collection of Wheatley's poetry, along with that of enslaved North Carolina poet George Moses Horton, under the title \"Memoir and Poems of Phillis Wheatley, A Native African and a Slave. Also, Poems by a Slave\". Wheatley's memoir was earlier published in 1834 by Geo W. Light but did not include poems by Horton.\nThomas Jefferson, in his book \"Notes on the State of Virginia,\" was unwilling to acknowledge the value of her work or the work of any black poet. He wrote:Misery is often the parent of the most affecting touches in poetry. Among the blacks is misery enough, God knows, but no poetry. Love is the peculiar oestrum of the poet. Their love is ardent, but it kindles the senses only, not the imagination. Religion indeed has produced a Phyllis Whately [\"sic\"] but it could not produce a poet. The compositions published under her name are below the dignity of criticism. Jefferson was not the only noted, Enlightenment figure who held racist views. Such luminaries as David Hume and Emmanuel Kant likewise believed Africans were not fully human.\nStyle, structure, and influences on poetry.\nWheatley believed that the power of poetry was immeasurable. John C. Shields, noting that her poetry did not simply reflect the literature she read but was based on her personal ideas and beliefs, writes:\nWheatley had more in mind than simple conformity. It will be shown later that her allusions to the sun god and to the goddess of the morn, always appearing as they do here in close association with her quest for poetic inspiration, are of central importance to her.\nThis poem is arranged into three stanzas of four lines in iambic tetrameter, followed by a concluding couplet in iambic pentameter. The rhyme scheme is ABABCC. Shields sums up her writing as being \"contemplative and reflective rather than brilliant and shimmering.\"\nShe repeated three primary elements: Christianity, classicism and hierophantic solar worship. The hierophantic solar worship was part of what she brought with her from Africa; the worship of sun gods is expressed as part of her African culture, which may be why she used so many different words for the sun. For instance, she uses Aurora eight times, \"Apollo seven, Phoebus twelve, and Sol twice.\" Shields believes that the word \"light\" is significant to her as it marks her African history, a past that she has left physically behind. He notes that Sun is a homonym for Son, and that Wheatley intended a double reference to Christ. Wheatley also refers to \"heav'nly muse\" in two of her poems: \"To a Clergy Man on the Death of his Lady\" and \"Isaiah LXIII,\" signifying her idea of the Christian deity.\nClassical allusions are prominent in Wheatley's poetry, which Shields argues set her work apart from that of her contemporaries: \"Wheatley's use of classicism distinguishes her work as original and unique and deserves extended treatment.\" Particularly extended engagement with the Classics can be found in the poem \"To Maecenas\", where Wheatley uses references to Maecenas to depict the relationship between her and her own patrons, as well as making reference to Achilles and Patroclus, Homer and Virgil. At the same time, Wheatley indicates to the complexity of her relationship with Classical texts by pointing to the sole example of Terence as an ancestor for her works: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhile some scholars have argued that Wheatley's allusions to classical material are based on the reading of other neoclassical poetry (such as the works of Alexander Pope), Emily Greenwood has demonstrated that Wheatley's work demonstrates persistent linguistic engagement with Latin texts, suggesting good familiarity with the ancient works themselves. Both Shields and Greenwood have argued that Wheatley's use of classical imagery and ideas was designed to deliver \"subversive\" messages to her educated, majority white audience, and argue for the freedom of Wheatley herself and other enslaved people.\nScholarly critique.\nBlack literary scholars from the 1960s to the present in critiquing Wheatley's writing have noted the absence in it of her sense of identity as a black enslaved person. A number of black literary scholars have viewed her work\u2014and its widespread admiration\u2014as a barrier to the development of black people during her time and as a prime example of Uncle Tom syndrome, believing that Wheatley's lack of awareness of her condition of enslavement furthers this syndrome among descendants of Africans in the Americas. However, others, more recently, have argued on her behalf. O'Neal notes that Wheatley \"was a strong force among contemporary abolitionist writers, and that, through the use of Biblical imagery, she incorporated anti-slavery statements in her work within the confines of her era and her position as a slave.\" Chernoh Sesay, Jr. sees a trend towards a more balanced view of Wheatley, looking at her \"not in twentieth century terms, but instead according to the conditions of the eighteenth century,\" and Henry Louis Gates has argued for her rehabilitation, asking \"What would happen if we ceased to stereotype Wheatley but, instead, read her, read her with all the resourcefulness that she herself brought to her craft?\".\nSome scholars thought Wheatley's perspective came from her upbringing. Writing in 1974, Eleanor Smith argued that the Wheatley family took interest in her at a young age because of her timid and submissive nature. Using this to their advantage, the Wheatley family was able to mold and shape her into a person of their liking. The family separated her from other slaves in the home and she was prevented from doing anything other than very light housework. This shaping prevented Phillis from ever becoming a threat to the Wheatley family or other people from the white community. As a result, Phillis was allowed to attend white social events and this created a misconception of the relationship between black and white people for her.\nThe matter of Wheatley's biography, \"a white woman's memoir\", has been a subject of investigation. In 2020, American poet Honor\u00e9e Fanonne Jeffers published her \"The Age of Phillis\", based on the understanding that Margaretta Matilda Odell's account of Wheatley's life portrayed Wheatley inaccurately, and as a character in a sentimental novel; the poems by Jeffers attempt to fill in the gaps and recreate a more realistic portrait of Wheatley.\nLegacy and honors.\nWith the 1773 publication of Wheatley's book \"Poems on Various Subjects,\" she \"became the most famous African on the face of the earth.\" Voltaire stated in a letter to a friend that Wheatley had proved that black people could write poetry. John Paul Jones asked a fellow officer to deliver some of his personal writings to \"Phillis the African favorite of the Nine (muses) and Apollo.\" She was honored by many of America's founding fathers, including George Washington, who wrote to her (after she wrote a poem in his honor) that \"the style and manner [of your poetry] exhibit a striking proof of your great poetical Talents.\"\nCritics consider her work fundamental to the genre of African-American literature, and she is honored as the first African-American woman to publish a book of poetry and the first to make a living from her writing.\nIn 1892 a Phyllis Wheatley Circle was formed in Greenville, Mississippi. and in 1896 the Phyllis Wheatley Circle.\nShe is commemorated on the Boston Women's Heritage Trail. The Phyllis Wheatley YWCA in Washington, D.C., and the Phillis Wheatley High School in Houston, Texas, are named for her, as are the Phyllis Wheatley School in Apopka, Florida, and the historic Phillis Wheatley School in Jensen Beach, Florida, now the oldest building on the campus of American Legion Post 126 (Jensen Beach, Florida). A branch of the Richland County Library in Columbia, South Carolina, which offered the first library services to black citizens, is named for her. A branch of the Rochester Public Library system in Rochester, New York was named for her when it was built in 1971. Phillis Wheatley Elementary School, New Orleans, opened in 1954 in Trem\u00e9, one of the oldest African-American neighborhoods in the US. The Phillis Wheatley Community Center opened in 1920 in Greenville, South Carolina, and in 1924 (spelled \"Phyllis\") in Minneapolis, Minnesota.\nOn July 16, 2019, at the London site where A. Bell Booksellers published Wheatley's first book in September 1773 (at 9 Aldgate High St, now the location of the Hotel Saint, formerly the Dorsett City Hotel), the unveiling took place of a commemorative blue plaque honouring her, organised by the Nubian Jak Community Trust and Black History Walks.\nWheatley is the subject of a project and play by British-Nigerian writer Ade Solanke entitled \"Phillis in London\", which was showcased at the Greenwich Book Festival in June 2018. A 90-minute play by Solanke titled \"Phillis in Boston\" was presented at the Old South Meeting House in November 2023.\nA 30-item collection of material related to Wheatley, including publications from her lifetime containing poems by her, was acquired by the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American History and Culture in 2023.\nWheatley was featured in \"Rise Up: Resistance, Revolution, Abolition\" at the Fitzwilliam Museum of Cambridge University during 2025, which told the stories of abolitionists such as Wheatley.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38933", "revid": "46683392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38933", "title": "Montanism", "text": "2nd-century Christian movement\nMontanism (), known by its adherents as the New Revelation, was an early Christian movement of the mid-to-late 2nd century, later referred to by the name of its founder, Montanus. Montanism held views about the basic tenets of Christian theology similar to those of the wider Christian Church, but it was labelled a heresy for its belief in new prophetic figures. The prophetic movement called for a reliance on the spontaneity of the Holy Spirit and a more conservative personal ethic.\nMontanism originated in Phrygia, a province of Anatolia, and flourished throughout the region, leading to the movement being referred to elsewhere as Cataphrygian (meaning it was \"from Phrygia\") or simply as Phrygian. They were sometimes also called Pepuzians after the town of Pepuza, which they regarded as the new Jerusalem. Sometimes the Pepuzians were distinguished from other Montanists for despising those not living in the new Jerusalem. The Montanist movement spread rapidly to other regions in the Roman Empire before Christianity was generally tolerated or became legal following the Edict of Serdica in 311. It persisted in some isolated places into the 6th century.\nThe Montanists did not want to separate themselves from the wider Christian Church, and the Christian theologian Tertullian even recorded an event where a bishop almost declared Montanism as orthodox, albeit changing his mind later. Some contemporary Christian theologians have drawn parallels between Montanism and modern-day Protestant movements, such as the Charismatic movement, as well as Pentecostalism (including Oneness Pentecostals).\nHistory.\nScholars debate as to when Montanus first began his prophetic activity, having chosen dates varying from c. AD 135 to as late as AD 177. Montanus was a recent convert when he first began prophesying, supposedly during the proconsulate of Gratus in a village in Mysia named Ardabau; no proconsul and village so named have been identified, however. Some accounts claim that before his conversion to Christianity, Montanus was a priest of Apollo or Cybele. He believed he was a prophet of God and that the Paraclete spoke through him.\nMontanus proclaimed the towns of Pepuza and Tymion in west-central Phrygia as the site of the New Jerusalem, making the larger\u2014Pepuza\u2014his headquarters. Phrygia as a source for this new movement was not arbitrary. Hellenization was slow to take root in Phrygia, unlike many of the surrounding eastern regions of the Roman Empire. This sense of difference, while simultaneously having easy access to the rest of the Mediterranean Christian world, encouraged the foundation of this separate sect of Christianity.\nMontanus had two female colleagues, Prisca (sometimes called Priscilla, the diminutive form of her name) and Maximilla, who likewise claimed the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Their popularity even exceeded Montanus' own. \"The Three\" spoke in ecstatic visions and urged their followers to fast and to pray, so that they might share these revelations. Their followers claimed they received the prophetic gift from the prophets Quadratus (prophet) and Ammia of Philadelphia, figures believed to have been part of a line of prophetic succession stretching all the way back to Agabus (1st century AD) and to the daughters of Philip the Evangelist. In time, the New Prophecy spread from Montanus's native Phrygia across the Christian world, to Africa and to Gaul.\nThe response to the New Prophecy split the Christian communities, and the proto-orthodox clergy mostly fought to suppress it. Opponents believed that evil spirits possessed the Phrygian prophets, and both Maximilla and Priscilla were the targets of failed exorcisms. The churches of Asia Minor pronounced the prophecies profane, and excommunicated New Prophecy adherents. Around 177, Apollinarius, Bishop of Hierapolis, presided over a synod which condemned the New Prophecy. The leaders of the churches of Lyons and Vienne in Gaul responded to the New Prophecy in 177. Their decision was communicated to the churches in Asia and Pope Eleuterus, but it is not known what this consisted of, only that it was \"prudent and most orthodox\". It is likely they called for moderation in dealing with the movement.\nThere was real doubt at Rome, and its bishop (either Eleuterus or Victor I) even wrote letters in support of Montanism, although he was later persuaded by Praxeas to recall them. In 193, an anonymous writer found the church at Ancyra in Galatia torn in two, and opposed the \"false prophecy\" there.\nEventually, Montanist teachings came to be regarded as heresy by the orthodox Great Church for a number of reasons. The clash of basic beliefs between the movement's proponents and the greater Christian world was likely enough for such conflict to occur. Additionally, in the opinion of anti-Montanists, the movement's penchant for dramatic public displays by its adherents brought unwanted attention to the still fledgling religion. Thus, fears concerning the appearance of Montanist practices to their non-Christian rulers fueled anti-Montanist sentiment. The imperial government carried out sporadic executions of Christians under the reign of Marcus Aurelius, circa AD 161\u2013180, which coincides with the spread of Montanism.\nThere is no clear evidence as to what happened to Montanus. One of the most widespread stories at the time, as stated by an anonymous associate of Apollinarius, is that he hanged himself, as did Maximilla, although he does not exclude the possibility of them dying some other way.\nThere was never a uniform excommunication of New Prophecy adherents, and in many places they maintained their standing within the orthodox community. This was the case at Carthage. While not without tension, the church there avoided schism over the issue. There were women prophesying at Carthage, and prophecy was considered a genuine charism. It was the responsibility of the council of elders to test all prophecy and to determine genuine revelation. Tertullian, undoubtedly the best-known defender of the New Prophecy, believed that the claims of Montanus were genuine beginning c. 207. He believed in the validity of the New Prophecy and admired the movement's discipline and ascetic standards. Debates continue as to whether Tertullian decisively left the orthodox Church and joined a separate Montanist sect or remained an early proto-orthodox Christian.\nAlthough what became the orthodox Christian Church prevailed against Montanism within a few generations, inscriptions in the Tembris valley of northern Phrygia, dated between 249 and 279, openly proclaim allegiance to the New Prophecy. Speros Vryonis considers these inscriptions remarkable in that they are the only set of inscriptions which openly reveal the religious affiliations of the deceased before the period of toleration, when Christians dared not to do so. In the 3rd century, a new prophetess appeared in Pepuza, Quintilla. Her followers, the Quintillians, were regarded as an important Montanist sect into the 5th century.\nA letter of Jerome to Marcella, written in 385, refutes the claims of Montanists that had been troubling her. A group of \"Tertullianists\" may have continued at Carthage. The anonymous author of \"Praedestinatus\" records that a preacher came to Rome in 388 where he made many converts and obtained the use of a church for his congregation on the grounds that the martyrs to whom it was dedicated had been Montanists. He was obliged to flee after the victory of Theodosius I.\nIn his own time, Augustine (354\u2013430) records that the Tertullianist group had dwindled to almost nothing and, finally, was reconciled to the church and handed over its basilica. It is not certain whether these Tertullianists were in all respects \"Montanist\" or not. In 530 Emperor Justinian expelled Montanist clergy from Constantinople. In 550, on the orders of Justinian, John of Ephesus led an expedition to Pepuza to destroy the Montanist shrine there, which was based on the tombs of Montanus, Priscilla and Maximilla.\nA Montanist sect in Galatia, the Tascodrugites, is attested around 600 by Timothy of Constantinople and in the 9th century by Theodore the Studite. A sect called \"Montanist\" existed in the 8th century; the Emperor Leo III ordered the conversion and baptism of its members. These Montanists refused, locked themselves in their houses of worship, set the buildings on fire and perished.\nBeliefs.\nBecause much of what is known about Montanism comes from anti-Montanist sources, it is difficult to know what they actually believed and how those beliefs differed from the Christian mainstream of the time. The New Prophecy was also a diverse movement, and what Montanists believed varied by location and period. Montanism was particularly influenced by Johannine literature, especially the Gospel of John and the Apocalypse of John (also known as the book of Revelation).\nIn John's Gospel, Jesus promises to send the Paraclete (Holy Spirit) after his death, from which Montanists believed their prophets derived inspiration. In the Apocalypse, John was taken by an angel to the top of a mountain, upon which he saw the New Jerusalem descend to Earth. Montanus identified this mountain as being located in Phrygia near Pepuza. Followers of the New Prophecy called themselves \"spiritales\" (\"spiritual people\") in contrast to their opponents, whom they termed \"psychici\" (\"carnal, natural people\").\nEcstatic prophecy.\nMontanism, as suggested by the name \"New Prophecy,\" was a movement centered on the prophecies of its founders, believed to convey the Holy Spirit's revelation for the current age. Prophecy itself was not controversial within 2nd-century Christian communities. However, the New Prophecy, as described by Eusebius of Caesarea, departed from nascent Christian tradition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And he [Montanus] became beside himself, and being suddenly in a sort of frenzy and ecstasy, he raved, and began to babble and utter strange things, prophesying in a manner contrary to the constant custom of the Church handed down by tradition from the beginning.\nAccording to opponents, the Montanist prophets did not speak as messengers of God; instead, they believed they became fully possessed by God and spoke as God. A prophetic utterance by Montanus described this possessed state: \"Lo, the man is as a lyre, and I fly over him as a pick. The man sleepeth, while I watch.\" Thus, the Phrygians were seen as false prophets because they acted irrationally and did not control their senses.\nA criticism of Montanism was that its followers claimed their revelation, received directly from the Holy Spirit, could supersede the authority of Jesus, Paul the Apostle, or anyone else. In some of his prophecies, Montanus apparently\u2014and somewhat like the oracles of the Greco-Roman world\u2014spoke in the first person as God: \"I am the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.\"\nEarly Christians likely interpreted Montanus as claiming to be God. However, scholars agree that he exemplified a common practice among religious prophets who spoke as mouthpieces of the divine, echoing phrases like \"Thus saith the Lord.\" This practice was observed in both Christian and pagan contexts.\nOther beliefs.\nOther beliefs and practices (or alleged beliefs and practices) of Montanism are as follows:\nGeographical differences.\nNorth African Montanism and the form of Montanism practiced in Anatolia may have had differences. The Montanists in North Africa believed that the New Testament was the supreme rule of Christian life and theology; that bishops were successors of the apostles; and held similar theology to the Great Church, while Montanus himself had different views.\nOpponents.\nOrigen addresses Montanism not as a heretical movement, but as those who are \"the simple\" among believers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38935", "revid": "45697095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38935", "title": "Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 996 to 1002\nOtto III (June/July 980 \u2013 23 January 1002) was the Holy Roman emperor and King of Italy from 996 until his death in 1002. A member of the Ottonian dynasty, Otto III was the only son of Emperor Otto II and his wife Theophanu.\nOtto III was crowned as King of Germany in 983 at the age of three, shortly after his father's death in Southern Italy while campaigning against the Byzantine Empire and the Emirate of Sicily. Though the nominal ruler of Germany, Otto III's minor status ensured his various regents held power over the Empire. His cousin Duke Henry II of Bavaria, initially claimed regency over the young king and attempted to seize the throne for himself in 984. When his rebellion failed to gain the support of Germany's aristocracy, Henry II was forced to abandon his claims to the throne and to allow Otto III's mother Theophanu to serve as regent until her death in 991. Otto III was then still a child, so his grandmother, Adelaide of Italy, served as regent until 994.\nIn 996, Otto III marched to Italy to claim the titles of King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor, which had been left unclaimed since the death of Otto II in 983. Otto III also sought to reestablish Imperial control over the city of Rome, which had revolted under the leadership of Crescentius II, and through it the papacy. Crowned as Emperor, Otto III put down the Roman rebellion and installed his cousin as Pope Gregory V, the first pope of German descent. After the Emperor had pardoned him and left the city, Crescentius II again rebelled, deposing Gregory V and installing John XVI as pope. Otto III returned to the city in 998, reinstalled Gregory V, and executed both Crescentius II and John XVI. When Gregory V died in 999, Otto III installed Sylvester II as the new pope. Otto III's actions throughout his life further strengthened imperial control over the Catholic Church.\nFrom the beginning of his reign, Otto III faced opposition from the Slavs along the eastern frontier. Following the death of his father in 983, the Slavs rebelled against imperial control, forcing the Empire to abandon its territories east of the Elbe river. Otto III fought to regain the Empire's lost territories throughout his reign with only limited success. While in the east, Otto III strengthened the Empire's relations with Poland, Bohemia, and Hungary. Through his affairs in Eastern Europe in 1000, he was able to extend the influence of Christianity by supporting mission work in Poland and through the crowning of Stephen I as the first Christian king of Hungary.\nReturning to Rome in 1001, Otto faced a rebellion by the Roman aristocracy, which forced him to flee the city. While marching to reclaim the city in 1002, Otto suffered a sudden fever and died in Castle Paterno in Faleria at the age of 21. With no clear heir to succeed him, his early death threw the Empire into political crisis.\nOtto was a charismatic figure associated with several legends and notable figures of his time. Opinions on Otto III and his reign vary considerably. Recognized in his own day as a brilliant, energetic, pious leader, Otto was portrayed by nineteenth century historians as a whimsical, overidealistic dreamer who failed in his duty towards Germany. Modern historians generally see him in a positive light, but several facets of the emperor remain enigmatic and debates on the true intentions behind his Imperial Renovation (\"renovatio imperii Romanorum\") program continue.\nEarly life.\nOtto III was born in June or July 980 somewhere between Aachen and Nijmegen, in modern-day North Rhine-Westphalia. The only son of Emperor Otto II and Empress Theophanu, Otto III was the youngest of the couple's four children. Immediately prior to Otto III's birth, his father had completed military campaigns in France against King Lothar.\nOn 14 July 982, Otto II's army suffered a crushing defeat against the Muslim Emirate of Sicily at the Battle of Stilo. Otto II had been campaigning in Southern Italy with hopes of annexing the whole of Italy into the Holy Roman Empire. Otto II himself escaped the battle unharmed but many important imperial officials were among the battle's casualties. Following the defeat and at the insistence of the Empire's nobles, Otto II called an assembly of the Imperial Diet in Verona at Pentecost, 983, where he proposed to the assembly to have the three-year-old Otto III elected as king of Germany and Italy, becoming Otto II's undoubted heir apparent. This was the first time a German ruler had been elected on Italian soil. After the assembly was concluded, Otto III traveled across the Alps in order to be crowned at Aachen, the traditional location of the coronation of the German kings. Otto II stayed behind to address military action against the Muslims. While still in central Italy, however, Otto II suddenly died on 7 December 983, and was buried in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.\nOtto III was crowned as king on Christmas Day 983, three weeks after his father's death, by Willigis, the archbishop of Mainz, and by John X, the archbishop of Ravenna. News of Otto II's death first reached Germany shortly after his son's coronation. The unresolved problems in southern Italy and the Slavic uprising on the Empire's eastern border made the Empire's political situation extremely unstable. With a minor on the throne, the Empire was thrown into confusion and Otto III's mother Theophanu assumed the role of regent for her young son.\nChild King.\nRegency of Henry II.\nOtto III's cousin Henry II had been deposed as Duke of Bavaria by Otto II in 976 following his failed rebellion and imprisoned within the Bishopric of Utrecht. Following Otto II's death, Henry was released from prison. As Otto III's nearest male Ottonian relative, Henry II claimed the regency over his infant cousin. Archbishop of Cologne Warin granted Henry II the regency without substantial opposition. Only Otto III's mother Theophanu objected, along with his grandmother, the Dowager Empress Adelaide of Italy, and his aunt, Abbess Matilda of Quedlinburg. Adelaide and Matilda, however, were both in Italy and unable to press their objections.\nAs regent, Henry II took actions aimed less at guardianship of his infant cousin and more at claiming the throne for himself. According to Gerbert of Aurillac, Henry II adopted a Byzantine-style joint-kingship. Towards the end of 984, Henry II sought to form alliances between himself and other important figures in the Ottonian world, chief among them his cousin King Lothar of France. In exchange for Lothar's agreement to make Henry II king of Germany, Henry II agreed to relinquish Lotharingia to Lothar. The two agreed to join their armies on 1 February 985, in order to take the city of Breisach, but at the last minute, Henry's resolve weakened. Nevertheless, Lothair continued to campaign into German lands and succeeded in overrunning the Verdun by March 985.\nHenry II took the young Otto III and traveled to Saxony. There, Henry II invited all the great nobles of the kingdom to celebrate Palm Sunday at Magdeburg for 985. He then campaigned openly for his claim to the German throne, with limited success. Among those who supported his claims were Duke Mieszko I of Poland and Duke Boleslaus II of Bohemia. Henry II was also supported by Archbishop Egbert of Trier, Archbishop Gisilher of Magdeburg, and Bishop Dietrich I of Metz.\nThose who opposed Henry II's claims fled to Quedlinburg in Saxony to conspire against him. When he became aware of this conspiracy, he moved his army towards Quedlinburg in hopes of crushing his opposition. Henry II sent Folcmar, the Bishop of Utrecht, ahead of him in order to attempt a peace negotiation between him and the conspirators. The negotiations failed when the conspirators refused to swear allegiance to anyone other than Otto III, with Bernard I, Duke of Saxony, maintaining allegiance to the child king. In response to his failure to gain control over Saxony, Henry II promised to hold future peace negotiations and then headed for the Duchy of Bavaria. With his long-standing familial ties in the region, many bishops and counts recognized him as the rightful heir to the throne. Henry III, Duke of Bavaria, who had been installed as Duke by Otto II, refused to recognize Henry II and remained loyal to Otto III.\nWith his successes and failures in Saxony and Bavaria, Henry II's claims depended on gaining support in the Duchy of Franconia, which was a direct possession of the German kings. The Franconian nobles, led by Archbishop Willigis of Mainz (the Primate of Germany) and Conrad I, Duke of Swabia, refused to abandon Otto III. Fearing outright civil war, Henry II relinquished Otto III to the joint-regency of his mother and grandmother on 29 June 985. In return for his submission, Henry II was restored as the Duke of Bavaria, replacing Henry III who became the new Duke of Carinthia.\nRegency of Theophanu.\nThe regency of Theophanu, from 984 until her death in 991, was largely spared internal revolt. She struggled throughout to reinstate the Diocese of Merseburg, which her husband Otto II had absorbed into the Archdiocese of Magdeburg in 981. Theophanu also retained Otto II's court chaplains, in particular Count Bernward of Hildesheim and Archbishop Willigis, who, as the Archbishop of Mainz, was \"ex officio\" the secular Archchancellor of Germany. Though Theophanu was regent, Willigis was given considerable leeway in administering the kingdom. One of the Empress's greatest achievements was her success in maintaining German supremacy over Bohemia, as Boleslaus II, Duke of Bohemia, was forced to accept the authority of Otto III.\nIn 986 the five-year-old Otto III celebrated Easter at Quedlinburg. The four major dukes of Germany (Henry II of Bavaria, Conrad I of Swabia, Henry III of Carinthia, and Bernard I of Saxony) also paid tribute to the child king. Imitating similar ceremonies carried out under Otto I in 936 and Otto II in 961, the dukes served Otto III as his ceremonial steward, chamberlain, cupbearer, and marshal, respectively. This service symbolized the loyalty of the dukes to Otto III and their willingness to serve him. Most significant was the submission of Henry II, who demonstrated his loyalty to his cousin despite his failed rebellion two years earlier. The next year, from the age of six onward, Otto III would receive education and training from Bernward of Hildesheim and Gerbert d'Aurillac.\nDuring the regency of Theophanu, the \"Great Gandersheim Conflict\" broke out, concerning control of Gandersheim Abbey and its estates. Both the Archbishop of Mainz and the Bishop of Hildesheim claimed authority over the abbey, including the authority to anoint the abbey's nuns. The conflict began in 989 when Otto III's older sister Sophia became a nun in the abbey. Sophia refused to accept the authority of the Bishop of Hildesheim, instead recognizing only that of the Archbishop of Mainz. The conflict escalated until it was brought before the royal court of Otto III and Theophanu. The royal intervention eased the tensions between the parties by providing that both bishops would anoint Sophia, while anointing the remaining nuns of the abbey would be left to the Bishop of Hildesheim alone.\nIn 989 Theophanu and Otto III made a royal expedition to Italy to visit the grave of Otto II in Rome. After crossing the Alps and reaching Pavia in northern Italy, the Empress had her longtime confidant John Philagathos appointed as Archbishop of Piacenza. After a year in Italy, the royal court returned to Germany, where Theophanu died in Nijmegen on 15 June 991, at the age of 31. She was buried in the Church of St. Pantaleon in Cologne.\nBecause Otto III was still a child (only eleven when his mother died), his grandmother, the Dowager Empress Adelaide of Italy, became regent, together with Archbishop Willigis of Mainz, until he became old enough to rule on his own in 994.\nIndependent reign.\nAs Otto III grew in age, the authority of his grandmother gradually waned until 994 when Otto III reached the age of 14. At an assembly of the Imperial Diet held in Solingen in September 994, Otto III was granted the ability to fully govern the kingdom without the need of a regent. With this, Adelaide retired to a nunnery she had founded at Selz in Alsace. Although she never became a nun, she spent the rest of her days there in the service of the Church and in acts of charity. As Otto III was still unmarried, from 995 until 997 his older sister Sophia accompanied him and acted as his consort.\nOne of Otto III's first actions as an independent ruler was to appoint Heribert of Cologne as his chancellor over Italy, a position he would hold until Otto's death in 1002. Otto III followed in his grandfather Otto I's footsteps in the beginning of his reign, by appointing a new pope, Gregory V, and leaving Rome. Gregory V was expelled and Otto III returned to Rome in 998 where he stayed permanently until his death. In the summer of 995, Otto sent the Archbishop of Piacenza, John Philagathos, to Constantinople as his representative to arrange a marriage between himself and a Byzantine princess following the example of his father, Otto II, who solidified his claim to the throne by marrying the Byzantine Theophanu. For a while the discussions were about Zoe Porphyrogenita.\nWar against the Slavs.\nThe Lutici federation of West Slavic Polabian tribes had remained quiet during the early years of Otto III's reign, even during Henry II's failed rebellion. In 983, following Otto II's defeat at the battle of Stilo, the Slavs revolted against Imperial control, forcing the Empire to abandon its territories east of the Elbe River in the Northern March and the Billung March. With the process of Christianization halted, the Slavs left the Empire in peace, and with Henry II's rebellion put down, Theophanu launched multiple campaigns to re-conquer the lost eastern territories, beginning in 985. Even though he was only six at the time, Otto III personally participated in these campaigns. During the expedition of 986 against the Slavs, Otto III received the homage of Duke Mieszko I of Poland, who provided the Imperial army with military assistance and gave Otto III a camel. Although the Lutici were subdued for a time in 987, they continued to occupy the young king's attention.\nIn September 991, when Otto III was eleven, Slavonic raiders captured the city of Brandenburg. In 992 this invasion, as well as an incursion of Viking raiders, forced Otto III to lead his army against the invaders, and he suffered a crushing defeat in this campaign.The next year, Germany suffered an outbreak of famine and pestilence. In 994 and 995, Otto III led fruitless campaigns against the northern Slavs and the Vikings, but he did successfully re-conquer Brandenburg in 993, and in 995 he subdued the Obotrite Slavs.\nIn the fall of 995, after Otto III reached his majority, he again took to the field against the Lutici, this time aided by the Polish Duke Boles\u0142aw I the Brave. Then in 997 he had to deal with a new Lutician attack on Arneburg on the Elbe, which they managed to retake for a short while.\nReign as emperor.\nRoman instability.\nPrior to his sudden death in December 983, Otto II had installed Pietro Canepanova as pope. Calling himself Pope John XIV, Canepanova was a non-Roman from Lombardy who had served as Otto II's chancellor in Italy. After Otto II's death, John XIV intervened in the dispute between Henry II of Bavaria and Theophanu over the regency, issuing an edict ordering Henry to turn Otto over to his mother.\nDuring that turmoil, the Roman aristocracy saw an opportunity to remove the non-Roman John XIV and install a pope from among themselves. The Antipope Boniface VII, who had spent nine years in exile in the Byzantine Empire, joined forces with Byzantine nobles in southern Italy and marched on Rome in April 984 in order to claim the papal throne for himself. With the aid of the sons of Crescentius the Elder \u2014 Crescentius II and John Crescentius \u2014 Boniface VII was able to imprison John XIV in the Tomb of Hadrian. Four months later, on 20 August 984, John XIV died in his prison, either starved or poisoned, probably on the orders of Boniface.\nWith Otto's regency seated in Germany, Crescentius II took the title of \"Patricius Romanorum\" (\"Patrician of the Romans\") and became the effective ruler of Rome, although he did not act entirely independently of central authority, presenting himself as a lieutenant of the king. When Boniface VII died in 985, Pope John XV was chosen to succeed him. Although the details of the election are unknown, it is likely that Crescentius II played a key role in the process. For a number of years, Crescentius II exercised authority over the city, severely limiting the autonomy of the pope in the process. When the Empress Theophanu was in Rome between 989 and 991, Crescentius II nominally subordinated himself to her, though he maintained his position as ruler of the city.\nFirst expedition into Italy.\nAfter taking the crown in 994, Otto III faced first a Slavic rebellion, which he put down, and then an attempt by Crescentius II to seize power in Italy.\nWhen Otto III turned his attention to Italy, he not only intended to be crowned \"Emperor\" but also to come to the aid of Pope John XV, who had been forced to flee Rome. Otto set out for Italy from Ratisbon in March 996. In Verona, he became the patron of Otto Orseolo, the son of Venetian Doge Pietro II Orseolo. He then pledged to support Otto Orseolo as the next Doge of Venice, leading to a period of good relations between the Holy Roman Empire and the Republic of Venice after years of conflict under Otto II.\nReaching Pavia for Easter, 996, Otto III was declared King of Italy and crowned with the Iron Crown of the Lombards. The king failed, however, to reach Rome before Pope John XV died of fever. While Otto III was in Pavia, Crescentius II, fearing the king's march on Rome, reconciled with Otto III and agreed to accept his nominee as pope.\nWhile in Ravenna, Otto III nominated his cousin and court chaplain Bruno, who was then only twenty-three years old, and sent him to Rome with Archbishop Willigis to secure the city. In early May 996, Bruno was consecrated as Gregory V, the first pope of German nationality. Despite submitting to Otto III, Crescentius shut himself in his family's stronghold, the Tomb of Hadrian, out of fear of retribution.\nThe new supreme pontiff crowned Otto III as emperor on 21 May 996, in Rome at St. Peter's Basilica. The Emperor and Pope then held a synod at St. Peter's on 25 May to serve as the Empire's highest judicial court. The Roman nobles who had rebelled against Pope John XV were summoned before the synod to give an account of their actions. A number of the rebels, including Crescentius II, were banished for their crimes. Pope Gregory V, however, wished to inaugurate his papal reign with acts of mercy and pleaded for clemency from the Emperor, who issued pardons to those he convicted. In particular, while Crescentius II was pardoned by Otto III, he was deprived of his title of \"Patricius\" but was permitted to live out his life in retirement at Rome.\nFollowing the synod, Otto III appointed Gerbert of Aurillac, the Archbishop of Reims, to be his tutor. Counseled by Gerbert and Bishop Adalbert of Prague, Otto III set out to reorganize the Empire. Influenced by the ruin of ancient Rome and perhaps by his Byzantine mother, Otto III dreamed of restoring the glory and power of the Roman Empire, with himself at the head of a theocratic state. He also introduced some Byzantine court customs. To shore up his power in Italy, Otto III sought the support of existing Italian religious communities. For instance, he granted royal immunity to the Abbey of San Salvatore, a rich monastery along the shores of the Lago di Bientina in Tuscany.\nThrough the election of Gregory V, Otto III exercised greater control over the Church than his grandfather Otto I had decades earlier. The Emperor quickly demonstrated his intention to withdraw Imperial support for the privileges of the Holy See laid out by Otto I. Under the \"Diploma Ottonianum\" issued by Otto I, the Emperor could only veto papal candidates. Otto III, however, had nominated and successfully installed his own candidate. The Emperor also refused to acknowledge the Donation of Constantine, which Otto III declared a forgery. Under a decree supposedly issued by Roman Emperor Constantine the Great, the Pope was granted secular authority over western Europe. These actions resulted in increased tensions between the Roman nobility and the Church, who had traditionally reserved the right to name the pope from among their own members.\nAfter his coronation, Otto III returned to Germany in December 996, staying along the Lower Rhine (especially in Aachen) until April 997. His specific activities during this time are not known. In summer 997, Otto III campaigned against the Elbe Slavs in order to secure Saxony's eastern border.\nSecond expedition into Italy.\nWhen Otto III left Italy for Germany, the situation in Rome remained uncertain. In September 996, a few months after receiving a pardon from Otto III, Crescentius II met with the Archbishop of Piacenza, John Philagathos, a former adviser to the late Empress Theophanu, to devise a plan to depose the newly installed Pope Gregory V. In 997, with the active support of Byzantine Emperor Basil II, Crescentius II led a revolt against Gregory V, deposed him, and installed John Philagathos as Pope John XVI, an antipope, in April 997. Gregory fled to Pavia in northern Italy, held a synod, and excommunicated John. The new bishop of Piacenza, Siegfried, came north to meet Otto at Eschwege in July. Otto detached the city from the county of Piacenza and granted it to the bishop in perpetuity.\nPutting down the Slavic forces in eastern Saxony, Otto III began his second expedition into Italy in December 997. Accompanied by his sister Sophia into Italy, Otto III named his aunt Matilda, Abbess of Quedlinburg, as his regent in Germany, becoming the first non-duke or bishop to serve in that capacity. Otto III peacefully retook Rome in February 998 when the Roman aristocracy agreed to a peace settlement. With Otto III in control of the city, Gregory V was reinstated as pope. John XVI fled, but the Emperor's troops pursued and captured him, cut off his nose and ears, cut out his tongue, broke his fingers, blinded him, and then brought him before Otto III and Gregory V for judgement. At the intercession of Saint Nilus the Younger, one of his countrymen, Otto III spared John XVI's life and sent him to a monastery in Germany, where he would die in 1001.\nCrescentius II retreated again to the Tomb of Hadrian, the traditional stronghold of the Crescentii, and was then besieged by Otto III's imperial army. Towards the end of April, the stronghold was breached, and Crescentius II was taken prisoner and executed by decapitation. His body was put on public display at Monte Mario.\nReign from Rome.\nOtto III made Rome the administrative capital of his Empire and revived elaborate Roman customs and Byzantine court ceremonies. During his time in Italy, the Emperor and the Pope attempted to reform the Church, and confiscated church property was returned to the respective religious institutions. Additionally, after the death of the Bishop of Halberstadt in November 996, who had been one of the masterminds behind the abolition of the bishopric of Merseburg, Otto III and Pope Gregory V began the process of reviving the Diocese. Otto I had established the Diocese in 968 following his victory over the Hungarians in order to Christianize the Polabian Slavs but it had been effectively destroyed in 983 with the Great Slav Rising following the death of Otto II that year.\nOtto III arranged for his imperial palace to be built on the Palatine Hill and planned to restore the ancient Roman Senate to its position of prominence. He revived the city's ancient governmental system, including appointing a City Patrician, a City Prefect, and a body of judges whom he commanded to recognize only Roman law. In order to strengthen his title to the Roman Empire and to announce his position as the protector of Christendom, Otto III took for himself the titles \"the Servant of Jesus Christ\", \"the Servant of the Apostles\", \"Consul of the Senate and People of Rome\", and \"Emperor of the World\".\nBetween 998 and 1000, Otto III made several pilgrimages. In 999, he made a pilgrimage from Gargano to Benevento, where he met with the hermit monk Romuald and the Abbot Nilus the Younger (at that time a highly venerated religious figure) in order to atone for executing Crescentius II after promising his safety. During this particular pilgrimage, his cousin Pope Gregory V died in Rome after a brief illness. Upon learning of Gregory V's death, Otto III installed his long-time tutor Gerbert of Aurillac as Pope Sylvester II. The use of this papal name was not without cause: it recalled the first pope of this name, who had allegedly created the \"Christian Empire\" together with Emperor Constantine the Great. This was part of Otto III's campaign to further link himself with both the Roman Empire and the Church.\nLike his grandfather before him, Otto III strongly aspired to be the successor of Charlemagne. In 1000, he visited Charlemagne's tomb in Aachen, removing relics from it and transporting them to Rome. Otto III also carried back parts of the body of Bishop Adalbert of Prague, which he placed in the church of San Bartolomeo all'Isola he had built on the Tiber Island in Rome. Otto III also added the skin of Saint Bartholomew to the relics housed there.\nAffairs in Central Europe.\nPolish relations.\nAround 960, the Polish Piast dynasty under Mieszko I had extended the Duchy of Poland beyond the Oder River in an effort to conquer the Polabian Slavs, who lived along the Elbe River. This brought the Poles into conflict with Otto I's Kingdom of Germany, who also desired to conquer the Polabian Slavs. Otto I sent his trusted lieutenant, the Saxon Margrave Gero, to address the Polish threat, while Otto I traveled to Italy to be crowned as emperor. The sides agreed in a resolution of the conflict in 963 that Mieszko would pledge fealty to Otto I. In return, Otto I granted Mieszko I the title of \"amicus imperatoris\" (\"Friend of the Emperor\") and acknowledged his position as \"dux Poloniae\" (\"Duke of Poland\"). Mieszko I is thus recognized as the founder of the independent Polish state and the first ruler of Poland, and his son, Boleslaus I, was the first to be crowned King of Poland.\nMieszko I remained a powerful ally of Otto I for the remainder of his life. Although he was a pagan, in 965 he married the Christian Dobrawa, daughter of Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia. He then converted to Christianity in 966, bringing Poland closer to the Christian states of Bohemia and the Empire. Dobrawa died in 977, and Mieszko I then strengthened his alliance with the Empire by marrying Oda, the daughter of the Saxon Margrave Dietrich of Haldensleben in 978, and by marrying his son Boles\u0142aus I of Poland to a daughter of Margrave Rikdag of Meissen.\nFollowing the death of Otto I in 973, Mieszko I sided with Henry II, Duke of Bavaria, against Otto II during Henry's failed revolt in 977. After the revolt was put down, Mieszko I swore loyalty to Otto II. When Otto II died suddenly in 983 and was succeeded by the three-year old Otto III, Mieszko I again supported Henry II in his bid for the German throne. When Henry's revolt failed, Mieszko I swore loyalty to Otto III. As such, the question of Mieszko's loyalty and alliance was complicated.\nMieszko I's son Boles\u0142aw I succeeded him as Duke in 992, and Poland continued its fraught alliance with the Empire, no longer paying tribute. Polish forces joined the Empire's campaigns to put down the Great Slav Rising, led by the Polabian Lutici tribes during the 980s and 990s. Immediately after Otto III's death on the other hand, Boles\u0142aw the Brave would go on to defeat Otto's successor, the emperor Henry II, in the Polish-German wars of 1003-1018, securing full sovereignty from the Empire and even forcing the emperor to aid Boles\u0142aw's invasion of the Kievan Rus.\nBohemian relations.\nGermany and the Duchy of Bohemia came into significant contact with one another in 929, when German King Henry I had invaded the Duchy to force Duke Wenceslaus I to pay regular tribute to Germany. When Wenceslaus I was assassinated in 935, his brother Boleslaus I succeeded him as Duke and refused to continue paying the annual tribute to Germany. This action caused Henry I's son and successor Otto I to launch an invasion of Bohemia. Following the initial invasion, the conflict deteriorated into a series of border raids that lasted until 950 when Otto I and Boleslaus I signed a peace treaty. Boleslaus I agreed to resume paying tribute and to recognize Otto I as his overlord. The Duchy was then incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire as a constituent state.\nBohemia would be a major factor in the many battles along the Empire's eastern border. Boleslaus I helped Otto I crush an uprising of Slavs along the Lower Elbe in 953, and they joined forces again to defeat the Hungarians at the battle of Lechfeld in 955. In 973 Otto I established the bishopric of Prague, subordinated to the archbishopric of Mainz, in order to Christianize the Czech territory. To strengthen the Bohemian-Polish alliance, Boleslaus I's daughter Dobrawa was married to the pagan Mieszko I of Poland in 965. The marriage helped bring Christianity to Poland. He died in 972 and was succeeded as Duke by his oldest son Boleslaus II.\nAfter initially siding with Henry II against Otto II during Henry's failed revolt in 977, Boleslaus II swore loyalty to Otto II. When Otto II died suddenly in 983 and was succeeded by the three-year old Otto III, Boleslaus II again supported Henry II in his bid for the German throne. As in 977, Henry's bid failed, and Boleslaus II swore loyalty to Otto III.\nHungarian relations.\nOtto I's defeat of the Hungarians at Lechfeld in 955 ended the decades-long Hungarian invasions of Europe. The Hungarian Grand Prince Fajsz was deposed following the defeat and was succeeded by Taksony, who adopted the policy of isolation from the West. He was succeeded by his son G\u00e9za in 972, who sent envoys to Otto I in 973. G\u00e9za was baptised in 972, and Christianity spread among the Hungarians during his reign.\nG\u00e9za expanded his rule over the territories west of the Danube and the Garam, but significant parts of the Carpathian Basin still remained under the rule of local tribal leaders. In 997, G\u00e9za died and was succeeded by Stephen (originally called Vajk). Stephen was baptized by Bishop Adalbert of Prague and married Gisela, daughter of Henry II, Duke of Bavaria, sister of Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor, as well as a distant niece of Otto III. Stephen had to face the rebellion of his relative, Kopp\u00e1ny, who claimed G\u00e9za's inheritance based on the Hungarian tradition of agnatic seniority. Stephen defeated Kopp\u00e1ny using some Western tactics and a small number of Swabian knights.\nWhen Otto III traveled to Poland in 1000, he brought with him a crown from Pope Sylvester II. With Otto III's approval, Stephen was crowned as the first Christian king of Hungary on Christmas Day, 1000.\nCongress of Gniezno.\nIn 996, Duke Boles\u0142aw I of Poland sent the longtime Bishop of Prague, Adalbert, to Christianize the Old Prussians. He was martyred by the Prussians for his efforts in 997. Boles\u0142aw I, who had bought Adalbert's body from the Old Prussians for its weight in gold, had Adalbert laid to rest in the cathedral at Gniezno, which eventually became the ecclesiastical center of Poland. Otto III and Boles\u0142aw I worked together to canonize Adalbert, making him the first Slavic bishop to become a saint. In December 999, Otto III left Italy to make a pilgrimage from Rome to Gniezno in Poland to pray at the grave of Adalbert.\nOtto III's pilgrimage allowed the Emperor to extend the influence of Christianity in Eastern Europe and to strengthen relations with Poland and Hungary by naming them \"federati\" (\"allies\"). On the pilgrimage to Gniezno, the Emperor was received by Boles\u0142aw I at the Polish border on the Bobr River near Ma\u0142omice. Between 7 and 15 March 1000, Otto III invested Boles\u0142aw I with the titles \"frater et cooperator Imperii\" (\"Brother and Partner of the Empire\") and \"populi Romani amicus et socius\" (\"Friend and ally of Rome\"). Otto III gave Boles\u0142aw a replica of his Holy Lance (part of the Imperial Regalia) and Boles\u0142aw presented the Emperor with a relic, an arm of Saint Adalbert in exchange.\nOn the same foreign visit, Otto III raised Gniezno to the rank of an archbishopric and installed Radzim Gaudenty, a brother of Saint Adalbert, as its first archbishop. Otto III also established three new subordinate dioceses under the Archbishop of Gniezno: the Bishopric of Krak\u00f3w (assigned to Bishop Poppo), the Bishopric of Wroc\u0142aw (assigned to Bishop Jan), and the Bishopric of Ko\u0142obrzeg in Pomerania (assigned to Bishop Reinbern).\nBoles\u0142aw I subsequently accompanied Otto III on his way back to Germany. Both proceeded to the grave of Charlemagne at Aachen Cathedral, where . Both arranged the betrothal of Boles\u0142aw's son Mieszko II Lambert with the Emperor's niece Richeza of Lotharingia.\nFinal years.\nReturn to Rome.\nThe Emperor spent the remainder of 1000 in Italy without any notable activities. In 1001, the people of the Italian city of Tibur revolted against Imperial authority. Otto III besieged the city and put down the revolt with ease, sparing its inhabitants. This action angered the people of Rome, who viewed Tibur as a rival and wanted the city destroyed. In a change of policy towards the papacy, Otto III bestowed the governance of the city upon Pope Sylvester II as part of the Papal States but under the overlordship of the Holy Roman Empire. Previously, Otto III had revoked the Pope's rights as secular ruler by denying the \"Donation of Constantine\" and by amending the \"Diploma Ottonianum\".\nIn the weeks after Otto's actions at Tibur, the Roman people rebelled against their Emperor, led by Count Gregory I of Tusculum. The rebellious citizens besieged the Emperor in his palace on the Palatine Hill and drove him from the city. Accompanied by Bishop Bernward of Hildesheim and the German chronicler Thangmar, he returned to the city to conduct peace negotiations with the rebellious Romans. Though both sides agreed to a peaceful settlement, with the Romans respecting Otto's rule over the city, feelings of mistrust remained. The Emperor's advisors urged him to wait outside the city until military reinforcements could arrive to ensure his safety.\nEmperor Otto, accompanied by Pope Sylvester II, traveled to Ravenna to do penance in the monastery of Sant'Apollinare in Classe and to summon his army. While in Ravenna, he received ambassadors from Duke Boles\u0142aw I of Poland and approved the plans of King Stephen of Hungary to establish the Archdiocese of Esztergom in order to convert Hungary to Christianity. The Emperor also strengthened relations with the Venetian Doge, Pietro II Orseolo. Since 996, Otto had been godfather to Pietro II's son, Otto Orseolo, and in 1001 he arranged for Pietro II's daughter to be baptized.\nDeath.\nAfter summoning his army in late 1001, Otto headed south to Rome to ensure his rule over the city. During the travel south, however, he suffered a sudden and severe fever. He died in a castle near Civita Castellana on 24 January 1002. He was 21 years old and had reigned as an independent ruler for just under six years, having nominally reigned for nearly nineteen. The Byzantine princess Zoe, second daughter of the Emperor Constantine VIII, had just disembarked in Apulia on her way to marry him. Otto III's death has been attributed to various causes. Medieval sources speak of malaria, which he had caught in the unhealthy marshes that surrounded Ravenna. Following his death, the Roman people suggested that Stefania, the widow of Crescentius II, had made Otto fall in love with her and then poisoned him.\nThe Emperor's body was carried back to Germany by his soldiers, as his route was lined with Italians who hurled abuses at his remains. He was buried in Aachen Cathedral alongside the body of Charlemagne.\nSuccession crisis.\nOtto III, having never married, died without issue, leaving the Empire without a clear successor. As the funeral procession moved through the Duchy of Bavaria in February 1002, Otto III's cousin duke Henry IV of Bavaria (son of Henry the Quarrelsome, representing the Bavarian-Liudolfing line) asked the bishops and nobles to elect him as the new king of Germany. With the exception of the Bishop of Augsburg and Willigis (Archbishop and Elector of Mainz), Henry II received no support for his claims. To emphasise Henry's claim to the throne the Bishop of Augsburg even buried Otto's intestines in the Cathedral of Augsburg in order to show that Henry cared for the well-being of Otto's body. At Otto III's funeral on Easter 1002, in Aachen, the German nobles repeated their opposition to Henry II. Several rival candidates for the throne \u2013 Count Ezzo of Lotharingia, Margrave Eckard I of Meissen, and Duke Herman II of Swabia (a Conradine) \u2014 strongly contested the succession of Henry II. On 6 or 7 June 1002 in Mainz, the duke of Bavaria was elected King of the Romans as Henry II by his Bavarian, Frankish and upper Lotharingian supporters, and anointed and crowned king by Willigis. In the meantime, Ekkehard had already been killed in a feud unconnected to the succession dispute. Henry then launched an indecisive campaign against Herman of Swabia, but was recognised by the Thuringians, Saxons and lower Lotharingians in subsequent months, either by homage or renewed election. On 1 October 1002 in Bruchsal, Herman finally submitted to Henry II, and the war of succession was over.\nWithout an Emperor on the throne, Italy began to break away from German control. On 15 February 1002, the Lombard Margrave of Ivrea Arduin, an opponent of the Ottonian dynasty, was elected King of Italy in Pavia.\nCharacter.\nOtto's mental gifts were considerable, and were carefully cultivated by Bernward, later bishop of Hildesheim, and Gerbert of Aurillac, archbishop of Reims. He spoke three languages and was so learned that contemporaries called him \"mirabilia mundi\" or \"the wonder of the world\" (later, Frederick II would often be referred to as \"stupor mundi\", also translated into English as \"the wonder of the world\". The two emperors are often compared on account of their intellectual power, ambitions and connection to the Italian culture). Enamoured as he was of Greek and Roman culture, a speech was attributed to him in Thangmar's Vita Bernwardi saying he preferred Romans to his German subjects though the speech's authenticity is disputed.\nAccounts of his reign.\nBetween 1012 and 1018 Thietmar of Merseburg wrote a \"Chronicon\", or \"Chronicle\", of eight books dealing with the period between 908 and 1018. For the earlier part he used Widukind's \"Res gestae Saxonicae\", the \"Annales Quedlinburgenses\" and other sources; the latter part is the result of personal knowledge. The chronicle is nevertheless an excellent authority for the history of Saxony during the reigns of the emperors Otto III and Henry II. No kind of information is excluded, but the fullest details refer to the bishopric of Merseburg and to the wars against the Wends and the Poles.\nFamily.\nOtto III was a member of the Ottonian dynasty of kings and emperors who ruled the Holy Roman Empire (previously Germany) from 919 to 1024. In relation to the other members of his dynasty, Otto III was the great-grandson of Henry the Fowler, grandson of Otto I, son of Otto II, and a second-cousin to Henry II.\nOtto III never married and never fathered any children due to his early death. At the time of his death, the Byzantine princess Zo\u00eb Porphyrogenita, second daughter of Emperor Constantine VIII, was traveling to Italy to marry him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38936", "revid": "1812441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38936", "title": "Yankee", "text": "Term for people from the United States\nThe term Yankee and its contracted form Yank have several interrelated meanings, all referring to people from the United States. Their various meanings depend on the context, and may refer to New Englanders, the Northeastern United States, the Northern United States, or to people from the US in general. Many of the earlier immigrants to the northeast from Ireland, Italy, Poland, and other regions of Europe, used \"Yankees\" to refer to English settlers in New England.\nOutside the United States, \"Yank\" is used informally to refer to a person or thing from the US. It has been especially popular in the United Kingdom, Ireland, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand where it may be used variously, either with an uncomplimentary overtone, endearingly, or cordially. In the Southern United States, \"Yankee\" is a derisive term which refers to all Northerners, and during the American Civil War it was applied by Confederates to soldiers of the Union army in general. Elsewhere in the United States, it largely refers to people from the Northeast or with New England cultural ties, such as descendants of colonial New England settlers, wherever they live. Its sense is sometimes more cultural than geographical, emphasizing the Calvinist Puritan Christian beliefs and traditions of the Congregationalists who brought their culture when they settled outside New England. The speech dialect of Eastern New England English is called \"Yankee\" or \"Yankee dialect\".\nEtymology and historical usage of the term.\nThe meaning of \"Yankee\" has varied over time. Its earliest usage was in the 17th century, in New Netherland. In the 18th century, it referred to residents of New England. As early as the 1770s, British people applied the term to any person from the United States, and was often derogatory.\nIn the 19th century, Americans in the southern United States employed the word in reference to Americans from the northern United States. Historically, it has also been used to distinguish American-born Protestants from later immigrants, such as Catholics of Irish descent.\nNew Netherland origin.\nThe term \"Yankee\" is attested as early as 1683. It likely derives from the Dutch name \"Janke\" (lit. 'Little John'), which was popular across New Netherland during the 17th century. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" calls this theory \"perhaps the most plausible\".\n\"Janke\" was used as both a diminutive form of the Dutch name \"Jan\" () and as a surname in its own right. After the British replaced the Dutch administration in 1664, it would have been Anglicized as \"Yankee\". Michael Quinion and Patrick Hanks posit that \"Yankee\" was therefore \"used as a nickname for a Dutch-speaking American in colonial times\".\nAlternatively, the \"Online Etymology Dictionary\" suggests that \"Yankee\" may be derived from \"Jan Kees\" or \"Jan Kaas\" (lit. 'John Cheese'), originally a derogatory Flemish nickname for the Dutch. The Dutch settlers of New Amsterdam may have used this as a disparaging term for the English colonists in Connecticut.\nNew England use.\nDutch colonists in New Amsterdam may have been the first to call New Englanders\u2014specifically English colonists in Connecticut\u2014\"Yankees\". In 1758, British General James Wolfe also negatively referred to New England soldiers under his command as \"Yankees\".\nThe term was not used by New Englanders themselves until 1775. According to \"Merriam-Webster\", New Englanders began to use the term as a self-descriptor after their successes in the battles of Lexington and Concord.\nRejected etymologies.\nMany etymologies have been suggested for the word \"Yankee\", but modern linguists generally reject theories that suggest it originated in any Indigenous languages. This includes a theory put forth by a British officer in 1789, who said that it was derived from the Cherokee word \"eankke\" meaning \"coward\"\u2014despite the fact that no such word existed in the Cherokee language. Another theory surmised that the word was borrowed from the Wyandot pronunciation of the French \"l'anglais\", meaning \"the Englishman\" or \"the English language\", which was sounded as \"Y'an-gee\".\nAmerican musicologist Oscar Sonneck debunked a romanticized false etymology in his 1909 work \"Report on \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", \"Hail Columbia\", \"America\", \"Yankee Doodle\"\". He cited a popular theory that the word came from a tribe called the \"Yankoos\" (said to mean \"invincible\") who were defeated by New Englanders, and transferred their name to the victors as part of an \"Indian custom\". Sonneck found no evidence such a tradition existed, nor had any settlers ever adopted an Indian name to describe themselves, and concluded there was never a tribe called the \"Yankoos\".\nHistory.\nYankee settlement in the United States.\nThe original Yankees diffused widely across the northern United States, leaving their imprints in New York, the Upper Midwest, many taking advantage of water routes by the Great Lakes, and places as far away as Seattle, San Francisco, and Honolulu.\nYankeeism is the general character of the Union. Yankee manners are as migratory as Yankee men. The latter are found everywhere and the former prevail wherever the latter are found. Although the genuine Yankee belongs to New England, the term \"Yankee\" is now as appropriate to the natives of the Union at large.\nYankees settled other states in various ways: some joined highly organized colonization companies, others purchased groups of land together; some joined volunteer land settlement groups, and self-reliant individual families also migrated. Yankees typically lived in villages consisting of clusters of separate farms. Often they were merchants, bankers, teachers, or professionals.\nVillage life fostered local democracy, best exemplified by the open town meeting form of government that still exists today in New England. Village life also stimulated mutual oversight of moral behavior and emphasized civic virtue. The Yankees built international trade routes stretching to China by 1800 from the New England seaports of Boston, Salem, Providence, Newport, and New London, among others. Much of the profit from trading was reinvested in the textile and machine tools industries.\nPost-Independence.\nAfter 1800, Yankees spearheaded most American reform movements, including those for the abolition of slavery, temperance in use of alcohol, increase in women's political rights, and improvement in women's education. Emma Willard and Mary Lyon pioneered in the higher education of women, while Yankees comprised most of the reformers who went South during Reconstruction in the late 1860s to educate the Freedmen.\nHistorian John Buenker has examined the worldview of the Yankee settlers in the Midwest:\nBecause they arrived first and had a strong sense of community and mission, Yankees were able to transplant New England institutions, values, and mores, altered only by the conditions of frontier life. They established a public culture that emphasized the work ethic, the sanctity of private property, individual responsibility, faith in residential and social mobility, practicality, piety, public order and decorum, reverence for public education, activists, honest, and frugal government, town meeting democracy, and he believed that there was a public interest that transcends particular and stock ambitions. Regarding themselves as the elect and just in a world rife with sin and corruption, they felt a strong moral obligation to define and enforce standards of community and personal behavior\u2026. This pietistic worldview was substantially shared by British, Scandinavian, Swiss, English-Canadian and Dutch Reformed immigrants, as well as by German Protestants and many of the Forty-Eighters.\nYankees dominated New England, much of upstate New York, and much of the upper Midwest, and were the strongest supporters of the new Republican party in the 1860s. This was especially true for the Congregationalists, Presbyterians, and Methodists among them. A study of 65 predominantly Yankee counties showed that they voted only 40 percent for the Whigs in 1848 and 1852, but became 61\u201365 percent Republican in presidential elections of 1856 through 1864.\nIvy League universities remained bastions of old Yankee culture until well after World War II, particularly Harvard and Yale.\nStereotypes.\nPresident Calvin Coolidge exemplified the modern Yankee stereotype. Coolidge moved from rural Vermont to urban Massachusetts and was educated at elite Amherst College. Yet his flint-faced, unprepossessing ways and terse rural speech proved politically attractive. \"That Yankee twang will be worth a hundred thousand votes\", explained one Republican leader. Coolidge's laconic ways and dry humor were characteristic of stereotypical rural \"Yankee humor\" at the turn of the 20th century.\nYankee ingenuity was a worldwide stereotype of inventiveness, technical solutions to practical problems, \"know-how,\" self-reliance, and individual enterprise. The stereotype first appeared in the 19th century. As Mitchell Wilson notes, \"Yankee ingenuity and Yankee git-up-and-go did not exist in colonial days.\" The great majority of Yankees gravitated toward the burgeoning cities of the northeast, while wealthy New Englanders also sent ambassadors to frontier communities where they became influential bankers and newspaper printers. They introduced the term \"Universal Yankee Nation\" to proselytize their hopes for national and global influence.\nReligion.\nNew England Yankees originally followed the Puritan tradition, as expressed in Congregational and Baptist churches. Beginning in the late colonial period, many became Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Methodists, or, later, Unitarians. Strait-laced 17th-century moralism as derided by novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne faded in the 18th century. The First Great Awakening under Jonathan Edwards and others in the mid-18th century, and the Second Great Awakening in the early 19th century under Charles Grandison Finney and others emphasized personal piety, revivals, and devotion to civic duty.\nHistoric uses.\nYankee Doodle.\nA pervasive influence on the use of the term throughout the years has been the song \"Yankee Doodle\" which was popular during the American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783). The song originated among the British troops during the French and Indian or Seven Years' War, creating a stereotype of the Yankee simpleton who stuck a feather in his cap and thought that he was stylish, but it was rapidly re-appropriated by American patriots after the battles of Lexington and Concord. Today, \"Yankee Doodle\" is the official state song of Connecticut.\nCanadian usage.\nAn early use of the term outside the United States was in the creation of Sam Slick the \"Yankee Clockmaker\" in a newspaper column in Halifax, Nova Scotia, in 1835. The character was a plain-speaking American who becomes an example for Nova Scotians to follow in his industry and practicality; his uncouth manners and vanity were qualities that his creator detested. The character was developed by Thomas Chandler Haliburton, and it grew between 1836 and 1844 in a series of publications.\nDamn Yankee.\nThe \"damned Yankee\" usage dates from 1812. Confederates popularized it as a derogatory term for their Northern enemies during and after the American Civil War (1861\u20131865). Rhode Island Governor Bruce Sundlun had been a pilot in World War II, and he named his B-17F bomber \"Damn Yankee\" because a crewman from North Carolina nicknamed him with that epithet.\nContemporary uses.\nIn the United States.\nThe term \"Yankee\" can have many different meanings within the United States that are contextually and geographically dependent. Traditionally, \"Yankee\" was most often used to refer to a New Englander descended from the settlers of the region, thus often suggesting Puritanism and thrifty values. By the mid-20th century, some speakers applied the word to any American inhabiting the area north of the Mason\u2013Dixon Line, though usually with a specific focus still on New England. \"New England Yankee\" might be used to differentiate. However, within New England itself, the term still refers more specifically to old-stock New Englanders of English descent. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Certainly the Irish have for years complained of Yankee discrimination against them.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There were no civil rights groups then. Even the Federal Government was controlled by bigoted Yankees and Irish who banded together against the Italian immigrant.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The one anomaly of this era was the election of Yankee Republican Leverett Saltonstall as governor in 1938, and even then Saltonstall jokingly attributed his high vote totals in Irish districts to his 'South Boston face'.\u2014\u200a\nIn the Southern United States, the term is used in derisive reference to any Northerner, especially one who has migrated to the South and maintains derisive attitudes towards Southerners and the Southern way of life. Alabama lawyer and author Daniel Robinson Hundley describes the Yankee as such in \"Social Relations in Our Southern States\":\nYankee with all these is looked upon usually as a term of reproach\u2014signifying a shrewd, sharp, chaffering, oily-tongued, soft-sawdering, inquisitive, money-making, money-saving, and money-worshipping individual, who hails from Down East, and who is presumed to have no where else on the Globe a permanent local habitation, however ubiquitous he may be in his travels and pursuits.\nSenator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas pointed out as late as 1966, \"The very word 'Yankee' still wakens in Southern minds historical memories of defeat and humiliation, of the burning of Atlanta and Sherman's March to the Sea, or of an ancestral farmhouse burned by Quantrill's Raiders\". Ambrose Bierce defines the term in \"The Devil's Dictionary\" as: \"In Europe, an American. In the Northern States of our Union, a New Englander. In the Southern States the word is unknown. (See DAMNYANK.)\"\nHumorously drawn distinctions, often attributed to E. B. White:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMajor League Baseball's New York Yankees acquired the name from journalists after the team was enfranchised in , though they were officially known as the Highlanders until . The regional Yankees\u2013Red Sox rivalry can make the utterance of the term \"Yankee\" unwelcome to some fans in New England, especially to the most dedicated Red Sox fans living in the northeastern United States.\nThe term \"Swamp Yankee\" is sometimes used in rural Rhode Island, Connecticut, and southeastern Massachusetts to refer to Protestant farmers of moderate means and their descendants, although it is often regarded as a derogatory term. Scholars note that the famous Yankee \"twang\" survives mainly in the hill towns of interior New England, though it is disappearing even there.\nMark Twain's 1889 novel \"A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court\" popularized the word as a nickname for residents of Connecticut, and Connecticut Air National Guard unit 103d Airlift Wing is nicknamed \"The Flying Yankees.\"\nIn other countries.\nThe shortened form \"Yank\" is used as a derogatory, pejorative, playful, or colloquial term for Americans in Britain, Australia, Canada, South Africa, Ireland, and New Zealand. The full \"Yankee\" may be considered mildly derogatory, depending on the country. The Spanish variation \"yanqui\" is used in Latin American Spanish, often derogatorily. Venezuelan Spanish has the word derived around 1940 from \"petit yankee\" or \"petit yanqui\", a derogatory term for those who profess an exaggerated and often ridiculous admiration for anything from the United States.\nIn Australia, the term \"seppo\", shortened from traditional rhyming slang \"yank\" ==&gt; \"septic tank\", is sometimes used as a pejorative reference to Americans.\nIn Finland, the word \"jenkki\" is sometimes used to refer to any American citizen, and \"Jenkkil\u00e4\" or \"Jenkit\" refers to the United States itself. It is not considered offensive or anti-American, but rather a colloquial expression. In Sweden, the word \"j\u00e4nkare\" is a derivative of Yankee that is used to refer to both American citizens and classic American cars from the 1950s that are popular in rural Sweden.\nJapan.\nIn the late 19th century, the Japanese were called \"the Yankees of the East\" in praise of their industriousness and drive to modernization. In Japan, the term has been used since the late 1970s to refer to a type of delinquent youth associated with motorcycle gangs and frequently sporting dyed blond hair.\nSouth Korea.\nAround the American occupation of Korea and the Korean War periods, Korean black markets that sold smuggled American goods from military bases were called \"yankee markets\" (Korean:\u00a0). The term \"yankee\" is now generally viewed as an anti-American slur in South Korea, and is often used in the exclamation \"Yankee go home!\" ().\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nLinguistic"}
{"id": "38937", "revid": "1169106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38937", "title": "John the Theologian", "text": ""}
{"id": "38938", "revid": "50226035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38938", "title": "John the Apostle", "text": "Apostle of Jesus, saint (c. 6 \u2013 c. 100)\nJohn the Apostle (; ; c.\u20096 AD\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009100 AD), also known as Saint John the Beloved and, in Eastern Orthodox Christianity, Saint John the Theologian, was one of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus according to the New Testament. Generally listed as the youngest apostle, he was the son of Zebedee and Salome. His brother James was another of the Twelve Apostles. The Church Fathers identify him as John the Evangelist, John of Patmos, John the Elder, and the Beloved Disciple, and claim that he outlived the remaining apostles and was the only one to die of natural causes, although modern scholars are divided on the veracity of these claims. \nJohn the Apostle is traditionally held to be the author of the Gospel of John, and many Christian denominations believe that he authored several other books of the New Testament (the three Johannine epistles and the Book of Revelation, together with the Gospel of John, are called the Johannine works), depending on whether he is distinguished from, or identified with, John the Evangelist, John the Elder, and John of Patmos.\nAlthough the authorship of the Johannine works has traditionally been attributed to John the Apostle, only a minority of contemporary scholars believe he wrote the gospel, and most conclude that he wrote none of them. Regardless of whether or not John the Apostle wrote any of the Johannine works, most scholars agree that all three epistles were written by the same author and that the epistles did not have the same author as the Book of Revelation, although there is widespread disagreement among scholars as to whether the author of the epistles was different from that of the gospel.\nReferences to John in the New Testament.\nJohn the Apostle was born into a family of Jewish fishermen on the Sea of Galilee. He was the son of Zebedee and the younger brother of James the Great. According to church tradition, their mother was Salome. Also according to some traditions, Salome was the sister of Mary, Jesus' mother, making Salome Jesus' aunt, and her sons John the Apostle and James were Jesus' cousins.\nJohn the Apostle is traditionally believed to be one of two disciples (the other being Andrew) recounted in , who upon hearing the Baptist point out Jesus as the \"Lamb of God\", followed Jesus and spent the day with him, thus becoming the first two disciples called by Jesus. On this basis some traditions believe that John was first a disciple of John the Baptist, even though he is not named in this episode.\nAccording to the Synoptic Gospels (Matt 4:18\u201322; Mark 1:16\u201320; Luke 5:1\u201311), Zebedee and his sons fished in the Sea of Galilee. Jesus then called Peter, Andrew and the two sons of Zebedee to follow him. James and John are listed among the Twelve Apostles. Jesus referred to the pair as \"Boanerges\" (translated \"sons of thunder\"). A Gospel story relates how the brothers wanted to call down heavenly fire on an unhospitable Samaritan town, but Jesus rebuked them. John was also the disciple who reported to Jesus that they had 'forbidden' a non-disciple from casting out demons in Jesus' name, prompting Jesus to state that 'he who is not against us is on our side'.\nJohn is traditionally believed to have lived on for more than fifty years after the martyrdom of his brother James, who became the first Apostle to die a martyr's death in AD 44.\nPosition among the apostles.\nJohn is always mentioned in the group of the first four apostles in the Gospels and in the Book of Acts, listed either second, third or fourth.\nJohn, along with his brother James and Peter, formed an informal triumvirate among the Twelve Apostles in the Gospels. Jesus allowed them to be the only apostles present at three particular occasions during his public ministry, the Raising of Jairus' daughter, Transfiguration of Jesus and Agony in the Garden of Gethsemane.\nJesus sent only Peter and John into the city to make the preparation for the final Passover meal (the Last Supper).\nMany traditions identify the \"disciple whom Jesus loved\" in the Gospel of John as the Apostle John, but this identification is debated. At the meal itself, the \"disciple whom Jesus loved\" sat next to Jesus. It was customary to recline on couches at meals, and this disciple leaned on Jesus. Tradition identifies this disciple as John.\nAfter the arrest of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, only Peter and the \"other disciple\" (according to tradition, John) followed him into the palace of the high-priest. The \"beloved disciple\" alone, among the Apostles, remained near Jesus at the foot of the cross on Calvary alongside myrrhbearers and numerous other women. Following the instruction of Jesus from the Cross, the beloved disciple took Mary, the mother of Jesus, into his care as the last legacy of Jesus. Peter and John were also the only two apostles who ran to the empty tomb after Mary Magdalene bore witness to the resurrection of Jesus.\nAfter Jesus' Ascension and the descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, John, together with Peter, took a prominent part in the founding and guidance of the church. He was with Peter at the healing of the lame man at Solomon's Porch in the Temple and he was also thrown into prison with Peter. Later, only Peter and John went to visit the newly converted believers in Samaria.\nWhile he remained in Judea and the surrounding area, the other disciples returned to Jerusalem for the Apostolic Council (c.\u200948\u201350 AD). Paul, in opposing his enemies in Galatia, explicitly recalled that John, along with Peter and James the Just, were collectively recognized as the three \"Pillars of the Church.\" He also referred to the recognition that his Apostolic preaching of a gospel free from Jewish Law was received from these three, the most prominent men of the messianic community at Jerusalem.\nThe disciple whom Jesus loved.\nThe phrase \"the disciple whom Jesus loved\" (, ), or in ; \"whom Jesus loved\" (, ), is used six times in the Gospel of John, but in no other New Testament accounts of Jesus. claims that the Gospel of John is based on the written testimony of this disciple.\nThe disciple whom Jesus loved is specifically referred to six times in the Gospel of John:\nNone of the other Gospels includes anyone in the parallel scenes that could be directly understood as the Beloved Disciple. For example, in , Peter alone runs to the tomb. Mark, Matthew and Luke do not mention any one of the twelve disciples having witnessed the crucifixion.\nThere are also two references to an unnamed \"other disciple\" in and , which may be to the same person based on the wording in .\nNew Testament author.\nChurch tradition has held that John is the author of the Gospel of John and four other books of the New Testament \u2013 the three Epistles of John and the Book of Revelation. In the Gospel, authorship is internally credited to the \"disciple whom Jesus loved\" (, \"o math\u0113t\u0113s on \u0113gapa o I\u0113sous\") in . claims that the Gospel of John is based on the written testimony of the \"Beloved Disciple\". The authorship of some Johannine literature has been debated since about the year 200.\nIn his 4th century \"Ecclesiastical History\", Eusebius says that the First Epistle of John and the Gospel of John are widely agreed upon as his. However, Eusebius mentions that the consensus is that the second and third epistles of John are not his but were written by some other John. Eusebius also goes to some length to establish with the reader that there is no general consensus regarding the revelation of John. The revelation of John could only be what is now called the Book of Revelation. The Gospel according to John differs considerably from the Synoptic Gospels, which were likely written decades earlier. The bishops of Asia Minor supposedly requested him to write his gospel to deal with the heresy of the Ebionites, who asserted that Christ did not exist before Mary. John probably knew of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, but these gospels spoke of Jesus primarily in the year following the imprisonment and death of John the Baptist. Around 600, however, Sophronius of Jerusalem noted that \"two epistles bearing his name ... are considered by some to be the work of a certain John the Elder\" and, while stating that Revelation was written by John of Patmos, it was \"later translated by Justin Martyr and Irenaeus,\" presumably in an attempt to reconcile tradition with the obvious differences in Greek style.\nUntil the 19th century, the authorship of the Gospel of John had been attributed to the Apostle John. Many modern scholars such as Colin G. Kruse continue to affirm traditional authorship, but most modern critical scholars have their doubts. Some scholars place the Gospel of John somewhere between AD 65 and 85; John Robinson proposes an initial edition by 50\u201355 and then a final edition by 65 due to narrative similarities with Paul. Other scholars are of the opinion that the Gospel of John was composed in two or three stages. Most contemporary scholars consider that the Gospel was not written until the latter third of the first century AD, and with the earliest possible date of AD 75\u201380: \"...a date of AD 75\u201380 as the earliest possible date of composition for this Gospel.\" Other scholars think that an even later date, perhaps even the last decade of the first century AD right up to the start of the 2nd century (i.e. 90 \u2013 100), is applicable.\nModern, mainstream Bible scholars generally assert that the Gospel of John has been written by an anonymous author and not written by an eyewitness. According to \"The New Oxford Annotated Bible\" (2018), modern scholars agree that the gospel was more probably written by a disciple of John son of Zebedee; it could have been the Beloved Disciple or someone who recorded his dictation.\nRegarding whether the author of the Gospel of John was an eyewitness, according to Paul N. Anderson, the gospel \"contains more direct claims to eyewitness origins than any of the other Gospel traditions.\" F. F. Bruce argues that 19:35 contains an \"emphatic and explicit claim to eyewitness authority.\" According to Bart Ehrman, the gospel nowhere claims to have been written by direct witnesses to the reported events. According to Hugo Mendez, both the original text of John\u2019s gospel and the epilogue (chapter 21) claims that the work was \u2018written\u2019 by an eyewitness. Although the gospel presents its implied author as an eyewitness to Jesus, Mendez argues that this claim should be doubted given the amount of historically dubious content in the work and the commonality of claims to eyewitness testimony in forgeries at the time.\nBook of Revelation.\nAccording to the Book of Revelation, its author was on the island of Patmos \"for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus\", when he was honoured with the vision contained in Revelation.\nThe author of the Book of Revelation identifies himself as \"\u1f38\u03c9\u03ac\u03bd\u03bd\u03b7\u03c2\" (\"John\" in standard English translation). The early 2nd-century writer Justin Martyr was the first to equate the author of Revelation with \"John the Apostle\". However, most biblical scholars now contend that these were separate individuals since the text was written around 100 AD, after the death of John the Apostle, although many historians have defended the identification of the Author of the Gospel of John with that of the Book of Revelation based on the similarity of the two texts.\nJohn the Presbyter, an obscure figure in the early church, has also been identified with the seer of the Book of Revelation by such authors as Eusebius in his \"Church History\" (Book III, 39) and Jerome.\nJohn is considered to have been exiled to Patmos, during the persecutions under Emperor Domitian. Revelation 1:9 says that the author wrote the book on Patmos: \"I, John, both your brother and companion in tribulation, ... was on the island that is called Patmos for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.\" Adela Yarbro Collins, a biblical scholar at Yale Divinity School, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Early tradition says that John was banished to Patmos by the Roman authorities. This tradition is credible because banishment was a common punishment used during the Imperial period for a number of offenses. Among such offenses were the practices of magic and astrology. Prophecy was viewed by the Romans as belonging to the same category, whether Pagan, Jewish, or Christian. Prophecy with political implications, like that expressed by John in the book of Revelation, would have been perceived as a threat to Roman political power and order. Three of the islands in the Sporades were places where political offenders were banished. (Pliny \"Natural History\" 4.69\u201370; Tacitus \"Annals\" 4.30)\nSome modern critical scholars have raised the possibility that John the Apostle, John the Evangelist, and John of Patmos were three separate individuals. These scholars assert that John of Patmos wrote Revelation but neither the Gospel of John nor the Epistles of John. The author of Revelation identifies himself as \"John\" several times, but the author of the Gospel of John never identifies himself directly. Some Catholic scholars state that \"vocabulary, grammar, and style make it doubtful that the book could have been put into its present form by the same person(s) responsible for the fourth gospel.\"\nExtrabiblical traditions.\nThere is no information in the Bible concerning the duration of John's activity in Judea. According to tradition, John and the other Apostles remained some 12 years in this first field of labour. The persecution of Christians under Herod Agrippa I (r. 41\u201344 AD) led to the scattering of the Apostles through the Roman Empire's provinces.\nA messianic community existed at Ephesus before Paul's first labors there (cf. \"the brethren\"), in addition to Priscilla and Aquila. The original community was under the leadership of Apollos (1 Corinthians 1:12). They were disciples of John the Baptist and were converted by Aquila and Priscilla. According to tradition, after the Assumption of Mary, John went to Ephesus. Irenaeus writes of \"the church of Ephesus, founded by Paul, with John continuing with them until the times of Trajan.\" From Ephesus he wrote the three epistles attributed to him. John was banished by the Roman authorities to the Greek island of Patmos, where, according to tradition, he wrote the Book of Revelation. According to Tertullian (in \"The Prescription of Heretics\") John was banished (presumably to Patmos) after being plunged into boiling oil in Rome and suffering nothing from it. It is said that all in the audience of Colosseum were converted to Christianity upon witnessing this miracle. This event would have occurred in the 1st century, during the reign of either Emperor Nero or Emperor Domitian, who were both known to have persecuted Christians.\nWhen John was aged, he trained Polycarp who later became Bishop of Smyrna. This was important because Polycarp was able to carry John's message to future generations. Polycarp taught Irenaeus, passing on to him stories about John. Similarly, Ignatius of Antioch was a student of John. In \"Against Heresies\", Irenaeus relates how Polycarp told a story of \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;John, the disciple of the Lord, going to bathe at Ephesus, and perceiving Cerinthus within, rushed out of the bath-house without bathing, exclaiming, \"Let us fly, lest even the bath-house fall down, because Cerinthus, the enemy of the truth, is within.\"\nIt is traditionally believed that John was the youngest of the apostles and survived all of them. He is said to have lived to old age, dying of natural causes at Ephesus sometime after AD 98, during the reign of Trajan, thus becoming the only apostle who did not die as a martyr.\nAn alternative account of John's death, ascribed by later Christian writers to the early second-century bishop Papias of Hierapolis, claims that he was slain by the Jews. Most Johannine scholars doubt the reliability of its ascription to Papias, but a minority, including B.W. Bacon, Martin Hengel and Henry Barclay Swete, maintain that these references to Papias are credible. Zahn argues that this reference is actually to John the Baptist. \nJohn's tomb is thought to be located in the former Basilica of St. John at Sel\u00e7uk, a small town in the vicinity of Ephesus. John, along with Virgin Mary and Saint Joseph, belongs among a few saints who left no bodily relics as the opening of his tomb during Constantine the Great's reign yielded no bones. This fact gave rise to the belief that his body was assumed into heaven. \nJohn is also associated with the pseudepigraphal apocryphal text of the Acts of John, which is traditionally viewed as written by John himself or his disciple, Leucius Charinus. It was widely circulated by the second century AD but deemed heretical at the Second Council of Nicaea (787 AD). Varying fragments survived in Greek and Latin within monastic libraries. It contains strong docetic themes, but is not considered in modern scholarship to be Gnostic.\nLiturgical commemoration.\nThe feast day of Saint John in the Roman Catholic Church, which calls him \"Saint John, Apostle and Evangelist\", and in the Anglican Communion and Lutheran Calendars, which call him \"Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist\", is on 27 December. In the Tridentine calendar he was commemorated also on each of the following days up to and including 3 January, the Octave of the 27 December feast. This Octave was abolished by Pope Pius XII in 1955. The liturgical color is White. John, Apostle and Evangelist is remembered in the Church of England with a Festival on 27 December. In Roman Catholic tradition he is considered patron of Turkey, Asia Minor and Turkish people.\nUntil 1960, another feast day which appeared in the General Roman Calendar is that of \"Saint John Before the Latin Gate\" on 6 May, celebrating a tradition recounted by Jerome that St John was brought to Rome during the reign of the Emperor Domitian, and was thrown in a vat of boiling oil, from which he was miraculously preserved unharmed. A church (San Giovanni a Porta Latina) dedicated to him was built near the Latin gate of Rome, the traditional site of this event.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite commemorate the Apostle John on multiple days throughout the Church year.\nOther views.\nIslamic view.\nThe Quran also speaks of Jesus's disciples but does not mention their names, instead referring to them as \"supporters for [the cause of] Allah\". The Sunnah did not mention their names either. However, some Muslim scholars mentioned their names, likely relying on the resources of Christians, who are considered \"People of the Book\" in Islamic tradition. Muslim exegesis more or less agrees with the New Testament list and says that the disciples included Peter, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, Andrew, James, Jude, John and Simon the Zealot. Notably, narrations of People of the Book (Christians and Jews) are not to be believed or disbelieved by Muslims as long as there is nothing that supports or denies them in Quran or Sunnah.\nDruze view.\nDruze tradition honors several \"mentors\" and \"prophets\", and John the Apostle is honored as a prophet. In the Druze tradition and doctrine, Matthew the Apostle is respected for his contributions to spiritual knowledge and guidance. Druze doctrine teaches that Christianity is to be \"esteemed and praised\", as the Gospel writers are regarded as \"carriers of wisdom\". \nLatter-day Saint (Mormon) view.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) teaches that, \"John is mentioned frequently in latter-day revelation (1 Ne. 14:18\u201327; 3 Ne. 28:6; Ether 4:16; D&amp;C 7; 27:12; 61:14; 77; 88:141). For Latter-day Saints these passages confirm the biblical record of John and also provide insight into his greatness and the importance of the work the Lord has given him to do on the earth in New Testament times and in the last days. The latter-day scriptures clarify that John did not die but was allowed to remain on the earth as a ministering servant until the time of the Lord's Second Coming (John 21:20\u201323; 3 Ne. 28:6\u20137; D&amp;C 7)\". It also teaches that in 1829, along with the resurrected Peter and the resurrected James, John visited Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restored the priesthood authority with Apostolic succession to earth, though a few ex-Latter-Day Saints claim controversially that previous editions of Latter-day scripture contradict this claim of Priesthood authority and Apostolic succession. John, along with the Three Nephites, will live to see the Second Coming of Christ as translated beings.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints teaches that John the Apostle is the same person as John the Evangelist, John of Patmos, and the Beloved Disciple.\nFreemasonry view.\nAlthough Freemasonry is not a religion, it takes as its patron saints St. John the Baptist and St. John the Evangelist. Therefore, the Feast of St. John the Evangelist is used in many jurisdictions as the start of the new masonic year.\nIn art.\nAs he was traditionally identified with the beloved apostle, the evangelist, and the author of the Revelation and several Epistles, John played an extremely prominent role in art from the early Christian period onward. He is traditionally depicted in one of two distinct ways: either as an aged man with a white or gray beard, or alternatively as a beardless youth. The first way of depicting him was more common in Byzantine art, where it was possibly influenced by antique depictions of Socrates; the second was more common in the art of Medieval Western Europe, and can be dated back as far as 4th century Rome.\nLegends from the Acts of John, an apocryphal text attributed to John, contributed much to Medieval iconography; it is the source of the idea that John became an apostle at a young age. One of John's familiar attributes is the chalice, often with a serpent emerging from it. This symbol is interpreted as a reference to a legend from the Acts of John, in which John was challenged to drink a cup of poison to demonstrate the power of his faith (the poison being symbolized by the serpent). Other common attributes include a book or scroll, in reference to the writings traditionally attributed to him, and an eagle, which is argued to symbolize the high-soaring, inspirational quality of these writings.\nIn Medieval and through to Renaissance works of painting, sculpture and literature, Saint John is often presented in an androgynous or feminized manner. Historians have related such portrayals to the circumstances of the believers for whom they were intended. For instance, John's feminine features are argued to have helped to make him more relatable to women. Likewise, Sarah McNamer argues that because of his status as an androgynous saint, John could function as an \"image of a third or mixed gender\" and \"a crucial figure with whom to identify\" for male believers who sought to cultivate an attitude of affective piety, a highly emotional style of devotion that, in late-medieval culture, was thought to be poorly compatible with masculinity. After the Middle Ages, feminizing portrayals of Saint John continued to be made; a case in point is an etching by Jacques Bellange, shown to the right, described by art critic Richard Dorment as depicting \"a softly androgynous creature with a corona of frizzy hair, small breasts like a teenage girl, and the round belly of a mature woman.\"\nIn the realm of popular media, this latter phenomenon was brought to notice in Dan Brown's novel \"The Da Vinci Code\" (2003), where one of the book's characters suggests that the feminine-looking person to Jesus' right in Leonardo da Vinci's \"The Last Supper\" is actually Mary Magdalene rather than St. John.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38939", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38939", "title": "Michelangelo Antonioni", "text": "Italian filmmaker (1912\u20132007)\nMichelangelo Antonioni ( or ; ; 29 September 1912 \u2013 30 July 2007) was an Italian film director, screenwriter, and editor. He is best known for his \"trilogy on modernity and its discontents\", \"L'Avventura\" (1960), \"La Notte\" (1961), and \"L'Eclisse\" (1962); the English-language film \"Blowup\" (1966); and the multilingual \" The Passenger\" (1975). His films have been described as \"enigmatic and intricate mood pieces\" that feature elusive plots, striking visual composition, and a preoccupation with modern landscapes. His work substantially influenced subsequent world art cinema.\nAntonioni received numerous awards and nominations throughout his career, being the first and one of two directors, the other being Jafar Panahi, to have won the Palme d'Or, the Golden Lion, the Golden Bear and the Golden Leopard. Three of his films are on the list of hundred Italian films to be saved. He received Academy Award nominations for Best Director and Best Original Screenplay for \"Blowup\". In 1995, he received an Honorary Oscar \"in recognition of his place as one of cinema's master visual stylists\".\nEarly life.\nAntonioni was born into a prosperous family of landowners in Ferrara, Emilia-Romagna. He was the son of Elisabetta (n\u00e9e Roncagli) and Ismaele Antonioni. The director explained to Italian film critic Aldo Tassone:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My childhood was a happy one. My mother... was a warm and intelligent woman who had been a labourer in her youth. My father also was a good man. Born into a working-class family, he succeeded in obtaining a comfortable position through evening courses and hard work. My parents gave me free rein to do what I wanted: with my brother, we spent most of our time playing outside with friends. Curiously enough, our friends were invariably proletarian and poor. The poor still existed at that time, you recognized them by their clothes. But even in the way they wore their clothes, there was a fantasy, a frankness that made me prefer them to boys of bourgeois families. I always had sympathy for young women of working-class families, even later when I attended university: they were more authentic and spontaneous.\u2014\u200a\nAs a child, Antonioni was fond of drawing and music. A precocious violinist, he gave his first concert at the age of nine. Although he abandoned the violin with the discovery of cinema in his teens, drawing would remain a lifelong passion. \"I have never drawn, even as a child, either puppets or silhouettes but rather facades of houses and gates. One of my favourite games consisted of organizing towns. Ignorant in architecture, I constructed buildings and streets crammed with little figures. I invented stories for them. These childhood \"happenings\"\u2014I was eleven years old\u2014were like little films.\"\nUpon graduation from the University of Bologna with a degree in economics, he started writing for the Ferrara newspaper \"Il Corriere Padano\" in 1935 as a film journalist.\nIn 1940, Antonioni moved to Rome, where he worked for \"Cinema\", the official Fascist film magazine edited by Vittorio Mussolini. However, Antonioni was fired a few months afterwards. Later that year, he enrolled at the Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia to study film technique but left after three months. He was subsequently drafted into the army, and survived being condemned to death as a member of the Italian Resistance.\nCareer.\nEarly film work.\nIn 1942, Antonioni co-wrote \"A Pilot Returns\" with Roberto Rossellini and worked as assistant director on Enrico Fulchignoni's \"I due Foscari\". In 1943, he travelled to France to assist Marcel Carn\u00e9 on \"Les visiteurs du soir\" and began a series of short films with \"Gente del Po\" (1943), a story of poor fishermen of the Po valley. When Rome was liberated by the Allies, the film stock was transferred to the Fascist \"Republic of Sal\u00f2\" and could not be recovered and edited until 1947. The complete footage was never retrieved. These films were neorealist semi-documentary studies of the lives of working-class people.\nHowever, Antonioni's first feature \"Cronaca di un amore\" (\"Story of a Love Affair\", 1950) broke away from neorealism by depicting the middle classes. He continued to do so in a series of other films: \"I vinti\" (\"The Vanquished\", 1952), a trio of stories, each set in a different country (France, Italy and England), about juvenile delinquency; \"La signora senza camelie\" (\"The Lady Without Camellias\", 1953) about a young film star and her fall from grace; and \"Le amiche\" (\"The Girlfriends\", 1955) about middle-class women in Turin. \"Il grido\" (\"The Outcry\", 1957) was a return to working class stories, depicting a factory worker and his daughter. Each of these stories is about social alienation.\nInternational recognition.\nIn \"Le Amiche\" (1955), Antonioni experimented with a radical new style: instead of a conventional narrative, he presented a series of apparently disconnected events, and used long takes as part of his style. Antonioni returned to their use in \"L'avventura\" (1960), which became his first international success. At the 1960 Cannes Film Festival it received a mixture of cheers and boos, but won a Jury Prize and became popular in arthouse cinemas around the world. \"La notte\" (1961), starring Jeanne Moreau and Marcello Mastroianni, and \"L'Eclisse\" (1962), starring Alain Delon and Monica Vitti, followed \"L'avventura\". These three films are often referred to as a trilogy. \"La notte\" won the Golden Bear at the 11th Berlin International Film Festival, His first color film, \"Il deserto rosso\" (\"The Red Desert\", 1964), deals with similar themes, and is sometimes considered the fourth film of the \"trilogy\". All four films featured Vitti, his romantic partner at the time.\nAntonioni then signed a deal with producer Carlo Ponti that would allow artistic freedom on three films in English to be released by MGM. The first, \"Blowup\" (1966), was an international critical and commercial success and won the Palme d'Or at the 1967 Cannes Film Festival. Set in Swinging London, the film starred David Hemmings as a fashion photographer and was loosely based on a short story by Argentine-French writer Julio Cort\u00e1zar. The second film, \"Zabriskie Point\" (1970), was set in America and followed the counterculture. The soundtrack featured music from Pink Floyd, the Grateful Dead and the Rolling Stones. However, \"Zabriskie Point\" was a critical and commercial failure, and has been called \"the worst film ever made by a director of genius\". The third, \"The Passenger\" (1975), starring Jack Nicholson and Maria Schneider, received critical praise but did poorly at the box office.\nIn 1966, Antonioni drafted a treatment entitled \"Technically Sweet\", which he later developed into a screenplay with Mark Peploe, Niccolo Tucci, and Tonino Guerra, with plans to begin filming in the early 1970s with Jack Nicholson and Maria Schneider. On the verge of production in the Amazon jungle Ponti suddenly withdrew support and the project was abandoned, with Nicholson and Schneider going forward to star in \"The Passenger\". In 2008, \"Technically Sweet\" became an international group exhibition curated by Copenhagen-based artists Yvette Brackman and Maria Finn, in which the creations of artists, working in multiple mediums and based on Antonioni's manuscript, were displayed in New York. One of these was the short film \"Sweet Ruin\", directed by Elisabeth Subrin and starring Gaby Hoffmann. Antonioni's widow Enrica and director Andr\u00e9 Ristum announced plans to produce a film based on the screenplay, with filming in Brazil and Sardinia to begin in 2023.\nIn 1972, Antonioni was invited by to China to film the achievements of the Cultural Revolution.13 The resulting documentary, \"Chung Kuo, Cina\", was strongly condemned by the Chinese authorities as \"anti-Chinese\" and \"anti-communist\". It was first shown in China on 25 November 2004 in Beijing, with a film festival hosted by the Beijing Film Academy to honour the works of Antonioni. The film is now well-regarded by Chinese audiences, particularly by people who lived during the Cultural Revolution.14\nLater career.\nIn 1980, Antonioni directed \"Il mistero di Oberwald\" (\"The Mystery of Oberwald\"), based on Jean Cocteau's play, \"L'Aigle \u00e0 deux t\u00eates\" (\"The Eagle With Two Heads\"). Featuring Monica Vitti in the lead, the film delves into an experimental approach to color enhancement through electronic treatment. The process involves initially capturing the footage on video and transferring it to 35mm film stock during post-production.\n\"Identificazione di una donna\" (\"Identification of a Woman\",) a 1982 film shot in Italy, explores the recurring themes found in his Italian trilogy. In 1983, Antonioni published the book \"That Bowling Alley on the Tiber\", which contains sketch stories and musings he described as \"nuclei\" for possible films. In 1985, Antonioni suffered a stroke that left him aphasic and partly paralyzed. Despite his incapacity to speak or write, Antonioni continued to direct films including \"Beyond the Clouds\" (1995), based on four stories from \"That Bowling Alley on the Tiber\", for which Wim Wenders was hired as a back-up director to shoot various scenes. As Wenders has explained, \"without someone else, no film of his would find insurers.\" During the editing, however, Antonioni rejected almost all of the material filmed by Wenders except for a few short interludes. They shared the FIPRESCI Prize at the Venice Film Festival with \"Cyclo\".\nIn 1994, he was given an Honorary Academy Award \"in recognition of his place as one of cinema's master visual stylists.\" Presented to him by Jack Nicholson, the statuette was later stolen by burglars and had to be replaced. Previously, Antonioni had received Academy Award nominations for Best Director and Best Screenplay for \"Blowup\" (1967).\nAntonioni's final film, directed when he was in his 90s, was a segment of the anthology film \"Eros\" (2004), entitled \"Il filo pericoloso delle cose\" (\"The Dangerous Thread of Things\"). The short film's episodes are framed using a series of enigmatic paintings by Antonioni, a luxury sports car that has difficulty negotiating the narrow lanes and archaic stone bridges of the provincial town setting, a bikini-clad women performing a cryptic choreography on a beach, and the song \"Michelangelo Antonioni\", composed and sung by Caetano Veloso. The film was not well-received internationally. In America, Roger Ebert claimed it was neither erotic nor about eroticism. The U.S. DVD release of the film includes another 2004 short film by Antonioni, \"Lo sguardo di Michelangelo\" (\"The Gaze of Michelangelo\").\nAntonioni died in Rome, aged 94, on 30 July 2007, the same day as renowned Swedish director Ingmar Bergman. Antonioni lay in state at City Hall in Rome, where a large screen showed black-and-white footage of him among his film sets and behind-the-scenes. He was buried in his hometown of Ferrara on 2 August 2007.\nStyle and themes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt's too simplistic to say\u2014as many people have done\u2014that I am condemning the inhuman industrial world which oppresses the individuals and leads them to neurosis. My intention ... was to translate the poetry of the world, in which even factories can be beautiful. The line and curves of factories and their chimneys can be more beautiful than the outline of trees, which we are already too accustomed to seeing. It is a rich world, alive and serviceable ... There are people who do adapt, and others who can't manage, perhaps because they are too tied to ways of life that are by now out-of-date.\n\u2014Antonioni, interviewed about \"Red Desert\" (1964).\nCritic Richard Brody described Antonioni as \"the cinema's exemplary modernist\" and one of its \"great pictorialists\u2014his images reflect, with a cold enticement, the abstractions that fascinated him.\" AllMovie stated that \"his films\u2014a seminal body of enigmatic and intricate mood pieces\u2014rejected action in favor of contemplation, championing image and design over character and story.\" Stephen Dalton of the British Film Institute described Antonioni's influential visual hallmarks as \"extremely long takes, striking modern architecture, painterly use of colour, [and] tiny human figures adrift in empty landscapes,\" noting similarities to the \"empty urban dreamscapes\" of surrealist painter Giorgio de Chirico. Film historian Virginia Wright Wexman notes the slowness of his camera and the absence of frequent cuts, stating that \"he forces our full attention by continuing the shot long after others would cut away.\" Antonioni is also noted for exploiting colour as a significant expressive element in his later works, especially in \"Il deserto rosso\", his first colour film.\nAntonioni's plots were experimental, ambiguous, and elusive, often featuring middle-class characters who suffer from ennui, desperation, or joyless sex. Film historian David Bordwell writes that in Antonioni's films, \"Vacations, parties and artistic pursuits are vain efforts to conceal the characters' lack of purpose and emotion. Sexuality is reduced to casual seduction, enterprise to the pursuit of wealth at any cost.\" \"The New Yorker\" wrote that \"Antonioni captured a new bourgeois society that shifted from physical to intellectual creation, from matter to abstraction, from things to images, and the crisis of personal identity and self-recognition that resulted,\" calling his 1960s collaborations with Monica Vitti \"a crucial moment in the creation of cinematic modernism.\" Richard Brody stated that his films explore \"the way that new methods of communication\u2014mainly the mass media, but also the abstractions of high-tech industry, architecture, music, politics, and even fashion\u2014have a feedback effect on the educated, white-collar thinkers who create them,\" but noted that \"he wasn't nostalgic about the premodern.\"\nWexman describes Antonioni's perspective on the world as that of a \"postreligious Marxist and existentialist intellectual.\" In a speech at Cannes about \"L'Avventura\", Antonioni said that in the modern age of reason and science, mankind still lives by \"a rigid and stereotyped morality which all of us recognize as such and yet sustain out of cowardice and sheer laziness [...] We have examined those moral attitudes very carefully, we have dissected them and analyzed them to the point of exhaustion. We have been capable of all this, but we have not been capable of finding new ones.\" Nine years later he expressed a similar attitude in an interview, saying that he loathed the word 'morality': \"When man becomes reconciled to nature, when space becomes his true background, these words and concepts will have lost their meaning, and we will no longer have to use them.\" Critic Roland Barthes claimed that Antonioni's approach \"is not that of a historian, a politician or a moralist, but rather that of a utopian whose perception is seeking to pinpoint the new world, because he is eager for this world and already wants to be part of it.\" He added that his art \"consists in always leaving the road of meaning open and as if undecided.\"\nReception and legacy.\nBordwell explains that Antonioni was extremely influential on art films: \"More than any other director, he encouraged filmmakers to explore elliptical and open-ended narrative.\" \"The Guardian\" described him as, \"in essence, a director of extraordinary sequences,\" and advised viewers to \"forget plotting, characters or dialogue, his import is conveyed in absolutely formal terms.\"\nFilm director Akira Kurosawa considered Antonioni one of the most interesting filmmakers. Stanley Kubrick listed \"La Notte\" as one of his ten favorite films in a 1963 Poll. Andrei Tarkovsky was deeply influenced by Antonioni, especially for the development of his film \"Nostalghia\". In an interview with Serge Kaganski in 2004, Jean-Luc Godard judges that Antonioni is the filmmaker who has most influenced contemporary cinema. Wim Wenders considered Antonioni as a master and the two collaborated as directors for the film \"Beyond the Clouds\". Mikl\u00f3s Jancs\u00f3 considers Antonioni as his master. American director Martin Scorsese paid tribute to Antonioni following his death in 2007, stating that his films \"posed mysteries\u2014or rather the mystery, of who we are, what we are, to each other, to ourselves, to time. You could say that Antonioni was looking directly at the mysteries of the soul.\" American directors Francis Ford Coppola and Brian De Palma paid homage to Antonioni in their own films.\nAntonioni's spare style and purposeless characters, however, have not received universal acclaim. Ingmar Bergman stated in 2002 that while he considered the Antonioni films \"Blowup\" and \"La notte\" masterpieces, he found the other films boring and noted that he had never understood why Antonioni was held in such esteem. Orson Welles regretted the Italian director's use of the long take: \"I don't like to dwell on things. It's one of the reasons I'm so bored with Antonioni\u2014the belief that, because a shot is good, it's going to get better if you keep looking at it. He gives you a full shot of somebody walking down a road. And you think, 'Well, he's not going to carry that woman all the way up that road.' But he \"does\". And then she leaves and you go on looking at the road after she's gone.\"\nAmerican actor Peter Weller, whom Antonioni directed in \"Beyond the Clouds\", explained in a 1996 interview: \"There is no director living except maybe Kurosawa, Bergman, or Antonioni that I would fall down and do anything for. I met Antonioni three years ago in Taormina at a film festival. I introduced myself and told him that I adored his movies, his contributions to film, because he was the first guy who really started making films about the reality of the vacuity between people, the difficulty in traversing this space between lovers in modern day\u00a0... and he never gives you an answer, Antonioni\u2014that's the beautiful thing.\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMetadata\nVideo"}
{"id": "38940", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38940", "title": "Banana", "text": "Tropical, edible, staple fruit\nA banana is an elongated, edible fruit\u2014botanically a berry\u2014produced by several kinds of large treelike herbaceous flowering plants in the genus \"Musa\". In some countries, cooking bananas are called plantains, distinguishing them from dessert bananas. The fruit is variable in size, color and firmness, but is usually elongated and curved, with soft flesh rich in starch covered with a peel, which may have a variety of colors when ripe. It grows upward in clusters near the top of the plant. Almost all modern edible seedless (parthenocarp) cultivated bananas come from two wild species \u2013 \"Musa acuminata\" and \"Musa balbisiana\", or their hybrids.\n\"Musa\" species are native to tropical Indomalaya and Australia; they were probably domesticated in New Guinea. They are grown in 135 countries, primarily for their fruit, and to a lesser extent to make banana paper and textiles, while some are grown as ornamental plants. The world's largest producers of bananas in 2022 were India and China, which together accounted for approximately 26% of total production. Bananas are eaten raw or cooked in recipes varying from curries to banana chips, fritters, fruit preserves, or simply baked or steamed.\nWorldwide, there is no sharp distinction between dessert \"bananas\" and cooking \"plantains\": this distinction works well enough in the Americas and Europe, but it breaks down in Southeast Asia where many more kinds of bananas are grown and eaten. The term \"banana\" is applied also to other members of the \"Musa genus\", such as the scarlet banana (\"Musa coccinea\"), the pink banana (\"Musa velutina\"), and the Fe'i bananas. Members of the genus \"Ensete\", such as the snow banana (\"Ensete glaucum\") and the economically important false banana (\"Ensete ventricosum\") of Africa are sometimes included. Both genera are in the banana family, Musaceae.\nBanana plantations can be damaged by parasitic nematodes and insect pests, and to fungal and bacterial diseases, one of the most serious being Panama disease which is caused by a \"Fusarium\" fungus. This and black sigatoka threaten the production of Cavendish bananas, the main kind eaten in the Western world, which is a triploid \"Musa acuminata\". Plant breeders are seeking new varieties, but these are difficult to breed given that commercial varieties are seedless. To enable future breeding, banana germplasm is conserved in multiple gene banks around the world.\nDescription.\nThe banana plant is the largest herbaceous flowering plant. All the above-ground parts of a banana plant grow from a structure called a corm. Plants are normally tall and fairly sturdy with a treelike appearance, but what appears to be a trunk is actually a pseudostem composed of multiple leaf-stalks (petioles). Bananas grow in a wide variety of soils, as long as it is at least deep, has good drainage and is not compacted. They are fast-growing plants, with a growth rate of up to per day.\nThe leaves of banana plants are composed of a stalk (petiole) and a blade (lamina). The base of the petiole widens to form a sheath; the tightly packed sheaths make up the pseudostem, which is all that supports the plant. The edges of the sheath meet when it is first produced, making it tubular. As new growth occurs in the centre of the pseudostem, the edges are forced apart. Cultivated banana plants vary in height depending on the variety and growing conditions. Most are around tall, with a range from 'Dwarf Cavendish' plants at around to 'Gros Michel' at or more. Leaves are spirally arranged and may grow long and wide. When a banana plant is mature, the corm stops producing new leaves and begins to form a flower spike or inflorescence. A stem develops which grows up inside the pseudostem, carrying the immature inflorescence until eventually it emerges at the top. Each pseudostem normally produces a single inflorescence, also known as the \"banana heart\". After fruiting, the pseudostem dies, but offshoots will normally have developed from the base, so that the plant as a whole is perennial. The inflorescence contains many petal-like bracts between rows of flowers. The female flowers (which can develop into fruit) appear in rows further up the stem (closer to the leaves) from the rows of male flowers. The ovary is inferior, meaning that the tiny petals and other flower parts appear at the tip of the ovary.\nThe banana fruits develop from the \"banana heart\", in a large hanging cluster called a \"bunch\", made up of around nine tiers called \"hands\", with up to 20 fruits to a hand. A bunch can weigh . The stalk ends of the fruits connect up to the rachis part of the inflorescence. Opposite the stalk end, is the blossom end, where the remnants of the flower deviate the texture from the rest of the flesh inside the peel.\nThe fruit has been described as a \"leathery berry\". There is a protective outer layer (a peel or skin) with numerous long, thin strings (Vascular bundles), which run lengthwise between the skin and the edible inner white flesh. The peel is less palatable and usually discarded after peeling the fruit. The inner part of the common yellow dessert variety can be split lengthwise into three sections that correspond to the inner portions of the three carpels by manually deforming the unopened fruit. In cultivated varieties, fertile seeds are usually absent.\nEvolution.\nPhylogeny.\nA 2011 phylogenomic analysis using nuclear genes indicates the phylogeny of some representatives of the Musaceae family. Major edible kinds of banana are shown in boldface.\nWork by Li and colleagues in 2024 identifies three subspecies of \"M.\u00a0acuminata\", namely sspp. \"banksii\", \"malaccensis\", and \"zebrina\", as contributing substantially to the \"Ban\", \"Dh\", and \"Ze\" subgenomes of triploid cultivated bananas respectively.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Musa\" was created by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. The name may be derived from Antonius Musa, physician to the Emperor Augustus, or Linnaeus may have adapted the Arabic word for banana, \"mauz\". The ultimate origin of \"musa\" may be in the Trans\u2013New Guinea languages, which have words similar to \"#muku\"; from there the name was borrowed into the Austronesian languages and across Asia, accompanying the cultivation of the banana as it was brought to new areas, via the Dravidian languages of India, into Arabic as a \"Wanderwort\". The word \"banana\" is thought to be of West African origin, possibly from the Wolof word , and passed into English via Spanish or Portuguese.\n\"Musa\" is the type genus in the family Musaceae. The APG III system assigns Musaceae to the order Zingiberales, part of the commelinid clade of the monocotyledonous flowering plants. Some 85 species of \"Musa\" were recognized by Plants of the World Online as of July\u00a02025[ [update]]; several produce edible fruit, while others are cultivated as ornamentals.\nThe classification of cultivated bananas has long been a problematic issue for taxonomists. Linnaeus originally placed bananas into two species based only on their uses as food: \"Musa sapientum\" for dessert bananas and \"Musa paradisiaca\" for plantains. More species names were added, but this approach proved to be inadequate for the number of cultivars in the primary center of diversity of the genus, Southeast Asia. Many of these cultivars were given names that were later discovered to be synonyms.\nIn a series of papers published from 1947 onward, Ernest Cheesman showed that Linnaeus's \"Musa sapientum\" and \"Musa paradisiaca\" were cultivars and descendants of two wild seed-producing species, \"Musa acuminata\" and \"Musa balbisiana\", both first described by Luigi Aloysius Colla. Cheesman recommended the abolition of Linnaeus's species in favor of reclassifying bananas according to three morphologically distinct groups of cultivars \u2013 those primarily exhibiting the botanical characteristics of \"Musa balbisiana\", those primarily exhibiting the botanical characteristics of \"Musa acuminata\", and those with characteristics of both. Researchers Norman Simmonds and Ken Shepherd proposed a genome-based nomenclature system in 1955. This system eliminated almost all the difficulties and inconsistencies of the earlier classification of bananas based on assigning scientific names to cultivated varieties. Despite this, the original names are still recognized by some authorities, leading to confusion.\nThe accepted scientific names for most groups of cultivated bananas are \"Musa acuminata\" and \"Musa balbisiana\" for the ancestral species, and \"Musa\" \u00d7 \"paradisiaca\" for the hybrid of the two.\nAn unusual feature of the genetics of the banana is that chloroplast DNA is inherited maternally, while mitochondrial DNA is inherited paternally. This facilitates taxonomic study of species and subspecies relationships.\nInformal classification.\nIn regions such as North America and Europe, \"Musa\" fruits offered for sale can be divided into small sweet \"bananas\" eaten raw when ripe as a dessert, and large starchy \"plantains\" or cooking bananas, which do not have to be ripe. Linnaeus made this distinction when naming two \"species\" of \"Musa\". Members of the \"plantain subgroup\" of banana cultivars, most important as food in West Africa and Latin America, correspond to this description, having long pointed fruit. They are described by Ploetz et al. as \"true\" plantains, distinct from other cooking bananas.\nThe cooking bananas of East Africa belong to a different group, the East African Highland bananas. Further, small farmers in Colombia grow a much wider range of cultivars than large commercial plantations do, and in Southeast Asia\u2014the center of diversity for bananas, both wild and cultivated\u2014the distinction between \"bananas\" and \"plantains\" does not work. Many bananas are used both raw and cooked. There are starchy cooking bananas which are smaller than those eaten raw. The range of colors, sizes and shapes is far wider than in those grown or sold in Africa, Europe or the Americas. Southeast Asian languages do not make the distinction between \"bananas\" and \"plantains\" that is made in English. Thus both Cavendish dessert bananas and Saba cooking bananas are called \"pisang\" in Malaysia and Indonesia, \"kluai\" in Thailand and \"chu\u1ed1i\" in Vietnam. Fe'i bananas, grown and eaten in the islands of the Pacific, are derived from a different wild species. Most Fe'i bananas are cooked, but Karat bananas, which are short and squat with bright red skins, are eaten raw.\nHistory.\nDomestication.\nThe earliest domestication of bananas (\"Musa\" spp.) was from naturally occurring parthenocarpic (seedless) individuals of \"Musa banksii\" in New Guinea. These were cultivated by Papuans before the arrival of Austronesian-speakers. Numerous phytoliths of bananas have been recovered from the Kuk Swamp archaeological site and dated to around 10,000 to 6,500 BP. Foraging humans in this area began domestication in the late Pleistocene using transplantation and early cultivation methods. Various investigations \u2013 including Denham \"et al.\", 2003 \u2013 determine that by the early to middle of the Holocene the process was complete. \nAncient spread.\nAustronesian trade routes.\nFrom New Guinea, cultivated bananas spread westward into Island Southeast Asia. They hybridized with other (possibly independently domesticated) subspecies of \"Musa acuminata\" as well as \"M. balbisiana\" in the Philippines, northern New Guinea, and possibly Halmahera. These hybridization events produced the triploid cultivars of bananas commonly grown today. From Island Southeast Asia, they became part of the staple domesticated crops of the Austronesian peoples and were spread via their ancient seaborne migrations and ancient maritime trading routes into Oceania, Africa, South Asia, and Indochina.\nBananas are believed to have been introduced to Africa from Southeast Asia via the Austronesian settlement of Madagascar (c.\u2009600 AD). This is supported by relict populations of (accidentally-introduced) seeded \"Musa acuminata\" in northeastern Madagasacar and Pemba Island (off Tanzania), as well as the phenotypes of cultivated polyploid bananas, and their distribution; all of which provide the clearest evidence of a Southeast Asian origin. However, the role of Madagascar as a staging board for the dispersal of bananas (and other Asian crops) is unclear. Malagasy people colonized Madagascar from Island Southeast Asia around 600 AD onwards, but contact between East Africa and Island Southeast Asia dates back to at least 300 BC or earlier. The possibility that bananas may have been introduced from earlier Austronesian settlements in the East African coast that pre-date the settlement of Madagascar can not be ruled out. \nThese ancient introductions resulted in the banana subgroup now known as the \"true\" plantains, which include the East African Highland bananas and the Pacific plantains (the Iholena and Maoli-Popo'ulu subgroups). Genetic evidence show that East African Highland bananas (AAA) originated from banana populations introduced to Africa from the region between Java, Borneo, and New Guinea. Pacific plantains (AAB), on the other hand, were introduced to the Pacific Islands from banana populations originating from either eastern New Guinea or the Bismarck Archipelago.\nAnother wave of introductions later spread domesticated polyploid bananas to other parts of tropical Asia, particularly Indochina and the Indian subcontinent.\nSoutheast Asia remains the region of primary diversity of the banana. Areas of secondary diversity are found in Africa, indicating a long history of banana cultivation there.\nOther hypotheses.\n21st century discoveries of alleged banana phytoliths in Uganda and Cameroon dating to the first millennium BC and earlier triggered a debate about the date of the first introduction of bananas to East Africa.\nHowever, the identification of the remains in Uganda as phytoliths, much less banana phytoliths, is now considered dubious. The Cameroon phytoliths, on the other hand, are confirmed as \"Musa\", despite early doubts that they may be from \"Ensete\". However, the incongruous early date (all other archaeobotanical remains of bananas in Africa being from at earliest the first millennium AD) remains questionable due to the low number of phytoliths recovered (25), the absence of additional phytoliths in more recent sediments, and the possibility that the apparent date was the result of stratigraphic mixing. An introduction date of 2000 to 1000 BC is also unlikely as this was long before there were any evidence of agriculture in East Africa. Polyploid banana cultivars are sterile and do not spread without human cultivation.\nSimilarly, phytoliths recovered from the Kot Diji archaeological site in Pakistan were interpreted as evidence that bananas were known to the Indus Valley civilisation. This may indicate very early dispersal of bananas by Austronesian traders by sea from as early as 2000 BCE. But this is still putative, as they may have come from local wild \"Musa\" species used for fiber or as ornamentals, not food; and banana phytoliths are absent in other contemporary sites in South Asia.\nGlucanase and two other proteins specific to Musaceae were found in dental calculus from the early Iron Age (12th century BCE) Philistines in Tel Erani in the southern Levant. However, the authors only tentatively identify it as \"Musa\", as the proteins can also be found in \"Ensete\" (cultivated for their edible corms and pseudostems in Africa).\nArab Agricultural Revolution.\nThe banana may have been present in isolated locations in the Middle East on the eve of Islam. The spread of Islam was followed by far-reaching diffusion. There are numerous references to it in Islamic texts (such as poems and hadiths) from the 9th century onwards. By the 10th century, the banana appeared in texts from Palestine and Egypt. From there, it diffused into North Africa and Al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) during the Arab Agricultural Revolution. An article on banana tree cultivation is included in Ibn al-'Awwam's 12th-century agricultural work, \"Kit\u0101b al-Fil\u0101\u1e25a\" (\"Book on Agriculture\"). During the Middle Ages, bananas from Granada were considered among the best in the Arab world. Bananas were certainly grown in the Christian Kingdom of Cyprus by the late medieval period. Writing in 1458, the Italian traveller and writer Gabriele Capodilista wrote favourably of the extensive farm produce of the estates at Episkopi, near modern-day Limassol, including the area's banana plantations.\nEarly modern spread.\nIn the early modern period, bananas were encountered by European explorers during the Magellan expedition in 1521, in both Guam and the Philippines. Lacking a name for the fruit, the ship's historian Antonio Pigafetta described them as \"figs more than one palm long.\" Bananas were introduced to South America by Portuguese sailors who brought them from West Africa in the 16th century. Southeast Asian banana cultivars, as well as abaca grown for fibers, were introduced to North and Central America by the Spanish from the Philippines, via the Manila galleons.\nPlantation cultivation.\nIn the 15th and 16th centuries, Portuguese colonists started banana plantations in the Atlantic Islands, Brazil, and western Africa. North Americans began consuming bananas on a small scale at very high prices shortly after the Civil War, though it was only in the 1880s that the food became more widespread. As late as the Victorian Era, bananas were not widely known in Europe, although they were available.\nThe earliest modern plantations originated in Jamaica and the related Western Caribbean Zone, including most of Central America. Plantation cultivation involved the combination of modern transportation networks of steamships and railroads with the development of refrigeration that allowed more time between harvesting and ripening. North American shippers like Lorenzo Dow Baker and Andrew Preston, the founders of the Boston Fruit Company started this process in the 1870s, with the participation of railroad builders like Minor C. Keith. Development led to the multi-national giant corporations like Chiquita and Dole. These companies were monopolistic, vertically integrated (controlling growing, processing, shipping and marketing) and usually used political manipulation to build enclave economies (internally self-sufficient, virtually tax exempt, and export-oriented, contributing little to the host economy). Their political maneuvers, which gave rise to the term banana republic for states such as Honduras and Guatemala, included working with local elites and their rivalries to influence politics or playing the international interests of the United States, especially during the Cold War, to keep the political climate favorable to their interests.\nSmall-scale cultivation.\nThe vast majority of the world's bananas are cultivated for family consumption or for sale on local markets. They are grown in large quantities in India, while many other Asian and African countries host numerous small-scale banana growers who sell at least some of their crop. Peasants with smallholdings of 1 to 2 acres in the Caribbean produce bananas for the world market, often alongside other crops. In many tropical countries, the main cultivars produce green (unripe) bananas used for cooking. Because bananas and plantains produce fruit year-round, they provide a valuable food source during the \"hunger season\" between harvests of other crops, and are thus important for global food security.\nModern cultivation.\nBananas are propagated asexually from offshoots. The plant is allowed to produce two shoots at a time; a larger one for immediate fruiting and a smaller \"sucker\" or \"follower\" to produce fruit in 6\u20138 months. As a non-seasonal crop, bananas are available fresh year-round. They are grown in some 135 countries.\nCavendish.\nIn global commerce in 2009, by far the most important cultivars belonged to the triploid \"Musa acuminata\" AAA group of Cavendish group bananas. Disease is threatening the production of the Cavendish banana worldwide. It is unclear if any existing cultivar can replace Cavendish bananas, so various hybridisation and genetic engineering programs are attempting to create a disease-resistant, mass-market banana. One such strain that has emerged is the Taiwanese Cavendish or Formosana.\nRipening.\nExport bananas are picked green, and ripened in special rooms upon arrival in the destination country. These rooms are air-tight and filled with ethylene gas to induce ripening, which mimics the normal production of this gas as a ripening hormone. Ethylene stimulates the formation of amylase, an enzyme that breaks down starch into sugar, influencing the taste. Ethylene signals the production of pectinase, a different enzyme which breaks down the pectin between the cells of the banana, causing the banana to soften as it ripens. The vivid yellow color many consumers in temperate climates associate with bananas is caused by ripening around , and does not occur in Cavendish bananas ripened in tropical temperatures (over ), which leaves them green.\nStorage and transport.\nBananas are transported over long distances from the tropics to world markets. To obtain maximum shelf life, harvest comes before the fruit is mature. The fruit requires careful handling, rapid transport to ports, cooling, and refrigerated shipping. The goal is to prevent the bananas from producing their natural ripening agent, ethylene. This technology allows storage and transport for 3\u20134 weeks at . On arrival, bananas are held at about and treated with a low concentration of ethylene. After a few days, the fruit begins to ripen and is distributed for final sale. Ripe bananas can be held for a few days at home. If bananas are too green, they can be put in a brown paper bag with an apple or tomato overnight to speed up the ripening process.\nSustainability.\nThe excessive use of fertilizers contributes greatly to eutrophication in streams and lakes, harming aquatic life, while expanding banana production has led to deforestation. As soil nutrients are depleted, more forest is cleared for plantations. This causes soil erosion and increases the frequency of flooding.\nVoluntary sustainability standards such as Rainforest Alliance and Fairtrade are being used to address some of these issues. Banana production certified in this way grew rapidly at the start of the 21st century to represent 36% of banana exports by 2016. However, such standards are applied mainly in countries which focus on the export market, such as Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, and Guatemala; worldwide they cover only 8\u201310% of production.\nBreeding.\nEdible bananas are parthenocarpic (seedless). This is important for their edibility, but the lack of seed production makes breeding difficult. Furthermore, cultivated bananas are typically triploid (less commonly diploid, and a few tetraploid). They are typically derived from the wild diploid species \"M.\u00a0acuminata\" and \"M.\u00a0balbisiana\", although some originate from \"M.\u00a0acuminata\" only. Unpaired chromosomes in triploids, homoeologous recombination between chromosomes from the two ancestral species, and failures to produce functional reproductive structures (due to selection for parthenocarpy) all combine to cause extremely low frequencies of successful seed production when attempting to breed bananas. Starting in the 1920s, \"pedigree breeding\" has been employed to try to generate desirable hybrids. Existing triploids are bred against diploids, sometimes wild with a desired characteristic, trying to create a tetraploid by combining a haploid gamete from the diploid parent with a (rare) unreduced triploid gamete from the other. The resulting tetraploid can then be bred against another diploid to produce triploid offspring. More recently, the \"reproductive breeding\" strategy treats diploids with colchicine to produce tetraploid offspring, which can then be bred against a second diploid to produce triploids.\nMutation breeding can be used in this crop. Aneuploidy is a source of significant variation in allotriploid varieties. For one example, it can be a source of TR4 resistance. Lab protocols have been devised to screen for such aberrations and for possible resulting disease resistances. Wild \"Musa\" spp. provide useful resistance genetics, and are vital to breeding for TR4 resistance, as shown in introgressed resistance from wild relatives. \nThe Honduran Foundation for Agricultural Research has bred a seedless banana that is resistant to both Panama disease and black Sigatoka disease. The team made use of the fact that \"seedless\" varieties do rarely produce seeds; they obtained around 15 seeds from some 30,000 cultivated plants, pollinated by hand with pollen from wild Asian bananas.\nProduction and export.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], bananas are exported in larger volume and to a larger value than any other fruit. In 2022, world production of bananas and plantains combined was 179 million tonnes, led by India and China with a combined total of 26% of global production. Other major producers were Uganda, Indonesia, the Philippines, Nigeria and Ecuador. As reported for 2013, total world exports were 20 million tonnes of bananas and 859,000 tonnes of plantains. Ecuador and the Philippines were the leading exporters with 5.4 and 3.3 million tonnes, respectively, and the Dominican Republic was the leading exporter of plantains with 210,350 tonnes.\nPests.\nBananas are damaged by a variety of pests, especially nematodes and insects.\nNematodes.\nBanana roots are subject to damage from multiple species of parasitic nematodes. \"Radopholus similis\" causes nematode root rot, the most serious nematode disease of bananas in economic terms. Root-knot is the result of infection by species of \"Meloidogyne\", while root-lesion is caused by species of \"Pratylenchus\", and spiral nematode root damage is the result of infection by \"Helicotylenchus\" species.\nInsects.\nAmong the main insect pests of banana cultivation are two beetles that cause substantial economic losses, the banana borer \"Cosmopolites sordidus\" and the banana stem weevil \"Odoiporus longicollis\". Other significant pests include aphids and scarring beetles.\nDiseases.\nAlthough in no danger of outright extinction, bananas of the Cavendish group, which dominate the global market, are under threat. There is a need to enrich banana biodiversity by producing diverse new banana varieties, not just focusing on the Cavendish. Its predecessor 'Gros Michel', discovered in the 1820s, was similarly dominant but had to be replaced after widespread infections of Panama disease. Monocropping of Cavendish similarly leaves it susceptible to disease and so threatens both commercial cultivation and small-scale subsistence farming. Within the data gathered from the genes of hundreds of bananas, the botanist Julie Sardos has found several wild banana ancestors currently unknown to scientists, whose genes could provide a means of defense against banana crop diseases.\nSome commentators have remarked that those variants which could replace what much of the world considers a \"typical banana\" are so different that most people would not consider them the same fruit, and blame the decline of the banana on monogenetic cultivation driven by short-term commercial motives. Overall, fungal diseases are disproportionately important to small island developing states.\nPanama disease.\nPanama disease is caused by a \"Fusarium\" soil fungus, which enters the plants through the roots and travels with water into the trunk and leaves, producing gels and gums that cut off the flow of water and nutrients, causing the plant to wilt, and exposing the rest of the plant to lethal amounts of sunlight. Prior to 1960, almost all commercial banana production centered on the Gros Michel cultivar, which was highly susceptible. Cavendish was chosen as the replacement for Gros Michel because, among resistant cultivars, it produces the highest quality fruit. It requires more care during shipping, and its quality compared to Gros Michel is debated.\nFusarium wilt TR4.\nFusarium wilt TR4, a reinvigorated strain of Panama disease, was discovered in 1993. This virulent form of Fusarium wilt has destroyed Cavendish plantations in several southeast Asian countries and spread to Australia and India. As the soil-based fungi can easily be carried on boots, clothing, or tools, the wilt spread to the Americas despite years of preventive efforts. Without genetic diversity, Cavendish is highly susceptible to TR4, and the disease endangers its commercial production worldwide. The only known defense to TR4 is genetic resistance. This is conferred either by RGA2, a gene isolated from a TR4-resistant diploid banana, or by the nematode-derived Ced9. This may be achieved by genetic modification.\nBlack sigatoka.\nBlack sigatoka is a fungal leaf spot disease first observed in Fiji in 1963 or 1964. It is caused by the ascomycete \"Mycosphaerella fijiensis\". The disease, also called black leaf streak, has spread to banana plantations throughout the tropics from infected banana leaves used as packing material. It affects all main cultivars of bananas and plantains (including the Cavendish cultivars), impeding photosynthesis by blackening parts of the leaves, eventually killing the entire leaf. Starved for energy, fruit production falls by 50% or more, and the bananas that do grow ripen prematurely, making them unsuitable for export. The fungus has shown ever-increasing resistance to treatment; spraying with fungicides may be required as often as 50 times a year. Better strategies, with integrated pest management, are needed.\nBanana bunchy top virus.\nBanana bunchy top virus is a plant virus of the genus \"Babuvirus\", family \"Nanonviridae\" affecting \"Musa\" spp. (including banana, abaca, plantain and ornamental bananas) and \"Ensete\" spp. in the family \"Musaceae\". Banana bunchy top disease symptoms include dark green streaks of variable length in leaf veins, midribs and petioles. Leaves become short and stunted as the disease progresses, becoming 'bunched' at the apex of the plant. Infected plants may produce no fruit or the fruit bunch may not emerge from the pseudostem. The virus is transmitted by the banana aphid \"Pentalonia nigronervosa\" and is widespread in Southeast Asia, Asia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Oceania and parts of Africa. There is no cure, but it can be effectively controlled by the eradication of diseased plants and the use of virus-free planting material. No resistant cultivars have been found, but varietal differences in susceptibility have been reported. The commercially important Cavendish subgroup is severely affected.\nBanana bacterial wilt.\nBanana bacterial wilt is a bacterial disease caused by \"Xanthomonas campestris\" pv. \"musacearum\". First identified on a close relative of bananas, \"Ensete ventricosum\", in Ethiopia in the 1960s, The disease was first seen in Uganda in 2001 affecting all banana cultivars. Since then it has been diagnosed in Central and East Africa, including the banana growing regions of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania, Kenya, Burundi, and Uganda.\nConservation of genetic diversity.\nGiven the narrow range of genetic diversity present in bananas and the many threats via biotic (pests and diseases) and abiotic threats (such as drought) stress, conservation of the full spectrum of banana genetic resources is ongoing. In 2024, the economist Pascal Liu of the FAO described the impact of global warming as an \"enormous threat\" to the world supply of bananas.\nBanana germplasm is conserved in many national and regional gene banks, and at the world's largest banana collection, the International \"Musa\" Germplasm Transit Centre, managed by Bioversity International and hosted at KU Leuven in Belgium. Since \"Musa\" cultivars are mostly seedless, they are conserved by three main methods: \"in vivo\" (planted in field collections), \"in vitro\" (as plantlets in test tubes within a controlled environment), and by cryopreservation (meristems conserved in liquid nitrogen at \u2212196\u00a0\u00b0C).\nGenes from wild banana species are conserved as DNA and as cryopreserved pollen. Seeds from wild species are sometimes conserved, although less commonly, as they are difficult to regenerate. In addition, bananas and their crop wild relatives are conserved \"in situ\", in the wild natural habitats where they evolved and continue to do so. Diversity is also conserved in farmers' fields where continuous cultivation, adaptation and improvement of cultivars is often carried out by small-scale farmers growing traditional local cultivars.\nNutrition.\nA raw banana (not including the peel) is 75% water, 23% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and contains negligible fat. A reference amount of supplies 89 calories, 24% of the Daily Value of vitamin B6, and moderate amounts of vitamin C, manganese, potassium, and dietary fiber, with no other micronutrients in significant content (table).\nAlthough bananas are commonly thought to contain exceptional potassium content, their actual potassium content is not high per typical food serving, having only 12% of the Daily Value for potassium (table). The potassium-content ranking for bananas among fruits, vegetables, legumes, and many other foods is medium.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nFruit.\nBananas are a staple starch for many tropical populations. Depending upon cultivar and ripeness, the flesh can vary in taste from starchy to sweet, and texture from firm to mushy. Both the skin and inner part can be eaten raw or cooked. The primary component of the aroma of fresh bananas is isoamyl acetate (also known as \"banana oil\"), which, along with several other compounds such as butyl acetate and isobutyl acetate, is a significant contributor to banana flavor.\nPlantains are eaten cooked, often as fritters. Pisang goreng, bananas fried with batter, is a popular street food in Southeast Asia. Bananas feature in Philippine cuisine, with desserts like \"maruya\" banana fritters. Bananas can be made into fruit preserves. Banana chips are a snack produced from sliced and fried bananas, such as in Kerala. Dried bananas are ground to make banana flour. In Africa, matoke bananas are cooked in a sauce with meat and vegetables such as peanuts or beans to make the breakfast dish katogo. In Western countries, bananas are used to make desserts such as banana bread.\nFlowers.\nBanana flowers (also called \"banana hearts\" or \"banana blossoms\") are used as a vegetable in South Asian and Southeast Asian cuisine. The flavor resembles that of artichoke. As with artichokes, both the fleshy part of the bracts and the heart are edible.\nLeaf.\nBanana leaves are large, flexible, and waterproof. While generally too tough to actually be eaten, they are often used as ecologically friendly disposable food containers or as \"plates\" in South Asia and several Southeast Asian countries. In Indonesian cuisine, banana leaf is employed in cooking methods like pepes and botok; banana leaf packages containing food ingredients and spices are cooked in steam or in boiled water, or are grilled on charcoal. Certain types of tamales are wrapped in banana leaves instead of corn husks.\nWhen used so for steaming or grilling, the banana leaves protect the food ingredients from burning and add a subtle sweet flavor. In South India, it is customary to serve traditional food on a banana leaf. In Tamil Nadu (India), dried banana leaves are used as to pack food and to make cups to hold liquid food items.\nTrunk.\nThe tender core of the banana plant's trunk is also used in South Asian and Southeast Asian cuisine. Examples include the Burmese dish \"mohinga\", and the Filipino dishes \"inubaran\" and \"kadyos, manok, kag ubad\".\nPaper and textiles.\nFiber harvested from the pseudostems and leaves of the abac\u00e1 banana (\"Musa textilis\") and other bananas have been used for textiles in the Philippines since ancient times. Archaeological evidence of cloth-weaving tools like spindle whorls date back to the period between 1000 BC and 500 AD in the Philippines. However, the tropical environment and the sparsity of pre-colonial records makes it hard to trace its antiquity. Nevertheless, abac\u00e1 bananas are the main source of fibers for traditional textiles still woven among various ethnic groups of the Philippines. Examples of abac\u00e1-based textiles include the \"t'nalak\", made by the Tiboli tribe of South Cotabato, and \"dagmay\", made by the Bagobo people. Traditional abac\u00e1 cloth collected from the Philippines during the Spanish colonial period is found in museum collections around the world, like the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Textile Museum of Canada.\nThe oldest surviving example of textile made from banana fibers is the Banton Burial Cloth recovered from a coffin in the sacred Ipot Cave of Banton, Romblon, Philippines, and dated to around the 13th and 14th centuries. Abac\u00e1 textiles were also mentioned numerous times in Spanish colonial records in the Philippines since the 16th century, eventually acquiring the Philippine Spanish name (entering the contemporary English language as \"medrinacks\", \"medrianacks\", \"medrianackes\", and \"medrinacles\", among other names) and the English name \"Manila hemp\". Aside from indigenous clothing for native Filipinos, was also used during the colonial era as canvas for sails and for stiffening clothing like skirts, collars, and doublets. The inner fibers are also used in the making of hats, including the \"Manila hats\", hammocks, matting, cordage, ropes, coarse twines, and Manila paper. By the 19th century, abac\u00e1 fiber had become one of the most important economic exports of the Philippines. They were in demand due to their strength and saltwater-resistance. \nOutside the Philippines, abac\u00e1 was first cultivated on a large scale in Sumatra in 1925 under the Dutch, who had observed its cultivation in the Philippines for cordage since the nineteenth century, followed up by plantings in Central America in 1929 sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. It also was transplanted into India and Guam.\nA similar tradition of weaving banana textiles (from \"Musa basjoo\" and \"Musa balbisiana\") also existed among the non-Han minority groups in southern China since at least the Han Dynasty (202 BC\u00a0\u2013 220 BC). Both fruit-bearing and fibrous banana species have been used. This textile tradition along with the banana species \"Musa basjoo\" (Japanese \"bash\u014d\", \u82ad\u8549) was introduced to the Ryukyu Islands of Japan at around the 14th century. In the Japanese system of kij\u014dka-bash\u014dfu, leaves and shoots are cut from the plant periodically to ensure softness. Harvested shoots are first boiled in lye to prepare fibers for yarn-making. These banana shoots produce fibers of varying degrees of softness, yielding yarns and textiles with differing qualities for specific uses. For example, the outermost fibers of the shoots are the coarsest, and are suitable for tablecloths, while the softest innermost fibers are desirable for kimono and kamishimo. This traditional Japanese cloth-making process requires many steps, all performed by hand. Banana paper can be made either from the bark of the banana plant, mainly for artistic purposes, or from the fibers of the stem and non-usable fruits. The paper may be hand-made or industrially processed.\nOther uses.\nThe large leaves of bananas are locally used as umbrellas. Banana peel may have capability to extract heavy metal contamination from river water, similar to other purification materials. Waste bananas can be used to feed livestock. As with all living things, potassium-containing bananas emit radioactivity at low levels occurring naturally from the potassium-40 (K-40) isotope. The banana equivalent dose of radiation was developed in 1995 as a simple teaching-tool to educate the public about the natural, small amount of K-40 radiation occurring in everyone and in common foods.\nPotential allergic reaction.\nIndividuals with a latex allergy may experience a reaction to handling or eating bananas.\nCultural roles.\nArts.\nThe Edo period poet Matsuo Bash\u014d is named after the Japanese word \u82ad\u8549 () for the Japanese banana. The planted in his garden by a grateful student became a source of inspiration to his poetry, as well as a symbol of his life and home.\nThe song \"Yes! We Have No Bananas\" was written by Frank Silver and Irving Cohn and originally released in 1923; for many decades, it was the best-selling sheet music in history. Since then the song has been rerecorded several times and has been particularly popular during banana shortages.\nA person slipping on a banana peel has been a staple of physical comedy for generations. An American comedy recording from 1910 features a popular character of the time, \"Uncle Josh\", claiming to describe his own such incident.\nThe banana's suggestively phallic shape has been exploited in artworks from Giorgio de Chirico's 1913 painting \"The Uncertainty of the Poet\" onwards. In 2019, an exhibition of Natalia LL's video and set of photographs showing a woman \"sucking on a banana\" at the National Museum in Warsaw was taken down and the museum's director reprimanded. The cover artwork for the 1967 debut album of The Velvet Underground features a banana made by Andy Warhol. On the original vinyl LP version, the design allowed the listener to \"peel\" this banana to find a pink, peeled banana on the inside. In 1989, the feminist Guerilla Girls made a screenprint with two bananas, intentionally reminiscent of Warhol's, arranged to form a \"0\" to answer the question in the artwork, \"How many works by women artists were in the Andy Warhol and Tremaine auctions at Sotheby's?\".\nItalian artist Maurizio Cattelan created a 2019 concept art piece titled \"Comedian\" involving taping a banana to a wall using silver duct tape. The piece was exhibited briefly at the Art Basel in Miami before being removed from the exhibition and eaten without permission in another artistic stunt titled \"Hungry Artist\" by New York artist David Datuna.\nReligion and folklore.\nIn India, bananas serve a prominent part in many festivals and occasions of Hindus. In South Indian weddings, particularly Tamil weddings, banana trees are tied in pairs to form an arch as a blessing to the couple for a long-lasting, useful life.\nIn Thailand, it is believed that a certain type of banana plant may be inhabited by a spirit, Nang Tani, a type of ghost related to trees and similar plants that manifests itself as a young woman. People often tie a length of colored satin cloth around the pseudostem of the banana plants.\nIn Malay folklore, the ghost known as Pontianak is associated with banana plants (\"pokok pisang\"), and its spirit is said to reside in them during the day.\nRacial signifier.\nIn European, British, and Australian sport, throwing a banana at a member of an opposing team has long been used as a form of racial abuse. The act, which was commonplace in England in the 1980s, is meant to taunt players of Black African ancestry by equating them to apes or monkeys.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38942", "revid": "32251677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38942", "title": "Wedding reception", "text": "Party after a wedding\nA wedding reception is a party usually held after the completion of a marriage ceremony as hospitality for those who have attended the wedding, hence the name reception: the couple \"receive\" society, in the form of family and friends, for the first time as a married couple. Hosts provide their choice of food and drink, although a wedding cake is popular.\nEntertaining guests after a wedding ceremony is traditional in most societies, and can last anywhere from half an hour to many hours or even days. Most wedding receptions are made in the evening for dinner; however, the couple may opt for a luncheon, brunch, or even afternoon tea. Ultimately the married couple chooses the details and location of the reception.\nIn some cultures, separate wedding celebrations are held for the bride's and groom's families.\nBefore receptions \u2013 a social event that is structured around a receiving line, and usually held in the afternoon, with only light refreshments \u2013 became popular, weddings were more typically celebrated with wedding breakfasts (for those whose religious traditions encouraged morning weddings) and wedding balls (for those who were married in the evening). The popularity of receptions, rather than breakfasts, dinners, and balls, during the 20th century led to the name \"reception\" being applied to any social event after a wedding, whether it is brunch, tea, dinner, or a dance.\nWestern culture.\nLocation.\nUntil after World War II, wedding celebrations were most commonly held in the bride's home, in whatever style of entertainment was within the means of the family. This might be a grand ball for a wealthy family, a luncheon for middle-class families, or an afternoon tea, featuring cake and lemonade, for working-class families.\nThe choice depended primarily on the family's economic situation, and in some cases, mass weddings were favored as a way to share costs. At the beginning of the 20th century, dance halls became common, and were rented by those planning a celebration beyond what their homes could hold.\nTypical locations for wedding celebrations now include hotel ballrooms, banquet halls, wedding venues, community halls, social halls at the church or other sacred place where the wedding ceremony took place, and, particularly for smaller weddings, restaurants and garden parties at home. There are also many small businesses that specialize in providing places for wedding ceremonies and celebrations.\nReceiving line.\nIn a receiving line, newly wedded couple, the hosts, and often their parents and any honour attendants, stand in order of precedence and greet every guest in turn.\nEach guest greets the first (lowest precedence) person in the line and, if necessary, introduces him/herself. The first person then introduces the guest to the next person in the line, and turns to the next guest. As each guest properly speaks little more than his/her name (if necessary) and conventional greetings or congratulations to each person in turn, the line progresses steadily without unnecessary delays.\nWestern etiquette requires at least one of the hosts and the newly married couple, as the guests of honor, to welcome and greet the guests, but the other members of the wedding party, parents who are not hosting the party, siblings, etc., are not required to stand in the receiving line. It is increasingly common to feature only the couple, since more modern couples host and pay for their own weddings rather than their parents.\nAfter formally receiving each guest in this fashion, the receiving line is finished and the people who had been duty-bound to stand in it can mingle with guests, eat, and enjoy more extended conversations.\nGrand entrance.\nAnother option, especially popular on the East and West Coast of the United States, is having a grand entrance instead of a receiving line. The grand entrance might involve presenting some or all of the wedding party, the parents, and/or the bride and groom.\nThe wedding party is usually introduced by a master of ceremonies, toastmaster, disc jockey, or band leader. It may be done in the same manner as they walked down the aisle during the wedding ceremony. This is generally much faster than a receiving line and guests may be seated before the arrival of the wedding party. In addition, it can be an event in itself and be as entertaining as wished. Introductions may be accompanied by music and information about each person to introduce them to the guests. However, unlike a reception line, it does not give the guests an opportunity to speak to any of the people being presented.\nFood.\nThe food served at a wedding reception is determined by the time of the wedding and local customs. Food may range from a non-alcoholic drink with wedding cake to elaborate, multi-course dinners. The type of food is chosen entirely at the discretion and budget of the hosts as costs for catering weddings have soared.\nSome receptions, especially if the wedding party's culture or religious faith prohibits alcohol or dancing, focus on dessert. Hosts may also choose to honor regional or local customs, such as by serving a culturally important cake like croquembouche in France, or featuring a cookie table as is celebrated in Pittsburgh and some surrounding areas.\nThe wedding cake is often a multi-tiered layer cake that is elaborately decorated with white frosting. Some couples have a smaller display cake, which is supplemented by sheet cake.\nThe groom's cake is a tradition observed mainly in the southern United States. In the Colonial and Victorian eras, the white-iced bride's cake was considered \"too light\" for male tastes, and a second cake choice\u2014usually a dark, liquor-soaked fruitcake\u2014was also offered. Today, chocolate is popular, although the groom's cake may be in any flavor and is usually shaped or decorated as something significant to the groom, such as a favorite hobby or sport.\nIf a full meal is served, the wedding cake is usually served after the meal. Otherwise, the cake may be served as soon as the family has received all of the guests.\nCommonly, the couple ceremonially cut the first piece of the cake, and in a nod to an ancient Roman wedding rite, may feed a bite to one another and perhaps sip a glass of wine or other drink with linked arms. Then the cake is served to the guests. Like being asked to pour tea at a formal tea party, being asked to serve the cake is generally considered an honor.\nToasts.\nIn most Western countries, either before or after food is served, toasts are made by members of the wedding party, wishing the couple well. Commonly, toasts are proposed by the bride's father, the groom, the best man, and/or the maid of honor, although there is no absolutely required list of people who must make toasts, or indeed any requirement to offer toasts at all.\nA new trend involves the addition of a DVD slideshow or photo montage video, featuring pictures of the new spouses growing up and meeting. These are created using home movies and photos taken over the couple's life, edited and set to music. The montage is shown either on a large TV or monitor or with an LCD projector.\nDances.\nIf there is dancing, the newly married couple typically open the dancing with their first dance. When waltzing was popular, it was sometimes called a \"bridal waltz\" to a love song, although other dance styles are more commonly used now. The bride and groom might decide to choose a choreographed dance routine or other forms of dancing, like club, disco or hip hop.\nTop 40 chart hits becoming an increasingly popular option for the first dance \u2013 the most popular first dance song at UK weddings in 2020 is You Got Me Thinking, a soft rock ballad by Joshua Radin. Before the wedding, the newlyweds choose a DJ and agree on a playlist with them. As a rule, the performance of the DJ takes place after the official traditional part.\nTraditionally, shortly after the dance begins, guests would promptly join in the dancing, in order of precedence, exactly like at any other ball. In very recent times, some families have told guests to not start dancing until after watching a sometimes lengthy sequence of \"special\" dances. For example, after the first dance, the newly married couple might dance with their parents and/or in-laws. However, there is no requirement that any particular people dance at all, much less with any particular person, and no absolutely required order for the bridal couple, their families, or the bridal party to begin dancing in.\nEntertainment.\nWedding receptions are often the time when couples want to ensure their family and guests will be entertained, and a variety of options such as disc jockeys, live bands, professional dancers such as ballroom dancers or belly dancers, magicians, fire artists, electric violinists, comedians and more unusual entertainers are brought in to heighten the festivities and make the wedding stand out.\nTypically, including lavish entertainment at the wedding reception is a luxury. Wedding DJs have been increasing in popularity in modern cultures as has hiring a live band.\nDeparture.\nA ceremony is often made of the newlyweds' departure. Rice or birdseed, signifying abundance, may be thrown at the departing couple, with birdseed preferred by facility managers, since it requires less clean up work than rice, and new, mess-free substitutes, such as blowing soap bubbles or ringing small bells being even more favored by the cleaning staff.\nAs the newlyweds are the guests of honor, the other guests are expected to remain at the reception until they leave them, and consequently, it is an imposition on the other guests for the newlyweds to stay unreasonably long at the party. On occasion, the newlyweds will stage an official leave-taking, so that guests feel free to leave, and then quietly return through another door.\nExpense.\nThe median cost of a wedding, including both the ceremony and reception, has generally outpaced the rate of inflation. In the United States, as of 2016, the average price is $35,329, steadily rising year over year, as it also has in the UK where the average cost was \u00a325,090, rising roughly 7000 pounds from two years prior. In Australia, the cost is $36,200 (AUD). Approximately 50% of a couple's entire wedding budget is spent on the reception alone. This is primarily due to the cost of food and alcohol. The wedding industry is a huge industry grossing $161 billion annually, according to Rebecca Mead, author of \"One Perfect Day\".\nOther Western traditions and beyond.\nWedding traditions vary between countries, and between regions of the same country. Some shared traditions include:\nChinese traditions.\nGifts.\nUnless the wedding couple has a wedding registry, it is best not to give gifts or gift certificates. For Chinese weddings, cash or a check is the traditional gift. (Traditional Italian weddings similarly include cash gifts.) The check should be in a red envelope or red pocket with the givers' names on it, and it is always given when signing in at the restaurant. In choosing the amount of money to give, givers scrupulously avoid unlucky numbers, such as 4 and favor combinations of lucky numbers, such even numbers, numbers with 8 (homonym with \"fortune\") and 9 (homonym with \"longevity\" \u2013 as in, may your marriage enjoy longevity). Also, white envelopes are never used to wrap gifts for a wedding or other joyful event, as the color white is associated with death. In addition to the check, in Chinese weddings some elder relatives might also give gold jewelry.\nTiming.\nThere are two times listed on the invitation: (g\u014dngh\u00f2u/greeting) and (r\u00f9x\u00ed/reception). Typically, they are at least two hours apart (some may be four hours). The first one is the time the groom and bride, along with their family, will be ready to receive guests and greet them; the second one is the time the reception/banquet will start. The gap between those hours is referred to as entertainment time. Very often, the restaurant will provide poker and mahjong () for gambling; the time can also be used to socialize with other guests and take photos with the bride/groom and their families. Nowadays, for Chinese couples' weddings in the U.S., you are less likely to see mahjong being played before the banquet; it is often replaced by a cocktail party. However, if the wedding reception takes place in southern China, Hong Kong, Macau, and even parts of Canada (where there is a large Cantonese population), mahjong might still be played before the dinner.\nSigning in.\nTwo people will be at the sign-in tables (one from the bride's family and one from the groom's) to register guests and receive gifts/red envelopes. Often, they will have two separate guest lists, one from the groom's side and one from the bride's. Then the best man and the maid of honor will direct ushers to escort guests to their seat.\nBanquet procedure.\nTypically, the banquet will include a speech from the parents, the best man, the maid of honor, and the guest speaker. There will be cake cutting, toasts, a tea ceremony, and dancing. The two tables at the center of the room are for the groom's and bride's families.\nTraditions.\nA Chinese wedding reception typically has nine or ten courses. Expensive dishes such as shark fin, abalone, lobster, jumbo shrimp, squab, sea bass, or sea cucumber are common on a wedding banquet menu.\nA whole fish, chicken, or pig means luck and completeness in Chinese wedding culture.\nTraditionally, after the fifth dish of the dinner, the groom and bride and their families will approach each table to toast the guests. Very often, the bride will change into a traditional Chinese red wedding dress (, or \"q\u00edp\u00e1o\") at that time, if she has been wearing a different style of clothing before.\nGallery.\nThe decorations vary by culture and budget.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38945", "revid": "31861199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38945", "title": "Cooking banana", "text": "Banana commonly used in cooking\nCooking bananas are a group of banana cultivars in the genus \"Musa\" whose fruits are generally used in cooking. They are not eaten raw and are generally starchy. Many cooking bananas are referred to as plantains or \"green bananas\". In botanical usage, the term \"plantain\" is used only for true plantains, while other starchy cultivars used for cooking are called \"cooking bananas\". True plantains are cooking cultivars belonging to the AAB group, while cooking bananas are any cooking cultivar belonging to the AAB, AAA, ABB, or BBB groups. The currently accepted scientific name for all such cultivars in these groups is \"Musa\" \u00d7 \"paradisiaca\". Fe'i bananas (\"Musa\" \u00d7 \"troglodytarum\") from the Pacific Islands are often eaten roasted or boiled, and are thus informally referred to as \"mountain plantains\", but they do not belong to any of the species from which all modern banana cultivars are descended.\nCooking bananas are a major food staple in West and Central Africa, the Caribbean islands, Central America, and northern South America. Members of the genus \"Musa\" are indigenous to the tropical regions of Southeast Asia and Oceania. Bananas fruit all year round, making them a reliable all-season staple food.\nCooking bananas are treated as a starchy fruit with a relatively neutral flavor and soft texture when cooked. Cooking bananas may be eaten raw; however, they are most commonly prepared either fried, boiled, or processed into flour or dough.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDescription.\nPlantains have more starch and less sugar compared to regular bananas, which is why they are mostly cooked before eating. They are typically boiled or fried when eaten green, and when processed, they can be made into flour and turned into baked products such as cakes, bread and pancakes. Green plantains can also be boiled and pureed and then used as thickeners for soups. The pulp of green plantain is typically hard, with the peel often so stiff that it must be cut with a knife to be removed.\nMature, yellow plantains can be peeled like typical dessert bananas; the pulp is softer than in immature, green fruit and some of the starch has been converted to sugar. They can be eaten raw, but are not as flavorful as dessert bananas, so are usually cooked. When yellow plantains are fried, they tend to caramelize, turning a golden-brown color. They can also be boiled, baked, microwaved, or grilled over charcoal, either peeled or unpeeled.\nPlantains are a staple food in the tropical regions of the world, ranking as the tenth most important staple food in the world. As a staple, plantains are treated in much the same way as potatoes, with a similar neutral flavor and texture when the unripe fruit is cooked by steaming, boiling, or frying.\nSince they fruit all year, plantains are a reliable staple food, particularly in developing countries with inadequate food storage, preservation, and transportation technologies. In Africa, plantains and bananas provide more than 25 percent of the caloric requirements for over 70 million people. Plantain plantations are vulnerable to destruction by hurricanes, because \"Musa\" spp. do not withstand high winds well.\nAn average plantain provides about of food energy and is a good source of potassium and dietary fiber. The sap from the fruit peel, as well as the entire plant, can stain clothing and hands, and can be difficult to remove.\nTaxonomy.\nCarl Linnaeus originally classified bananas into two species based only on their uses as food: \"Musa paradisiaca\" for plantains and \"Musa sapientum\" for dessert bananas. Both are now known to be hybrids between the species \"Musa acuminata\" (A genome) and \"Musa balbisiana\" (B genome). The earlier published name, \"Musa\" \u00d7 \"paradisiaca\", is now used as the scientific name for all such hybrids. Most modern plantains are sterile triploids belonging to the AAB Group, sometimes known as the \"Plantain group\". Other economically important cooking banana groups include the East African Highland bananas (Mutika/Lujugira subgroup) of the AAA Group and the Pacific plantains (including the Popoulo, Maoli, and Iholena subgroups), also of the AAB Group.\nDishes.\nFried.\n\"Pisang goreng\" (\"fried banana\" in Indonesian and Malay) is a plantain snack deep-fried in coconut oil. \"Pisang goreng\" can be coated in batter flour or fried without batter. It is a snack food mostly found in Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei.\n\"Ethakka appam\", \"pazham\" (banana) \"boli\" or \"pazham pori\" are terms used for fried plantain in the state of Kerala, India. The plantain is usually dipped in sweetened rice and white flour batter and then fried in coconut or vegetable oil, similar to pisang goreng. It is also known as \"bajji\" in Southern Indian states, where it is typically served as a savory fast food.\n\"Aritikaya kura\", or \"vepudu\" are terms used for deep fried or cooked plantain dish in the state of Andhra Pradesh, India. Plantain is known as \"Raw Banana\" or \"Aritikaya\" in this part of southern India. It is usually served with steamed white rice and maybe accompanied with plain curd or yogurt. It is usually a favourite dish to be served in weddings and other occasions. \nIn the Philippines, fried bananas are also served with arroz a la cubana and is frequently characterized as one of its defining ingredients.\nPlantains are used in the Ivory Coast dish \"aloco\" as the main ingredient. Fried plantains are covered in an onion-tomato sauce, often with a grilled fish between the plantains and sauce.\n\"Boli\" or \"bole\" is the term used for roasted plantain in Nigeria. The plantain is usually grilled and served with roasted fish, ground peanuts and a hot palm oil sauce. It is a dish native to the Yoruba people of Western Nigeria. It is popular among the working class as an inexpensive midday meal.\nPlantain is popular in West and Central Africa, especially Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo, B\u00e9nin, Ghana and Nigeria; when ripe plantain is fried, it is generally called \"dodo\" (\"dough-dough\"). The ripe plantain is usually sliced diagonally for a large oval shape, then fried in oil to a golden brown color. The diagonal slice maximizes the surface area, allowing the plantain to cook evenly. Fried plantain can be eaten as such, or served with stew or sauce. In Ikire, a town in Osun State in southwestern Nigeria, there is a special way of preparing fried plantain known as Dodo Ikire. This variation of Dodo (Fried Plantain) is made from overripe plantain, chopped into small pieces, sprinkled with chili pepper and then fried in boiling point palm oil until the pieces turn blackish. The fried plantains are then stuffed carefully into a plastic funnel and then pressed using a wooden pestle to compress and acquire a conical shape when removed.\nIn Ghana, the dish is called kelewele and can be found as a snack sold by street vendors. Though sweeter and spicier variations exist, kelewele is often flavored with nutmeg, chili powder, ginger and salt.\nIn the Western hemisphere, tostones (also known as \"banann peze\" in Haiti, \"tachinos\" or \"chatinos\" in Cuba, and \"patacones\" in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras, Panama, Peru and Venezuela) are twice-fried plantain fritters, often served as a side dish, appetizer or snack. Plantains are sliced in long pieces and fried in oil. The segments are then removed and individually smashed down to about half their original height. Finally, the pieces are fried again and then seasoned, often with salt. In some countries, such as Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, the \"tostones\" are dipped in Creole sauce from chicken, pork, beef, or shrimp before eating. In Haiti, \"bannann peze\" is commonly served with pikliz, a slaw-like condiment made with cabbage, onions, carrots and scotch bonnet peppers. In Nicaragua, tostones are typically served with fried cheese (Tostones con queso) and sometimes with refried beans. While the name \"tostones\" is used to describe this food when prepared at home, in some South American countries the word also describes plantain chips, which are typically purchased from a store.\nIn western Venezuela, much of Colombia and the Peruvian Amazon, \"patacones\" are a frequently seen variation of \"tostones\". Plantains are sliced in long pieces and fried in oil, then used to make sandwiches with pork, beef, chicken, vegetables and ketchup. They can be made with unripe \"patacon verde\" or ripe \"patacon amarillo\" plantains.\n\"Chifles\" is the Spanish term used in Peru and Ecuador for fried green plantains sliced thick; it is also used to describe plantain chips which are sliced thinner. In Nicaragua, they are called \"tajadas\" and are sliced thinly the long way. They are commonly served alongside many dishes, including fritanga, and sold in bags by themselves.\nIn Honduras, Venezuela and Central Colombia, fried ripened plantain slices are known as \"tajadas\". They are customary in most typical meals, such as the Venezuelan \"pabell\u00f3n criollo\". The host or waiter may also offer them as \"barandas\" (guard rails), in common slang, as the long slices are typically placed on the sides of a full dish, and therefore look as such. Some variations include adding honey or sugar and frying the slices in butter, to obtain a golden caramel; the result has a sweeter taste and a characteristic pleasant smell. The same slices are known as \"amarillos\" and \"fritos maduros\" in Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic respectively. In Panama, \"tajadas\" are eaten daily together with steamed rice, meat and beans, thus making up an essential part of the Panamanian diet, as with Honduras. By contrast, in Nicaragua, \"tajadas\" are fried unripened plantain slices, and are traditionally served at a \"fritanga\", with fried pork or carne asada, or on their own on green banana leaves, either with a cabbage salad or fresh or fried cheese. In El Salvador, \"pl\u00e1tanos fritos\" are ripe plantain slices that are pan-fried and generally served as part of a traditional Salvadoran breakfast.\nOn Colombia's Caribbean coast, \"tajadas\" of fried green plantain are consumed along with grilled meats, and are the dietary equivalent of the French-fried potatoes/chips of Europe and North America.\nAfter removing the skin, \"maduro\" can be sliced (between thick) and pan-fried in oil until golden brown or according to preference. In the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Colombia, Honduras (where they are usually eaten with the native sour cream) and Venezuela, they are also eaten baked in the oven (sometimes with cinnamon). In Puerto Rico baked \"pl\u00e1tanos maduros\" are usually eaten for breakfast and served with eggs (mainly an omelet with cheese), chorizo or bacon. Only salt is added to green plantains.\nTacacho is a roasted plantain Amazonian cuisine dish from Peru. It is usually served \"con cecina\", with bits of pork.\nIn Venezuela, a yo-yo is a traditional dish made of two short slices of fried ripened plantain (see Tajada) placed on top of each other, with local soft white cheese in the middle (in a sandwich-like fashion) and held together with toothpicks. The arrangement is dipped in beaten eggs and fried again until the cheese melts and the yo-yo acquires a deep golden hue. They are served as sides or entrees.\nIn Puerto Rico fried plantains are served in a variety of ways as side dishes, fast foods, and main course. An alternative to tostones are ara\u00f1itas (little spiders). The name comes from the grated green and yellow plantain pieces forming little legs that stick out of the fritter itself, which ends up looking like a prickly spider on a plate. Alcapurrias are a traditional snack with masa dough made from grated green banana, yaut\u00eda, seasoned with lard, annatto and stuffed with picadillo. Alcaparrado de pl\u00e1tano have additional grated plantain added to the masa. Mofongo is a beloved dish on the island celebrating a blend of cultures making it one of Puerto Ricos most important dishes. Plantains are fried once and mashed with garlic, fat (butter, lard or olive oil), chicharr\u00f3n or bacon, and broth it is then formed into a ball and eaten with other meats, soup, vegetables or alone. Puerto Rican piononos are sweet and savory treats made with a combination of fried yellow plantains, cheese, picadillo, and beaten eggs. The result is sweet plantain cups stuffed with a cheese, ground beef and fluffy egg filling. Ralleno de pl\u00e1tano are the sweet plantain verson of papa rellena very popular street food and in cuchifritos.\nBoiled.\nEto is a Ghanaian traditional dish made from boiled and mashed yam or plantain and typically savored with boiled eggs, groundnut (peanuts) and sliced avocado. For the plantain option called 'Boodie eto', the plantain can be used unripe, slightly ripe or fully ripe. Culturally, eto was fed to a bride on the day of her marriage, but is now a popular dish enjoyed outside of special occasions as well.\nA traditional mang\u00fa from the Dominican Republic consists of peeled and boiled green plantains, mashed with hot water to reach a consistency slightly stiffer than mashed potatoes. It is traditionally eaten at breakfast, topped with saut\u00e9ed red onions in apple cider vinegar and accompanied by fried eggs, fried cheese or fried bologna sausage, known as Dominican salami.\nPlantain porridge is also a common dish throughout the Caribbean, in which cooking bananas are boiled with milk, cinnamon, and nutmeg to form a thick porridge typically served at breakfast.\nIn Uganda, cooking bananas are referred to as \"matooke\" or \"matoke\", which is also the name of a cooking banana stew that is widely prepared in Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and eastern Congo. The cooking bananas (specifically East African Highland bananas) are peeled, wrapped in the plant's leaves and set in a cooking pot (a \"sufuria\") on the stalks that have been removed from the leaves. The pot is then placed on a charcoal fire and the matoke is steamed for a few hours. While uncooked, the \"matoke\" is white and fairly hard, but cooking turns it soft and yellow. The \"matoke\" is then mashed while still wrapped in the leaves and is served with a sauce made of vegetables, ground peanuts, or some type of meat such as goat or beef.\nCayeye, also called Mote de Guineo, is a traditional Colombian dish from the Caribbean Coast of the country. Cayeye is made by cooking small green bananas or plantains in water, then mashing and mixing them with refrito, made with onions, garlic, red bell pepper, tomato and achiote. Cayeye are usually served for breakfast with fresh grated Colombian cheese (Queso Coste\u00f1o) and fried fish, shrimp, crab, or beef. Most popular is Cayeye with fresh cheese, avocado and fried egg on top.\nFunche criollo, a dish served for breakfast or dinner, varies on ingredients. Breakfast funche is made with coconut milk, butter, milk, sugar, cornmeal, sweet plantains, and topped with cinnamon, honey, nuts and fruit. The dinner version typically includes green or yellow plantains boiled in broth, butter, sofrito and mashed with taro, cornmeal, or yams. This is a typical dish from Puerto Rico and can be traced back to the Tainos and African slave trade.\nAs a dough.\nIn Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, \"mofongo\" is made by mashing fried plantains in a mortar with chicharr\u00f3n or bacon, garlic, olive oil and stock. Any meat, fish, shellfish, vegetables, spices, or herbs can also be added. The resulting mixture is formed into cylinders the size of about two fists and eaten warm, usually with chicken broth. \"Mofongo relleno\" is topped with creole sauce rather than served with chicken broth. Creole sauce may contain stewed beef, chicken or seafood; it is poured into a center crater, formed with the serving spoon, in the \"mofongo\". Grated green bananas and yautias are also used to form masa, a common ingredient for dishes such as alcapurria, which is a type of savory fritter.\n\"Fufu de platano\" is a traditional and very popular lunch dish in Cuba, and essentially akin to the Puerto Rican mofongo. It is a \"fufu\" made by boiling the plantains in water and mashing with a fork. The \"fufu\" is then mixed with chicken stock and \"sofrito\", a sauce made from lard, garlic, onions, pepper, tomato sauce, a touch of vinegar and cumin. The texture of Cuban \"fufu\" is similar to the \"mofongo\" consumed in Puerto Rico, but it is not formed into a ball or fried. \"Fufu\" is also a common centuries-old traditional dish made in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon and other West &amp; Central African countries. It is made in a similar fashion as the Cuban \"fufu\", but is pounded, and has a thick paste, putty-like texture which is then formed into a ball. West African \"fufu\" is sometimes separately made with cassava, yams or made with plantains combined with cassava.\nOther dishes.\nWhile cooking bananas are starchier and often used in savory dishes as a result, many Philippine desserts also use cooking bananas as a primary ingredient, such as:\nIn Ecuador, plantain is boiled, crushed, scrambled, and fried into \"majado\". This dish is typically served with a cup of coffee and bistek, fish, or grated cheese. It is a popular breakfast dish. Majado is also used as a base to prepare \"tigrillo\" and \"bolones\". To prepare tigrillo, majado is scrambled with pork rind, egg, cheese, green onions, parsley, and cilantro. To prepare bolones, majado is scrambled with cheese, pork rind, or a mixture of both. The resulting mixture is then shaped into a sphere which is later deep-fried. Both tigrillo and bolones are typically served with a cup of coffee.\nOther preparations.\nChips.\nAfter removing the skin, the unripe fruit can be sliced thin and deep fried in hot oil to produce chips. This thin preparation of plantain is known as \"tostones\", \"patacones\" or \"plataninas\" in some of Central American and South American countries, \"platanutres\" in Puerto Rico, \"mariquitas\" or \"chicharritas\" in Cuba and \"chifles\" in Ecuador and Peru. In Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Puerto Rico and Venezuela, \"tostones\" instead refers to thicker twice-fried patties (see below). In Cuba, plantain chips are called \"mariquitas\". They are sliced thinly, and fried in oil until golden colored. They are popular appetizers served with a main dish. In Colombia they are known as \"platanitos\" and are eaten with suero atollabuey as a snack. \"Tostada\" refers to a green, unripe plantain which has been cut into sections, fried, flattened, fried again, and salted. These tostadas are often served as a side dish or a snack. They are also known as \"tostones\" or \"patacones\" in many Latin American countries. In Honduras, banana chips are called \"tajadas\", which may be sliced vertically to create a variation known as plantain strips.\nChips fried in coconut oil and sprinkled with salt, called \"upperi\" or \"kaya varuthathu\", are a snack in South India in Kerala. They are an important item in sadya, a vegetarian feast prepared during festive occasions in Kerala. The chips are typically labeled \"plantain chips\" when they are made of green plantains that taste starchy, like potato chips. In Tamil Nadu, a thin variety made from green plantains is used to make chips seasoned with salt, chili powder and asafoetida. In the western/central Indian language Marathi, the plantain is called \"rajeli kela\" (figuratively meaning \"king-sized\" banana), and is often used to make fried chips.\nDried flour.\nIn South-west, Nigeria, unripe plantains are also dried and ground into flour which is referred to as Elubo Ogede. it is considered as a healthy and nutritious food among the Yoruba.\nIn southern India, dried plantain powder is mixed with a little bit of fennel seed powder and boiled in milk or water to make baby food to feed babies until they are one year old.\nDrink.\nIn Peru, plantains are boiled and blended with water, spices, and sugar to make chapo. In Kerala, ripe plantains are boiled with sago, coconut milk, sugar and spices to make a pudding.\nKetchup.\nThe Philippines uniquely processes saba bananas into banana ketchup. It was originally invented in World War II as a substitute for tomato ketchup.\nNutrition.\nPlantain is 32% carbohydrates with 2% dietary fiber and 15% sugars, 1% protein, 0.4% fat, and 65% water, and supplying of food energy in a reference serving (table). Raw plantain is an excellent source (20% or higher of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin B6 (23% DV) and vitamin C (22% DV), and a good source (10\u201319% DV) of magnesium and potassium (table).\nContaining little beta-carotene (457 micrograms per 100 grams), plantain is not a good source of vitamin A (table).\nComparison to other staple foods.\nThe following table shows the nutrient content of raw plantain and other major staple foods in a raw form on a dry weight basis to account for their different water contents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;A raw yellow dent corn\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;B raw unenriched long-grain white rice\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;C raw hard red winter wheat\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;D raw potato with flesh and skin\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;E raw cassava\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;F raw green soybeans\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;G raw sweet potato\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;H raw sorghum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;Y raw yam\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;Z raw plantains\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;/* unofficial\nAllergies.\nPlantain and banana allergies occur with typical characteristics of food allergy or latex fruit syndrome, including itching and mild swelling of the lips, tongue, palate or throat, skin rash, stomach complaints or anaphylactic shock. Among more than 1000 proteins identified in \"Musa\" species were numerous previously described protein allergens.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38946", "revid": "15941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38946", "title": "Banana, Congo", "text": ""}
{"id": "38948", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38948", "title": "Goldie", "text": "British DJ and producer (born 1965)\nClifford Joseph Price MBE (born 19 September 1965), better known as Goldie, is an English music producer, DJ, graffiti artist and actor.\nInitially gaining exposure for his work as a graffiti artist, Goldie became well known for his pioneering role as a musician in the 1990s UK jungle, drum and bass and breakbeat hardcore scenes. He released a variety of singles under the pseudonym Rufige Kru and co-founded the label Metalheadz. He later released several albums under his own name, including the 1995 album \"Timeless\", which entered the UK charts at number 7.\nGoldie's acting credits include the 1999 James Bond film \"The World Is Not Enough\", Guy Ritchie's \"Snatch\" (2000) and the BBC soap opera \"EastEnders\" (2001\u20132002). He has also appeared in a number of celebrity reality television shows, including \"Celebrity Big Brother 2\" (UK), \"Strictly Come Dancing\", \"Come Dine with Me\" and \"Maestro\".\nEarly life.\nBorn in Walsall, England, but raised in Wolverhampton, Price is of Jamaican and Scottish heritage. He was put up for adoption at the age of three, and raised in childcare homes and by several foster parents. According to his 2002 autobiography, he was physically and sexually abused during this time. Price was a member of the breakdance crew Westside, based in the Whitmore Reans and Heath Town areas of Wolverhampton, in the 1980s. He later joined a breakdance crew called the Birmingham Bboys, and made his name as a graffiti artist in the West Midlands.\nHis artwork around Birmingham and Wolverhampton was featured heavily in Dick Fontaine's documentary \"Bombin'\". He is mentioned for his graffiti in the book \"Spraycan Art\" by Henry Chalfant and James Prigoff, which contains several examples of his art.\nHe moved to the United States owing to graffiti projects, and also started selling grills (gold teeth jewellery) in New York and Miami; he continued this business after his return to the UK in 1988. His nickname stems from \"Goldielocks\", an earlier nickname given to him during his Bboys days and subsequently shortened when he no longer wore dreadlocks.\nCareer.\nMusic.\nBy 1991, Price had become fascinated by the British breakbeat music scene when his girlfriend, DJ Kemistry, introduced him to the pioneering jungle and drum and bass producers Dennis \"Dego\" McFarlane and Mark \"Marc Mac\" Clair, known as 4hero. He went on to execute some design and A&amp;R work for 4hero's Reinforced Records label.\nIn 1992, Price made his first record appearance by contributing to an EP by Icelandic group Ajax Project that included the track \"Ruffige\".\nHis releases \"Killa Muffin\" b/w \"Krisp Biscuit\" and the \"Dark Rider\" EP were released under the alias \"Rufige Kru\" His track \"Terminator\", released under the name \"Metal Heads\" in 1992, was a hit in the jungle scene and is noted for its use of pitch shifting. In 1993, he released \"Angel\", another 12\" on the Synthetic Hardcore Phonography label. 1994 saw him setting up his own record label, Metalheadz.\nHis first studio album, \"Timeless\", followed in 1995. \"Timeless\" entered the UK Albums Chart at number seven. The album fused the breakbeats and basslines common in jungle with orchestral textures and soul vocals by Diane Charlemagne. The album's title track was a 21-minute symphonic piece. \"Inner City Life\", a track from the album, reached number 39 in the UK Singles Chart. \"Timeless\" helped to popularise drum and bass as a form of musical expression. The music critic Simon Reynolds noted that Price's credentials as a musical innovator\u2014and particularly as one of the key driving forces of innovation in the jungle/breakbeat scene\u2014were exceptional. \"Goldie revolutionised jungle not once but thrice\", he noted in \"The Wire\" magazine, continuing, \"First there was 'Terminator' (pioneering the use of time stretching), then 'Angel' (fusing Diane Charlemagne's live vocal with David Byrne/Brian Eno samples to prove that hardcore could be more 'conventionally' musical), now there's 'Timeless', a 22-minute hardcore symphony.\"\nIn 1996, he released the \"Toasted Both Sides Please\" remix of the Bush song \"Swallowed\", which topped charts in the US and Canada.\nPrice released his second album, \"Saturnz Return\", in 1998. The album's opening track, \"Mother\", is an hour-long orchestral drum and bass piece. The album featured appearances by David Bowie, Noel Gallagher and KRS-One. The album met with mixed reviews. David Brown of \"Entertainment Weekly\" called the album \"ambitious but monotonous and overlong\u2014Pink Floyd with a gold tooth\".\nIn 2002, Price said that he had been working for three years on a film called \"Sine Tempus\", described as a coming-of-age story of a young paintbrush artist. In 2006, he announced the soundtrack as his new album. The album was released via the Metalheadz website in 2008, but the film has not been released.\nPrice is known for his work as the leader of Rufige Kru. The group has no fixed members and has included drum and bass producers such as Technical Itch, Heist, Cujo, Agzilla Da Ice, Danny J, Doc Scott and Rob Playford.\nMarch 2013 saw the release of \"The Alchemist: The Best of Goldie 1992\u20132012\", featuring prominent tracks from throughout Price's musical career. A subsequent compilation, the three-CD Masterpiece set released by Ministry of Sound in 2014, brought together tracks that influenced him (Soul II Soul's \"Back To Life\", Roy Ayers' \"Everybody Loves The Sunshine\") with cuts that soundtracked his entry into the rave scene and key moments from the drum'n'bass scene.\nIn 2017, the Goldie album \"The Journey Man\" was released, which Price described as his \"magnum opus\" and \"the most important thing that I've ever made.\"\nIn 2020, Goldie launched his new record label, Fallen Tree 1Hundred.\nA 25th anniversary edition of Timeless was released by London Records the following year. The new release included a triple gold vinyl version and a compact disc version. The release brought the number of versions of the iconic drum'n'bass album (including reissues and global pressings) to 44.\nActing.\nPrice has appeared in Guy Ritchie's \"Snatch\" and several other films, most notably the James Bond film, \"The World Is Not Enough\". He also played gangster Angel Hudson in the British soap opera \"EastEnders\" (2001\u20132002). Price starred in \"Everybody Loves Sunshine\" (1999) (aka \"B.U.S.T.E.D.\" \u2013 United States title) with David Bowie.\nTelevision appearances.\nPrice appeared on BBC1's \"Daytime Live\" in October 1987 to discuss the rise of urban art across the United Kingdom. Price also appeared on \"Central Weekend\", a Friday evening topical debate show on Central TV, promoting graffiti as an art form. He had a small documentary made about his own art on Central TV's \"Here and Now\" programme featuring Pogus Caesar's photographs of New York. He has appeared on various young people's TV shows as part of a breakdance crew, the Bboys from Wolverhampton. In 1995, he appeared on \"Passengers\", and in a Channel 4 documentary about himself in 1998.\nHis next TV appearance was hosting \"Crime Business\" on the digital TV channels Bravo and Ftn. He presented the documentary series \"The World's Deadliest Gangs\" on Bravo in 2002.\nPrice appeared on the second series of \"Celebrity Big Brother\" in 2002. He was the first celebrity to be \"evicted\". In 2006, he was scheduled to appear in \"The Games\", a UK reality TV show on Channel 4, but during training for the water-ski jump event he fractured his femur and was unable to take part in the show. He was replaced by Adam Rickitt. In 2009, he was reported to be suing the producers of the show for damages as a result of the injury.\nIn June 2008, Price participated in the German/French TV channel ARTEs format 'Into the Night with ...' episode 052, where he met artist Skream. The episode not only shows an adventurous encounter between two hard-drinking stars of the club scene, but also a close-up look at the operation of one of Europe's most important electro festivals, the Melt Festival.\nDuring August and September 2008, the BBC broadcast \"Maestro\", a reality television show in which eight celebrities, including Price, learned to conduct a concert orchestra. Price was placed second, behind Sue Perkins.\nOn 31 July 2009, the first of a two-part television programme \"Classic Goldie\" was broadcast, showing how in the wake of his success in the \"Maestro\" programme he learns to write a score for a large orchestra and choir. The resulting composition, commissioned by the BBC and entitled \"Sine Tempore\" (\"Timeless\"), was performed at two children's Promenade concerts in the Royal Albert Hall on 1 and 2 August 2009, which featured music connected with Charles Darwin and the creation and evolution of the world.\nHe appeared on \"Celebrity Mastermind\" on 27 December 2009 and came fourth behind Paul O'Grady, Gail Emms and Loyd Grossman. On 11 September 2010, he was announced as part of the line-up in \"Strictly Come Dancing\", staying in the competition for two weeks.\nOn 22 December 2010, he appeared in a \"Celebrity Come Dine with Me\" Christmas special.\nOn 26 March 2011, he appeared in a three-part reality television series, \"\" in which he led a group of music experts as they conducted a nationwide search for young talented musicians and then selected and coached 12 of them, who collaborated to create some musical pieces for a performance at Buckingham Palace.\nIn 2014, he appeared on the telethon \"BBC Children in Need\".\nArt.\nIn 2007, Price returned to the art world with an art exhibition, \"Love Over Gold\", which was held at the Leonard Street Gallery, London. In 2008, he teamed up with Pete Tong to provide much of the artwork for Tong's new Wonderland club night at Eden nightclub in San Antonio, Ibiza.\nThere was an exhibition of Price's art in Berlin from 13 to 26 June 2008. In April 2009, a retrospective exhibition titled \"Kids Are All Riot\" took place in Shoreditch, London, coinciding with the release of his screenprint \"Apocalypse Angel\".\nAround 2008, Price's art work was displayed on the London Underground by the arts company Art Below.\nIn 2021, he modeled for Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring / Summer collection and contributed a song.\nBooks.\nThe innovative nature of Goldie's art (both sonic and visual) was a consistent theme in Kodwo Eshun's acclaimed book 'More Brilliant Than The Sun' (published in 1998) which has long been seen as a landmark text on Afro-futurism. Among the works that Eshun referenced were Goldie's 1986 graffiti piece Future World Machine and his 1992 single 'Terminator'. Noting the links between the multi-dimensionality in both painting and sound, Eshun noted: \"There's a big interface between graffiti and the break.\"\nIn 2002, Goldie's autobiography 'Nine Lives' was published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton. Written with London-based writer Paul Gorman, the book traced his life story from childhood in care and foster homes through to the first flush of his success as a groundbreaking musical artist.\nA second autobiography 'All Things Remembered' was published in November 2017 by Faber &amp; Faber. Written when Goldie was 52, it covers a more comprehensive span than the earlier book but is more philosophic in tone. While incidents from his extraordinary childhood are recounted, it also includes his ruminations on musical heroes such as Pat Metheny and a conversation with \"my left-hand man\" Doc Scott as well as memories of his work in TV and film. The book includes pictures of Goldie on set with David Bowie. Co-written with Ben Thompson, 'All Things Remembered' was chosen by Nicola Barker as one of The Guardian's Books Of The Year. She described it as \"a fabulous, whirling kaleidoscope of music, memory and trauma . . . magical and cautionary.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn the early 1990s, Price had a relationship with drum and bass artist Kemistry, who died in a car accident in 1999. \nHe was romantically involved with Icelandic singer Bj\u00f6rk in 1996. Bj\u00f6rk's brief relationships with Goldie and musician Tricky, both Black men, upset deranged fan Ricardo Lopez who mailed an explosive device to Bj\u00f6rk before killing himself in his Florida home. The acid bomb failed to reach Bj\u00f6rk because Lopez's body, and his plans, were discovered before the package was delivered. The device was defused by Scotland Yard.\nIn 1998, Price bought a country house in Bovingdon, Hertfordshire.\nPrice married model Sonjia Ashby in 2002. They divorced in 2005. As of 2003, he had five children, including social content creator Danny Price, who has appeared on Channel 4 reality show \"Make Me Prime Minister\".\nIn 2007, Goldie began a relationship with Mika Wassenaar, a Canadian. The couple appeared in the 20 June 2009 episode of ITV's \"All Star Mr &amp; Mrs\" with Phillip Schofield and Fern Britton. Mika and Price married in 2010.\nOn 29 April 2010, Price opened the William Tyndale Primary School Sports Pitch in Islington, London.\nIn July 2010, Price received an honorary doctorate in Social Sciences from Brunel University, Uxbridge. On 3 September 2010, he received an honorary degree of Doctor of Design from the University of Wolverhampton.\nOn 7 September 2010, Price's 23-year-old son Jamie Price was sentenced to life imprisonment, with a minimum sentence of 21 years, for murder. He was convicted of stabbing a rival gang member to death in Wolverhampton town centre on 24 August 2008.\nAs of 2017, Price and his wife were living in Thailand, having moved there in 2015.\nPrice was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2016 New Year Honours awards, for services to music and young people.\nPrice was accused of assaulting a security guard at the 2017 Glastonbury festival after the guard had refused to let Price's daughter, Chance, backstage; Price later emailed a response which read, \"Yep, guilty as charged\", but in March 2018, district judge Lynn Matthews at Bristol Magistrates' Court rejected Price's emailed response and in a video call Price later admitted to assault by beating. On 30 May Bristol Magistrates' Court ordered Goldie to pay almost \u00a32,500 as a fine.\nIn 2017, Price appeared to reveal the first name of pseudonymous graffiti artist Banksy as \"Rob\" on Scroobius Pip's weekly \"Distraction Pieces Podcast\" (Episode No. 156). When discussing the rise of commercialism in street art, Price said, \"Give me a bubble letter and put it on a T-shirt and write Banksy on it and we're sorted. We can sell it now... No disrespect to Rob, I think he is a brilliant artist. I think he has flipped the world of art over.\"\nDiscography.\nAlbums.\nStudio albums\nas Rufige Kru\nSoundtrack albums\nCollaboration albums\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38950", "revid": "50524575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38950", "title": "Winter sports", "text": "Sports or recreational activities which are played on snow or ice\nWinter sports or winter activities are competitive sports or non-competitive recreational activities which are played on snow or ice. Most are variations of skiing, ice skating and sledding. Traditionally, such games were only played in cold areas during winter, but artificial snow and artificial ice allow more flexibility. Playing areas and fields consist of either snow or ice.\nArtificial ice can be used to provide ice rinks for ice skating, ice hockey, para ice hockey, ringette, broomball, bandy, rink bandy, rinkball, and spongee in a milder climate. The sport of speed skating uses a frozen circular track of ice, but in some facilities the track is combined in an enclosed area used for sports requiring an ice rink or the rink itself is used. Alternatively, ice cross downhill uses a track with various levels of elevation and a combination of bends. Long distance skating ( \"marathon skating\") such as tour skating is only performed outdoors and uses the available natural ice from frozen lakes, ponds, and marshes. Tour skating at times includes speed skaters, though tour skates are more common.\nCommon individual sports include: cross-country skiing, alpine skiing, snowboarding, ski jumping, speed skating, figure skating, luge, skeleton, bobsleigh, ski orienteering and snowmobiling.\nCommon team sports include ice hockey, ringette, broomball (on either an indoor ice rink, or an outdoor ice rink or field of snow), curling, rinkball, and bandy. Based on the number of participants, ice hockey is the world's most popular winter team sport, followed by bandy.\nWinter sports at times have their own multi-sport events, such as the Winter Olympic Games and the Winter Universiade.\nHistory.\nSnow and ice during the winter time has enabled sliding as a means of transportation, using sledges, skis and skates. This also led to different pastimes and sports being developed in the winter season as compared to other times of the year. Naturally, winter sports are more popular in countries with longer winter seasons.\nIn the European Alps, St. Moritz became a popular winter resort in 1864.\nIn the early days of the Olympics there was not much differentiation between the summer and winter games. These confusions would span from around the late 1890s until the early to mid 1900s. During this time, some sports considered to be winter sports and played or performed during the Olympic Winter Games today, would be held during the Olympic Summer Games. It was originally wanted to keep all of the Olympic sports together under one event and program, but due to environmental demands of some sports, it had to be separated.\nWhile most winter sports are played outside, ice hockey, speed skating and to some extent bandy have moved indoors starting in the mid-20th century. Indoor ice rinks with artificial ice allow ice skating and hockey to be played in hot climates.\nOutdoor winter sports will likely be severely impacted because of climate change in the next century.\nList of winter sports.\nNote: the Olympic rings next to a sport indicates that this particular sport is included in the Winter Olympic Games, as of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi. The Paralympic logo indicates the same for a sport not in the Olympics but in the Winter Paralympic Games.\nSledding.\nSports that use sleds going down ice tracks or pulled by something:\nRecreational sports.\nSome sports are competed in (or simply enjoyed) on a more casual basis, often by children:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38951", "revid": "378390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38951", "title": "Winter sport", "text": ""}
{"id": "38953", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38953", "title": "Roberto Rossellini", "text": "Italian film director (1906\u20131977)\nRoberto Gastone Zeffiro Rossellini (8 May 1906 \u2013 3 June 1977) was an Italian film director, screenwriter and producer. He was one of the most prominent directors of the Italian neorealist cinema, contributing to the movement with films such as \"Rome, Open City\" (1945), \"Paisan\" (1946), and \"Germany, Year Zero\" (1948). He is also known for his films starring his then wife Ingrid Bergman, \"Stromboli\" (1950), \"Europe '51\" (1952), \"Journey to Italy\" (1954), \"Fear\" (1954) and \"Joan of Arc at the Stake\" (1954).\nEarly life.\nRossellini was born in Rome. His mother, Elettra (n\u00e9e Bellan), was a housewife born in Rovigo, Veneto, and his father, Angiolo Giuseppe \"Peppino\" Rossellini, who owned a construction firm, was born in Rome from a family originally from Pisa, Tuscany. He lived on the Via Ludovisi, where Benito Mussolini had his first Roman hotel in 1922 when Fascism obtained power in Italy.\nRossellini's father built the first cinema in Rome, the \"Barberini\", a theatre where movies could be projected, granting his son an unlimited free pass; the young Rossellini started frequenting the cinema at an early age. When his father died, he worked in film sound-making and for a certain time, he experienced all the ancillary jobs related to the creation of a film, gaining competence in each field. Rossellini had a younger brother, Renzo, who later scored many of his films.\nAlthough he was not personally religious, he had a strong interest in Christian values in the contemporary world; he appreciated Catholic ethics and religious sentiment\u2014things which he saw as being neglected in the materialist world.\nCareer.\nIn 1937, Rossellini shot his first film, \"Pr\u00e9lude \u00e0 l'apr\u00e8s-midi d'un faune\", which was possibly unreleased and later lost. After this film, he was called to work as assistant director on Goffredo Alessandrini's in making \"Luciano Serra pilota\", one of the most successful Italian films of the first half of the 20th century, and later worked on Francesco De Robertis's 1940 film \"Uomini sul Fondo\". His close friendship with Vittorio Mussolini, son of Benito Mussolini, has been interpreted as a possible reason for having been preferred to other apprentices.\nSome writers have described the first part of his career as a sequence of trilogies. His first feature film, \"The White Ship\" (1941) was sponsored by the audiovisual propaganda centre of Navy Department and is the first work in Rossellini's \"Fascist Trilogy\", together with \"A Pilot Returns\" (1942) and \"The Man with a Cross\" (1943). During this period he developed relationships with Federico Fellini and Aldo Fabrizi. The Fascist regime collapsed in 1943, and two months after the liberation of Rome (4 June 1944), Rossellini began preparing the anti-fascist \"Roma citt\u00e0 aperta\" (\"Rome, Open City\", 1945), with Fellini assisting on the script. Fabrizi played the role of the priest, while Rossellini self-produced, filming commencing in January 1945. Most of the money came from credits and loans, and film had to be found on the black market. This dramatic film was an immediate success. It has been called the first film of the \"Neorealist Trilogy\", the second title of which was \"Pais\u00e0\" (1946), produced with non-professional actors, and the third, \"Germany, Year Zero\" (1948), was sponsored by a French producer and filmed in Berlin's French sector. In Berlin also, Rossellini preferred non-actors, but he was unable to find a face he found \"interesting\"; he placed his camera in the centre of a town square, as he did for \"Pais\u00e0\", but was surprised when nobody came to watch.\nAs he declared in an interview \"in order to really create the character that one has in mind, it is necessary for the director to engage in a battle with his actor which usually ends with submitting to the actor's wish. Since I do not have the desire to waste my energy in a battle like this, I only use professional actors occasionally\". One of the reasons for success is supposed to be Rossellini's rewriting of the scripts according to the non-professional actors' feelings and histories. Regional accent, dialect and costumes were shown in the film as they were in real life.\nAfter his Neorealist Trilogy, Rossellini produced two films now classified as the 'Transitional films': \"L'Amore\" (1948) (with Anna Magnani) and \"La macchina ammazzacattivi\" (1952), on the capability of cinema to portray reality and truth (with recalls of commedia dell'arte). In 1948, Rossellini received a letter from a famous foreign actress proposing a collaboration:\nDear Mr. Rossellini,\nI saw your films \"Open City\" and \"Paisan\", and enjoyed them very much. If you need a Swedish actress who speaks English very well, who has not forgotten her German, who is not very understandable in French, and who in Italian knows only \"ti amo,\" I am ready to come and make a film with you.\nIngrid Bergman\nWith this letter began one of the best-known love stories in film history, with Bergman and Rossellini both at the peak of their careers. Their first collaboration was \"Stromboli terra di Dio\" (1950) (in the island of Stromboli, and its volcano quite conveniently erupted during filming). This affair caused a great scandal in some countries (Bergman and Rossellini were married to other people); the scandal intensified when Bergman became pregnant with Renato Roberto Ranaldo Giusto Giuseppe (\"Robin\") Rossellini. Rossellini and Bergman had two more children, Isabella Rossellini (actress &amp; model) and her twin, Ingrid Isotta. \"Europa '51\" (1952), \"Siamo Donne\" (1953), \"Journey to Italy\" (1954), \"La paura\" (1954) and \"Giovanna d'Arco al rogo\" (1954) were the other films on which they worked together.\nIn 1957, Jawaharlal Nehru, the prime minister of India at the time, invited him to India to make the documentary \"India\" and put some life into the floundering Indian Films Division. Though married to Bergman, he had an affair with Sonali Senroy Dasgupta, a screenwriter, herself married to local filmmaker Harisadhan Dasgupta, who was helping develop vignettes for the film. Given the climate of the 1950s, this led to a huge scandal in India as well as in Hollywood. Nehru had to ask Rossellini to leave. Soon after, Bergman and Rossellini separated.\nIn 1971, Rice University in Houston, Texas, invited Rossellini to help establish a Media Center, where in 1970 he had begun planning a film on science with Rice professor Donald D. Clayton. They worked daily for two weeks in Rome in summer 1970, but financing was insufficient for filming to begin. In 1973, he was invited to teach at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, where he taught a one-semester course titled \"The Essential Image.\"\nRossellini's final project was the documentary \"Beaubourg\", filmed in 1977 and first premiered in 1983.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1934, Rossellini married Assia Noris, a Russian actress who worked in Italian films; the marriage was annulled in 1936. On 26 September 1936, he married Marcella De Marchis (17 January 1916, Rome \u2013 25 February 2009, Sarteano), a costume designer with whom he collaborated even after their marriage was over. De Marchis and Rossellini had two sons: Marco Romano (born 3 July 1937 and died of appendicitis in 1946), and Renzo (born 24 August 1941). Rossellini and De Marchis divorced in 1950.\nWhile filming \"Stromboli\", Rossellini had an affair with Ingrid Bergman (who was at the time married to Petter Lindstr\u00f6m) in 1949. In the same month the film was released, Bergman gave birth to a boy, Renato Roberto Ranaldo Giusto Giuseppe (\"Robin\") Rossellini (born 2 February 1950). A week after their son was born, Bergman divorced Lindstr\u00f6m and married Rossellini in Mexico. On 18 June 1952, she gave birth to their twin daughters Isotta Ingrid Rossellini and Isabella Rossellini.\nIn 1957, Rossellini had an affair with Bengali screenwriter Sonali Dasgupta (n\u00e9e Senroy), and soon after, Bergman and Rossellini separated. Rossellini eloped with Dasgupta in 1957 when she was 27 years old. He adopted her young son Arjun, renamed Gil Rossellini (23 October 1956 \u2013 3 October 2010), who became a New York-based film producer. Rossellini and Dasgupta had a daughter together, Raffaella Rossellini (born 1958), who is an actress and model.\nIn 1973, Rossellini left Dasgupta for producer Silvia D'Amico Bendic\u00f2, but he remained married to Dasgupta until his death of a heart attack at age 71 in 1977.\nAlong with Albert Einstein, Rossellini was one of the sponsors of the Peoples' World Convention (PWC), also known as Peoples' World Constituent Assembly (PWCA), which took place in 1950\u201351 at Palais Electoral, Geneva, Switzerland.\nLegacy.\nRossellini's films after his early Neo-Realist films\u2014particularly his films with Ingrid Bergman\u2014were commercially unsuccessful, though \"Journey to Italy\" is well regarded in some quarters. He was an acknowledged master for the critics of \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" in general and Andr\u00e9 Bazin, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, and Jean-Luc Godard in particular. Truffaut noted in his 1963 essay, \"Roberto Rossellini Prefers Real Life\" (available in \"The Films in My Life\") that Rossellini's influence among the directors who became part of the nouvelle vague was so great that he was in every sense \"the father of the French New Wave\".\nHis posthumous ex-son-in-law Martin Scorsese has acknowledged Rossellini's seminal influence in his documentary \"My Voyage to Italy\" (the title itself a take on Rossellini's \"Voyage to Italy\"). Among works from Italian directors Fellini, Visconti, De Sica and Antonioni, Rossellini's films form at least half of the films Scorsese discusses, highlighting Rossellini's monumental role in Italian and world cinema. The films covered include his Neo-Realist films and films with Ingrid Bergman, as well as \"The Flowers of St. Francis\", about St. Francis of Assisi. Scorsese notes that in contrast to directors who often become stylistically restrained and conservative as their careers advanced, Rossellini became more unconventional as his career advanced, and was constantly experimenting with new styles and technical challenges. Scorsese particularly highlights the series of biographies Rossellini made in the 60s of historical figures and singles out \"La Prise de pouvoir par Louis XIV\" for praise. \nCertain of Rossellini's film-related material and personal papers are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives to which scholars and media experts from around the world may have full access. Rossellini's son Renzo is producing the \"Audiovisual Encyclopedia of History by Roberto Rossellini\", a multi-media collection containing all of Rossellini's works, interviews, and other material from the Rossellini archive. The \"Encyclopedia\" existed in prototype form in 2011.\nTelevision.\nFollowing the critical failure of \"Anima nera\" and his participation in the various artists film \"Ro.Go.Pa.G.\", Rossellini began directing films for TV in 1966 with \"La Prise de pouvoir par Louis XIV\", and continued predominately in the medium until the end of his career in 1977.\nTV series.\nSome sources associate Rossellini with the 1961 \"Torino nei cent'anni\", but the status and completion of the project is unconfirmed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38954", "revid": "1310122920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38954", "title": "Inclined plane", "text": "Tilted flat supporting surface\nAn inclined plane, also known as a ramp, is a flat supporting surface tilted at an angle from the vertical direction, with one end higher than the other, used as an aid for raising or lowering a load. The inclined plane is one of the six classical simple machines defined by Renaissance scientists. Inclined planes are used to move heavy loads over vertical obstacles. Examples vary from a ramp used to load goods into a truck, to a person walking up a pedestrian ramp, to an automobile or railroad train climbing a grade.\nMoving an object up an inclined plane requires less force than lifting it straight up, at a cost of an increase in the distance moved. The mechanical advantage of an inclined plane, the factor by which the force is reduced, is equal to the ratio of the length of the sloped surface to the height it spans. Owing to conservation of energy, the same amount of mechanical energy (work) is required to lift a given object by a given vertical distance, disregarding losses from friction, but the inclined plane allows the same work to be done with a smaller force exerted over a greater distance.\nThe angle of friction, also sometimes called the angle of repose, is the maximum angle at which a load can rest motionless on an inclined plane due to friction without sliding down. This angle is equal to the arctangent of the coefficient of static friction \"\u03bcs\" between the surfaces.\nTwo other simple machines are often considered to be derived from the inclined plane. The wedge can be considered a moving inclined plane or two inclined planes connected at the base. The screw consists of a narrow inclined plane wrapped around a cylinder.\nThe term may also refer to a specific implementation; a straight ramp cut into a steep hillside for transporting goods up and down the hill. This may include cars on rails or pulled up by a cable system; a funicular or cable railway, such as the Johnstown Inclined Plane.\nUses.\nInclined planes are widely used in the form of \"loading ramps\" to load and unload goods on trucks, ships and planes. Wheelchair ramps are used to allow people in wheelchairs to get over vertical obstacles without exceeding their strength. Escalators and slanted conveyor belts are also forms of an inclined plane.In a funicular or cable railway a railroad car is pulled up a steep inclined plane using cables. Inclined planes also allow heavy fragile objects, including humans, to be safely lowered down a vertical distance by using the normal force of the plane to reduce the gravitational force. Aircraft evacuation slides allow people to rapidly and safely reach the ground from the height of a passenger airliner.\nOther inclined planes are built into permanent structures. Roads for vehicles and railroads have inclined planes in the form of gradual slopes, ramps, and causeways to allow vehicles to surmount vertical obstacles such as hills without losing traction on the road surface. Similarly, pedestrian paths and sidewalks have gentle ramps to limit their slope, to ensure that pedestrians can keep traction. Inclined planes are also used as entertainment for people to slide down in a controlled way, in playground slides, water slides, ski slopes and skateboard parks.\nHistory.\nInclined planes have been used by people since prehistoric times to move heavy objects. The sloping roads and causeways built by ancient civilizations such as the Romans are examples of early inclined planes that have survived, and show that they understood the value of this device for moving things uphill. The heavy stones used in ancient stone structures such as Stonehenge are believed to have been moved and set in place using inclined planes made of earth, although it is hard to find evidence of such temporary building ramps. The Egyptian pyramids were constructed using inclined planes, Siege ramps enabled ancient armies to surmount fortress walls. The ancient Greeks constructed a paved ramp 6\u00a0km (3.7 miles) long, the Diolkos, to drag ships overland across the Isthmus of Corinth.\nHowever the inclined plane was the last of the six classic simple machines to be recognised as a machine. This is probably because it is a passive and motionless device (the load is the moving part), and also because it is found in nature in the form of slopes and hills. Although they understood its use in lifting heavy objects, the ancient Greek philosophers who defined the other five simple machines did not include the inclined plane as a machine. This view persisted among a few later scientists; as late as 1826 Karl von Langsdorf wrote that an inclined plane \"...is no more a machine than is the slope of a mountain\". The problem of calculating the force required to push a weight up an inclined plane (its mechanical advantage) was attempted by Greek philosophers Heron of Alexandria (c. 10 - 60 CE) and Pappus of Alexandria (c. 290 - 350 CE), but their solutions were incorrect.\nIt was not until the Renaissance that the inclined plane was solved mathematically and classed with the other simple machines. The first correct analysis of the inclined plane appeared in the work of 13th century author Jordanus de Nemore, however his solution was apparently not communicated to other philosophers of the time. Girolamo Cardano (1570) proposed the incorrect solution that the input force is proportional to the angle of the plane. Then at the end of the 16th century, three correct solutions were published within ten years, by Michael Varro (1584), Simon Stevin (1586), and Galileo Galilei (1592). Although it was not the first, the derivation of Flemish engineer Simon Stevin is the most well-known, because of its originality and use of a string of beads (see box). In 1600, Italian scientist Galileo Galilei included the inclined plane in his analysis of simple machines in \"Le Meccaniche\" (\"On Mechanics\"), showing its underlying similarity to the other machines as a force amplifier.\nThe first elementary rules of sliding friction on an inclined plane were discovered by Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), but remained unpublished in his notebooks. They were rediscovered by Guillaume Amontons (1699) and were further developed by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1785). Leonhard Euler (1750) showed that the tangent of the angle of repose on an inclined plane is equal to the coefficient of friction.\nTerminology.\nSlope.\nThe mechanical advantage of an inclined plane depends on its \"slope\", meaning its gradient or steepness. The smaller the slope, the larger the mechanical advantage, and the smaller the force needed to raise a given weight. A plane's slope \"s\" is equal to the difference in height between its two ends, or \"\"rise\", divided by its horizontal length, or \"run\"\". It can also be expressed by the angle the plane makes with the horizontal, formula_1.\n \nformula_2\nMechanical advantage.\nThe mechanical advantage formula_3 of a simple machine as defined as the ratio of the output force exerted on the load to the input force applied. The inclined plane the output load force is just the gravitational force of the load object on the plane, its weight formula_4. The input force is the force formula_5 exerted on the object, parallel to the plane, to move it up the plane. The mechanical advantage is\nformula_6\nThe formula_3 of an ideal inclined plane without friction is sometimes called \"ideal mechanical advantage\" formula_8 while the MA when friction is included is called the \"actual mechanical advantage\" formula_9.\nFrictionless inclined plane.\nIf there is no friction between the object being moved and the plane, the device is called an \"ideal inclined plane\". This condition might be approached if the object is rolling like a barrel, or supported on wheels or casters. Due to conservation of energy, for a frictionless inclined plane the work done on the load lifting it, formula_10, is equal to the work done by the input force, formula_11\nformula_12\nWork is defined as the force multiplied by the displacement an object moves. The work done on the load is equal to its weight multiplied by the vertical displacement it rises, which is the \"rise\" of the inclined plane\nformula_13\nThe input work is equal to the force formula_5 on the object times the diagonal length of the inclined plane. \nformula_15\nSubstituting these values into the conservation of energy equation above and rearranging\nformula_16\nTo express the mechanical advantage by the angle formula_1 of the plane, it can be seen from the diagram \"(above)\" that\nformula_18\nSo\n\u00a0\u00a0formula_19\u00a0\u00a0\nSo the mechanical advantage of a frictionless inclined plane is equal to the reciprocal of the sine of the slope angle. The input force formula_20 from this equation is the force needed to hold the load motionless on the inclined plane, or push it up at a constant velocity. If the input force is greater than this, the load will accelerate up the plane. If the force is less, it will accelerate down the plane.\nInclined plane with friction.\nWhere there is friction between the plane and the load, as for example with a heavy box being slid up a ramp, some of the work applied by the input force is dissipated as heat by friction, formula_21, so less work is done on the load. Due to conservation of energy, the sum of the output work and the frictional energy losses is equal to the input work \nformula_22\nTherefore, more input force is required, and the mechanical advantage is lower, than if friction were not present.\nWith friction, the load will only move if the net force parallel to the surface is greater than the frictional force formula_23 opposing it. The maximum friction force is given by \nformula_24\nwhere formula_25 is the normal force between the load and the plane, directed normal to the surface, and formula_26 is the coefficient of static friction between the two surfaces, which varies with the material. When no input force is applied, if the inclination angle formula_1 of the plane is less than some maximum value formula_28 the component of gravitational force parallel to the plane will be too small to overcome friction, and the load will remain motionless. This angle is called the angle of repose and depends on the composition of the surfaces, but is independent of the load weight. It is shown below that the tangent of the angle of repose formula_28 is equal to formula_26 \nformula_31\nWith friction, there is always some range of input force formula_5 for which the load is stationary, neither sliding up or down the plane, whereas with a frictionless inclined plane there is only one particular value of input force for which the load is stationary.\nAnalysis.\nA load resting on an inclined plane, when considered as a free body has three forces acting on it:\nUsing Newton's second law of motion the load will be stationary or in steady motion if the sum of the forces on it is zero. Since the direction of the frictional force is opposite for the case of uphill and downhill motion, these two cases must be considered separately: \nThe mechanical advantage is\n\u00a0formula_37\nwhere formula_31. This is the condition for \"impending motion\" up the inclined plane. If the applied force Fi is greater than given by this equation, the load will move up the plane.\nThe mechanical advantage is\n\u00a0formula_39\nThis is the condition for impending motion down the plane; if the applied force Fi is less than given in this equation, the load will slide down the plane. There are three cases:\n#formula_40: The mechanical advantage is negative. In the absence of applied force the load will remain motionless, and requires some negative (downhill) applied force to slide down.\n#formula_41: The 'angle of repose'. The mechanical advantage is infinite. With no applied force, load will not slide, but the slightest negative (downhill) force will cause it to slide.\n#formula_42: The mechanical advantage is positive. In the absence of applied force the load will slide down the plane, and requires some positive (uphill) force to hold it motionless\nMechanical advantage using power.\nThe mechanical advantage of an inclined plane is the ratio of the weight of the load on the ramp to the force required to pull it up the ramp. If energy is not dissipated or stored in the movement of the load, then this mechanical advantage can be computed from the dimensions of the ramp.\nIn order to show this, let the position r of a rail car on along the ramp with an angle, \"\u03b8\", above the horizontal be given by\nformula_43\nwhere \"R\" is the distance along the ramp. The velocity of the car up the ramp is now\nformula_44\nBecause there are no losses, the power used by force \"F\" to move the load up the ramp equals the power out, which is the vertical lift of the weight \"W\" of the load.\nThe input power pulling the car up the ramp is given by\nformula_45\nand the power out is\nformula_46\nEquate the power in to the power out to obtain the mechanical advantage as\nformula_47\nThe mechanical advantage of an inclined plane can also be calculated from the ratio of length of the ramp \"L\" to its height \"H,\" because the sine of the angle of the ramp is given by\nformula_48\ntherefore,\nformula_49\nExample: If the height of a ramp is H = 1 meter and its length is L = 5 meters, then the mechanical advantage is\nformula_50\nwhich means that a 20\u00a0lb force will lift a 100\u00a0lb load.\nThe Liverpool Minard inclined plane has the dimensions 1804 meters by 37.50 meters, which provides a mechanical advantage of\nformula_51\nso a 100\u00a0lb tension force on the cable will lift a 4810\u00a0lb load. The grade of this incline is 2%, which means the angle \u03b8 is small enough that sin\u00a0\u03b8\u2248tan\u00a0\u03b8.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38955", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38955", "title": "1 E30 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "38956", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38956", "title": "1 E24 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "38957", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38957", "title": "Snowboarding", "text": "Snow sport involving a single board\nSnowboarding is both a recreational pastime and a competitive winter sport, in which an individual rides down snow-covered slopes or terrain while standing on a specially designed board called a snowboard. This board is securely fastened to the rider\u2019s feet using bindings, ensuring that the snowboard remains attached throughout the ride. The sport requires a combination of balance, control, and skill to navigate various snow conditions and terrains, ranging from groomed ski runs to natural backcountry slopes.\nOver the years, snowboarding has grown in popularity and recognition, and it is now an official discipline featured in major international competitions, including the Winter Olympic Games and the Winter Paralympic Games.\nThe origins of snowboarding can be traced back to the United States, where it was developed as a unique blend of influences from other board sports and winter activities. Skateboarding, surfing, sledding, and skiing all played a role in shaping the early versions of the sport. As it evolved, snowboarding attracted a dedicated following and gradually spread across the globe. Its growing popularity and athletic appeal led to its official debut as a Winter Olympic sport at the Nagano Games in Japan in 1998 and featured in the Winter Paralympics at Sochi in 2014. As of 2015[ [update]], its popularity (as measured by equipment sales) in the United States peaked in 2007 and has been in a decline since.\nHistory.\nThe first snowboards were developed in 1965 when Sherm Poppen, an engineer in Muskegon, Michigan, invented a toy for his daughters by fastening two skis together and attaching a rope to one end so he would have some control as they stood on the board and glided downhill. Dubbed the \"snurfer\" (combining snow and surfer) by his wife Nancy, the toy proved so popular among his daughters' friends that Poppen licensed the idea to a manufacturer, Brunswick Corporation, that sold about a million snurfers over the next decade. And, in 1966 alone, over half a million snurfers were sold.\nModern snowboarding was pioneered by Tom Sims and Jake Burton Carpenter, who both contributed significant innovations and started influential companies. In February 1968, Poppen organized the first snurfing competition at a Michigan ski resort that attracted enthusiasts from all over the country. One of those early pioneers was Tom Sims, a devotee of skateboarding (a sport born in the 1950s when kids attached roller skate wheels to small boards that they steered by shifting their weight). In the 1960s, as an eighth grader in Haddonfield, New Jersey, Sims crafted a snowboard in his school shop class by gluing carpet to the top of a piece of wood and attaching aluminum sheeting to the bottom. He produced commercial snowboards in the mid-70s including the \"Skiboard\" (also known as the \"Lonnie Toft flying banana\") a molded polyethylene bottom with a Lonnie Toft signature skateboard deck attached to the top. Others experimented with board-on-snow configurations at this time, including Welsh skateboard enthusiasts Jon Roberts and Pete Matthews developed their own snowboards to use at their local dry ski slope.\nAlso during this same period, in 1977, Jake Burton Carpenter, a Vermont native who had enjoyed snurfing since the age of 14, impressed the crowd at a Michigan snurfing competition with bindings he had designed to secure his feet to the board. That same year, he founded Burton Snowboards in Londonderry, Vermont. The \"snowboards\" were made of wooden planks that were flexible and had water ski foot traps. Very few people picked up snowboarding because the price of the board was considered too high at $38 and were not allowed on many ski hills, but eventually Burton would become the biggest snowboarding company in the business. Burton's early designs for boards with bindings became the dominant features in snowboarding.\nThe first competitions to offer prize money were the National Snurfing Championship, held at Muskegon State Park in Muskegon, Michigan. In 1979, Jake Burton Carpenter came from Vermont to compete with a snowboard of his own design. There were protests about Jake entering with a non-snurfer board. Paul Graves, and others, advocated that Jake be allowed to race. A \"modified\" \"Open\" division was created and won by Jake as the sole entrant. That race was considered the first competition for snowboarding and is the start of what became competitive snowboarding. Ken Kampenga, John Asmussen and Jim Trim placed first, second and third respectively in the Standard competition with best two combined times of 24.71, 25.02 and 25.41; and Jake Carpenter won prize money as the sole entrant in the \"open\" division with a time of 26.35. In 1980 the event moved to Pando Winter Sports Park near Grand Rapids, Michigan, because of a lack of snow that year at the original venue.\nIn the early 1980s, Aleksey Ostatnigrosh and Alexei Melnikov, two Snurfers from the Soviet Union, patented design changes to the Snurfer to allow jumping by attaching a bungee cord, a single footed binding to the Snurfer tail, and a two-foot binding design for improved control.\nAs snowboarding became more popular in the 1970s and 1980s, pioneers such as Dimitrije Milovich (founder of Winterstick out of Salt Lake City, Utah), Jake Burton Carpenter (founder of Burton Snowboards from Londonderry, Vermont), Tom Sims (founder of Sims Snowboards), David Kemper (founder of Kemper Snowboards) and Mike Olson (founder of Gnu Snowboards) came up with new designs for boards and mechanisms that slowly developed into the snowboards and other related equipment. From these developments, modern snowboarding equipment usually consists of a snowboard with specialized bindings and boots.\nIn April 1981, the \"King of the Mountain\" Snowboard competition was held at Ski Cooper in Colorado. Tom Sims along with an assortment of other snowboarders of the time were present. One entrant showed up on a homemade snowboard with a formica bottom that turned out to not slide so well on the snow.\nIn 1982, the first USA National Snowboard race was held near Woodstock, Vermont, at Suicide Six. The race, organized by Graves, was won by Burton's first team rider Doug Bouton.\nIn 1983, the first World Championship halfpipe competition was held at Soda Springs, California. Tom Sims, founder of Sims Snowboards, organized the event with the help of Mike Chantry, a snowboard instructor at Soda Springs.\nIn 1985, the first World Cup was held in Z\u00fcrs, Austria, further cementing snowboarding's recognition as an official international competitive sport.\nIn 1990, the International Snowboard Federation (ISF) was founded to provide universal contest regulations. In addition, the United States of America Snowboard Association (USASA) provides instructing guidelines and runs snowboard competitions in the U.S. today, high-profile snowboarding events like the Winter X Games, Air &amp; Style, US Open, Olympic Games and other events are broadcast worldwide. Many alpine resorts have terrain parks.\nAt the 1998 Winter Olympic Games in Nagano, Japan, Snowboarding became an official Olympic event. France's Karine Ruby was the first to win an Olympic gold medal for Woman's Snowboarding, while Canadian Ross Rebagliati was the first for Men's Snowboarding.\nInitially, ski areas adopted the sport at a much slower pace than the winter sports public. Indeed, for many years, there was animosity between skiers and snowboarders, which led to an ongoing skier vs snowboarder feud. Early snowboards were banned from the slopes by park officials. For several years snowboarders would have to take a small skills assessment prior to being allowed to ride the chairlifts. It was thought that an unskilled snowboarder would wipe the snow off the mountain. In 1985, only seven percent of U.S. ski areas allowed snowboarding, with a similar proportion in Europe. As equipment and skills improved, gradually snowboarding became more accepted. In 1990, most major ski areas had separate slopes for snowboarders. Now, approximately 97% of all ski areas in North America and Europe allow snowboarding, and more than half have jumps, rails and half pipes.\nIn 2008, snowboarding had over 5 million participants, most aged between 18 and 24, with women comprising 25% of participants.\nThere were 8.2 million snowboarders in the US and Canada for the 2009\u20132010 season. There was a 10% increase over the previous season, accounting for more than 30% of all snow sports participants.\nOn 2 May 2012, the International Paralympic Committee announced that adaptive snowboarding (dubbed \"para-snowboarding\") would debut as a men's and women's medal event in the 2014 Paralympic Winter Games taking place in Sochi, Russia.\nStyles.\nSince snowboarding's inception as an established winter sport, it has developed various styles, each with its own specialized equipment and technique. The most common styles today are: freeride, freestyle, and freecarve/race. These styles are used for both recreational and professional snowboarding. While each style is unique, there is overlap between them.\nJibbing.\n\"Jibbing\" is the term for technical riding on non-standard surfaces. The word \"jib\" is both a noun and a verb, depending on the usage of the word. As a noun: a jib includes metal rails, boxes, benches, concrete ledges, walls, vehicles, rocks and logs. As a verb: to jib is referring to the action of jumping, sliding, or riding on top of objects other than snow. It is directly influenced by grinding a skateboard. Jibbing is a freestyle snowboarding technique of riding. Typically jibbing occurs in a snowboard resort park but can also be done in urban environments.\nFreeriding.\nFreeriding is a style without a set of governing rules or set course, typically on natural, un-groomed terrain. The basic allows for various snowboarding styles in a fluid motion and spontaneity through naturally rugged terrain. It can be like freestyle with the exception that no man-made features are utilized. \"See also Backcountry snowboarding.\"\nFreestyle.\nFreestyle snowboarding is any riding that includes performing tricks. In freestyle, the rider utilizes natural and man-made features such as rails, jumps, boxes, and innumerable others to perform tricks. It is a popular all-inclusive concept that distinguishes the creative aspects of snowboarding, in contrast to a style like alpine snowboarding.\nAlpine snowboarding.\nAlpine snowboarding is a discipline within the sport of snowboarding. It is practiced on groomed pistes. It has been an Olympic event since 1998.\nSometimes called freecarving or hardbooting (due to the equipment used), this discipline usually takes place on hard packed snow or groomed runs (although it can be practiced in any and all conditions) and focuses on carving linked turns, much like surfing or longboarding. Little or no jumping takes place in this discipline. Alpine Snowboarding consists of a small portion of the general snowboard population, that has a well connected social community and its own specific board manufacturers, most situated in Europe. Alpine Snowboard equipment includes a ski-like hardshell boot and plate binding system with a true directional snowboard that is stiffer and narrower to manage linking turns with greater forces and speed. Shaped skis can thank these \"freecarve\" snowboards for the cutting-edge technology leading to their creation. A skilled alpine snowboarder can link numerous turns into a run placing their body very close to the ground each turn, similar to a motocross turn or waterski carve. Depending on factors including stiffness, turning radius and personality this can be done slowly or fast. Carvers make perfect half-circles out of each turn, changing edges when the snowboard is perpendicular to the fall line and starting every turn on the downhill edge. Carving on a snowboard is like riding a roller coaster, because the board will lock into a turn radius and provide what feels like multiple Gs of acceleration.\nAlpine snowboarding shares more visual similarities with skiing equipment than it does with snowboarding equipment. Compared to freestyle snowboarding gear:\nSlopestyle.\nCompetitors perform tricks while descending a course, moving around, over, across, up, or down terrain features. The course is full of obstacles including boxes, rails, jumps, jibs, or anything else the board or rider can slide across. Slopestyle is a judged event and winning a Slopestyle contest usually comes from successfully executing the most difficult line in the terrain park while having a smooth flowing line of difficult, mistake-free tricks performed on the obstacles. However, overall impression and style can play a factor in winning a Slopestyle contest and the rider who lands the hardest tricks will not always win over the rider who lands easier tricks on more difficult paths.\nBig air.\nBig air competitions are contests where riders perform tricks after launching off a man-made jump built specifically for the event. Competitors perform tricks in the air, aiming to attain sizable height and distance, all while securing a clean landing. Many competitions also require the rider to do a complex trick. Not all competitions call for a trick to win the gold; some intermittent competitions are based solely on height and distance of the launch of the snowboarder. Some competitions also require the rider to do a specific trick to win the major prize. One of the first snowboard competitions where Travis Rice attempted and landed a \"double back flip backside 180\" took place at the 2006 Red Bull Gap Session.\nHalf-pipe.\nThe half-pipe is a semi-circular ditch dug into the mountain or purpose-built ramp made up of snow, with walls between 8 and . Competitors perform tricks while going from one side to the other and while in the air above the sides of the pipe.\nSnowboard cross.\nSnowboard cross, also known as \"boardercross\", \"boarder X\", or \"snowboard X\", and commonly abbreviated as \"SBX\", or just \"BX\", is a snowboarding discipline consisting of several (typically 4 to 6) riders racing head-to-head down a course with jumps, berms and other obstacles constructed out of snow. Snowboard cross began in the 1980s, earning its place as an official Winter Olympic event in the 2006 Turin games. Unlike other snowboard racing disciplines such as parallel giant slalom, competitors race on a single course together.\nSnowboard racing.\nIn snowboard racing, riders must complete a downhill course constructed of a series of turning color indicators (gates) placed in the snow at prescribed distances apart. A gate consists of a tall pole and a short pole, connected by a triangular panel. The racer must pass around the short side of the gate, passing the long side of the gate doesn't count. There are 3 main formats used in snowboard racing including single person, parallel courses or multiple people on the course at the same time (SBX).\nCompetitions.\nSnowboarding contests are held throughout the world and range from grassroots competitions to professional events contested worldwide.\nSome of the larger snowboarding contests include: the European Air &amp; Style, the Japanese X-Trail Jam, Burton Global Open Series, Shakedown, FIS World Championships, the annual FIS World Cup, the Winter X Games, Freeride World Tour and the Winter Dew Tour.\nSnowboarding has been a Winter Olympic sport since 1998 Winter Olympics in Japan. Since its inauguration, Olympic snowboarding has seen many additions and removals of events. During the 2018 Winter Olympics, snowboarding events contested included big air, halfpipe, parallel giant slalom, slopestyle and snowboard cross.\n\"Snowboarder Magazine\"'s Superpark event was created in 1996. Over 150 of the World's top pros are invited to advance freestyle snowboarding on the most progressive terrain parks.\nPart of the snowboarding approach is to ensure maximum fun, friendship and event quality. Reflecting this perspective of snowboarding, there are \"Anti Contests\" which are an important part of its identity. These include the Holy Oly Revival at The Summit at Snoqualmie, The Nate Chute Hawaiian Classic at Whitefish, the original anti-contest, the World Quarterpipe Championships and the Grenade Games.\nThe United States of America Snowboarding and Freeski Association (USASA), the first governing body for grassroots snowboarding, runs 30 regional series and national championships in the US.\nSubculture.\nThe snowboarding way of life came about as a natural response to the culture from which it emerged. Early on, there was a rebellion against skiing culture and the view that snowboarders were inferior. Skiers did not easily accept this new culture on their slopes. The two cultures contrasted each other in several ways including how they spoke, acted, and their entire style of clothing. Snowboarders first embraced the punk and later the hip-hop look into their style. Words such as \"dude\", \"gnarly\", and \"Shred the Gnar\" are some examples of words used in the snowboarding culture. Snowboarding subculture became a crossover between the urban and suburban styles on snow, which made an easy transition from surfing and skateboarding culture over to snowboarding culture. In fact many skateboarders and surfers snowboarded in the winter months and were the early snowboarders.\nThe early stereotypes of snowboarding included \"lazy\", \"grungy\", \"punk\", \"stoners\", \"troublemakers\", and numerous others, many of which are associated with skateboarding and surfing as well. However, these stereotypes may be considered out of style. Snowboarding has become a sport that encompasses a very diverse international based crowd and fanbase of many millions, so much so that it is no longer possible to stereotype such a large community. Reasons for these dying stereotypes include how mainstream and popular the sport has become, with the shock factor of snowboarding's quick take off on the slopes wearing off. Skiers and snowboarders are becoming used to each other, showing more respect to each other on the mountain. \"The typical stereotype of the sport is changing as the demographics change\". While these two subcultures are now becoming accustomed to each other, there are still three resorts, in the United States, which do not allow snowboarding. Alta, Deer Valley, and Mad River Glen are the last skiing only resorts in North America and have become a focal point over time for the remaining animosity between snowboarding and skiing.\nCommon injuries.\nCommon injuries in snowboarding differ between professional and recreational groups. The most common type of injury for snowboarders is injury to the upper body. In recreational snowboarding, wrist injuries are more likely to occur. Among professional snowboarders, injuries to the lower half, specifically the knee joint, are more likely to occur. When injured, snowboarders are twice as likely to get a fracture as skiers. Other minor injuries that happen are \"wrist injuries, shoulder soft tissue injuries, ankle injuries, concussions, and clavicle fractures, were seen injuries are very common when snowboarding\". In recreational and inexperienced \"most injuries to snowboarders occurred more often while they were traveling at reckless speed on moderate slopes\". Another way injuries happen is because they try sticking with someone that is a higher skill level, which they are not capable of handling because of the lack of skill they possess. Some major injuries that occur during snowboarding are head, and spinal injuries, \"the main cause of spinal fractures in snowboarders was jump landing failure and compression type fractures occur in about 80% of snowboarders with vertebral fractures because they frequently fall backwards, and this can cause axial loading and anterior compression fractures\". Injuries to the upper body are much less common among professional snowboarders. \"Most of the professionals and elite snowboarders frequently sustain injuries when trying to execute challenging tricks at high speeds and with increased levels of force to the lower limbs\".\nSafety and precautions.\nLike some other winter sports, snowboarding comes with a certain level of risk.\nThe average snowboarder is a male in their early twenties, and there are three times as many men as there are women in the sport. Snowboarders have a 2.4 times greater risk of fractures than skiers, particularly in the upper extremities. Conversely, snowboarders have a lower risk of knee injuries than skiers. The injury rate for snowboarding is about four to six per thousand persons per day, which is around double the injury rate for alpine skiing. Injuries are more likely amongst beginners, especially those who do not take lessons with professional instructors. A quarter of all injuries occur to first-time riders and half of all injuries occur to those with less than a year of experience. Experienced riders are less likely to suffer injury, but the injuries that do occur tend to be more severe.\nTwo-thirds of injuries occur to the upper body and one-third to the lower body. This contrasts with alpine skiing, where two-thirds of injuries are to the lower body. The most common types of injuries are sprains, which account for around 40% of injuries. The most common point of injury is the wrists \u2013 40% of all snowboard injuries are to the wrists and 24% of all snowboard injuries are wrist fractures. There are around 100,000 wrist fractures worldwide among snowboarders each year. For this reason the use of wrist guards, either separate or built into gloves, is very strongly recommended. They are often compulsory in beginner's classes and their use reduces the likelihood of wrist injury by half. In addition it is important for snow boarders to learn how to fall without stopping the fall with their hand by trying to \"push\" the slope away, as landing a wrist which is bent at a 90-degree angle increase the chance of it breaking. Rather, landing with the arms stretched out (like a wing) and slapping the slope with the entire arm is an effective way to break a fall. This is the method used by practitioners of judo and other martial arts to break a fall when they are thrown against the floor by a training partner.\nThe risk of head injury is two to six times greater for snowboarders than for skiers and injuries follow the pattern of being rarer, but more severe, with experienced riders. Head injuries can occur both because of a collision and when failing to carry out a heel-side turn. The latter can result in the rider landing on their back and slamming the back of their head onto the ground, resulting in an occipital head injury. For this reason, helmets are widely recommended. Protective eyewear is also recommended as eye injury can be caused by impact and snow blindness can be a result of exposure to strong ultra-violet light in snow-covered areas. The wearing of ultra-violet-absorbing goggles is recommended even on hazy or cloudy days as ultra-violet light can penetrate clouds.\nUnlike ski bindings, snowboard bindings are not designed to release automatically in a fall. The mechanical support provided by the feet being locked to the board has the effect of reducing the likelihood of knee injury \u2013 15% of snowboard injuries are to the knee, compared with 45% of all skiing injuries. Such injuries are typically to the knee ligaments, bone fractures are rare. Fractures to the lower leg are also rare but 20% of injuries are to the foot and ankle. Fractures of the talus bone are rare in other sports but account for 2% of snowboard injuries \u2013 a lateral process talus fracture is sometimes called \"snowboarder's ankle\" by medical staff. This injury results in persistent lateral pain in the affected ankle yet is difficult to spot in a plain X-ray image. It may be misdiagnosed as just a sprain, with possibly serious consequences as not treating the fracture can result in serious long-term damage to the ankle. The use of portable ultrasound for mountainside diagnostics has been reviewed and appears to be a plausible tool for diagnosing some of the common injuries associated with the sport.\nFour to eight percent of snowboarding injuries take place while the person is waiting in ski-lift lines or entering and exiting ski lifts. Snowboarders push themselves forward with a free foot while in the ski-lift line, leaving the other foot (usually that of the lead leg) locked on the board at a 9\u201327 degree angle, placing a large torque force on this leg and predisposing the person to knee injury if a fall occurs. Snowboard binding rotating devices are designed to minimize the torque force, Quick Stance being the first developed in 1995. They allow snowboarders to turn the locked foot straight into the direction of the tip of the snowboard without removing the boot from the boot binding.\nAvalanches are a clear danger when on snowy mountain slopes.\nIt is best to learn the different kinds of avalanches, how to prevent causing one and how to react when one is going to happen. Also when going out onto the snow, all who practice an activity with increased chances of injury should have a basic First Aid knowledge and know how to deal with injuries that may occur.\nSnowboarding boots should be well-fitted, with toes snug in the end of the boot when standing upright and slightly away from the end when in the snowboarding position. Padding or \"armor\" is recommended on other body parts such as hips, knees, spine, and shoulders. To further help avoid injury to body parts, especially knees, it is recommended to use the right technique. To acquire the right technique, one should be taught by a qualified instructor. Also, when snowboarding alone, precaution should be taken to avoid tree wells, a particularly dangerous area of loose snow that may form at the base of trees.\nSome care is also required when waxing a board as fluorocarbon waxes emit toxic fumes when overheated. Waxing is best performed in a ventilated area with care being taken to use the wax at the correct temperature \u2013 the wax should be melted but not smoking or smoldering.\nIn a study conducted to examine the types of snowboarding injuries and changes in injury patterns over time, data was collected on injured snowboarders and skiers in a base-lodge clinic of a ski resort in Vermont over 18 seasons (1988\u20132006) and included extensive information about injury patterns, demographics, and experience. In conclusion of the study, the highest rate of injury was among young, inexperienced, female snowboarders. Injury rates in snowboarders have fluctuated over time but still remain higher than skiers. No evidence was found that those who spend more time in terrain parks are over represented in the injury population.\nTerminology.\nStances.\nThe way in which a snowboarder normally rides most on their snowboard as determined by the placement of their feet and direction of travel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nParts of a snowboard.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFlips.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOff-axis rotations.\nOff-Axis rotations combine flips and rotations; the naming convention is to first describe the horizontal rotation, followed by the number of off-axis rotations, terminated by the degree of total rotation (i.e. Backside Triple-Cork 1440).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedia.\nFilms.\nSnowboarding films have become a main part of progression in the sport. Each season, many films are released, usually in autumn. These are made by many snowboard-specific video production companies as well as manufacturing companies that use these films as a form of advertisement. Snowboarding videos usually contain video footage of professional riders sponsored by companies. An example of commercial use of snowboarding films would be \"The White Album\", a film by snowboarding legend and filmmaker Dave Seoane about Shaun White, that includes cameos by Tony Hawk and was sponsored by PlayStation, Mountain Dew and Burton Snowboards. Snowboarding films are also used as documentation of snowboarding and showcasing of current trends and styles of the sport. In addition, the 2011 movie \"The Art of Flight\" showcased snowboarders such as Travis Rice attempting to attain greater feats in the sport of snowboarding.\nHowever, sometimes the snowboarding industry is not supportive of all snowboarding-themed films. In 2013, \"The Crash Reel\", a feature-length documentary by filmmaker Lucy Walker about former Shaun White rival Kevin Pearce, premiered on the film festival circuit to critical acclaim and was subsequently broadcast on HBO. Using Pearce's career-ending traumatic brain injury and subsequent recovery as a backdrop, the film examines the physical dangers inherent to pro snowboarders and other extreme sports professional athletes under pressure by sponsors and the media to perform increasingly spectacular feats. Although there are significant references to various brands in the film, Walker is \"adamant\" that the snowboarding industry did not sponsor the film in any way and in fact has been unsupportive, despite the film's mainstream media success.\nMagazines.\nSnowboard magazines are integral in promoting the sport, although less so with the advent of the internet age. Photo incentives are written into many professional riders' sponsorship contracts giving professionals not only a publicity but a financial incentive to have a photo published in a magazine. Snowboard magazine staff travel with professional riders throughout the winter season and cover travel, contests, lifestyle, rider and company profiles, and product reviews. Snowboard magazines have recently made a push to expand their brands to the online market, and there has also been a growth in online-only publications. Popular magazines include \"Transworld Snowboarding\" (US), \"Snowboarder Magazine\" (US), \"Snowboard Magazine\" (US), and \"Whitelines\" (UK).\nVideo games.\nSnowboarding video games provide interactive entertainment on and off season. Most games for this genre have been made for consoles, such as the Xbox and PlayStation. A plethora of online casual snowboarding games also exist along with games for mobile phone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38959", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38959", "title": "1 E4 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "38960", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38960", "title": "1 E1 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "38962", "revid": "46992329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38962", "title": "1 E0 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "38964", "revid": "48886350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38964", "title": "Picometre", "text": "Unit of length (10^-12 meters)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe picometre (international spelling as used by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures; SI symbol: pm) or picometer (American spelling) is a unit of length in the International System of Units (SI), equal to , or one trillionth () of a metre, which is the SI base unit of length.\nThe picometre is one thousand femtometres, one thousandth of a nanometre (\u00a0nm), one millionth of a micrometre (also known as a micron), one billionth of a millimetre, and one trillionth of a metre. The symbol \u03bc\u03bc was once used for it. It is also one hundredth of an \u00e5ngstr\u00f6m, an internationally known (but non-SI) unit of length.\nUse.\nThe picometre's length is of an order so small that its application is almost entirely confined to particle physics, quantum physics, chemistry, and acoustics. Atoms are between 62 and 520\u00a0pm in diameter, and the typical length of a carbon\u2013carbon single bond is 154 pm. Smaller units still may be used to describe smaller particles (some of which are the components of atoms themselves), such as hadrons and the upper limits of possible size for fermion point particles.\nThe Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) probe is planned for launch in 2034 to directly detect gravitational waves and will measure relative displacements with a resolution of 20 picometres over a distance of 2.5 gigametres, yielding a strain sensitivity of better than 1 part in 1020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38965", "revid": "39618856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38965", "title": "Cary Grant", "text": "English-American actor (1904\u20131986)\nCary Grant (born Archibald Alec Leach; January 18, 1904\u00a0\u2013 November 29, 1986) was an English-American actor. Known for his blended British and American accent, debonair demeanor, lighthearted approach to acting, and sense of comic timing, he was one of classic Hollywood's definitive leading men. He was nominated twice for the Academy Award, received an Academy Honorary Award in 1970, and received the Kennedy Center Honor in 1981. He was named the of the Golden Age of Hollywood by the American Film Institute in 1999.\nGrant was born into an impoverished family in Bristol, where he had an unhappy childhood marked by the absence of his mother and his father's alcoholism. He became attracted to theatre at a young age when he visited the Bristol Hippodrome. At 16, he went as a stage performer with the Pender Troupe for a tour of the US. After a series of successful performances in New York City, he decided to stay there. He established a name for himself in vaudeville in the 1920s and toured the United States before moving to Hollywood in the early 1930s.\nGrant initially appeared in crime films and dramas, such as \"Blonde Venus\" (1932) and \"She Done Him Wrong\" (1933), but later gained renown for his performances in romantic screwball comedies such as \"The Awful Truth\" (1937), \"Bringing Up Baby\" (1938), \"His Girl Friday\" (1940), and \"The Philadelphia Story\" (1940). These pictures are frequently cited among the greatest comedy films of all time. Other well-known films in which he starred in this period were the adventure \"Gunga Din\" (1939), the dark comedy \"Arsenic and Old Lace\" (1944), and the dramas \"Only Angels Have Wings\" (1939), \"Penny Serenade\" (1941), and \"None but the Lonely Heart\" (1944), the latter two for which he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, Grant had a close working relationship with director Alfred Hitchcock, who cast him in four films: \"Suspicion\" (1941), \"Notorious\" (1946), \"To Catch a Thief\" (1955), and \"North by Northwest\" (1959). For the suspense-dramas \"Suspicion\" and \"Notorious\", Grant took on darker, morally ambiguous characters, both challenging Grant's screen persona and his acting abilities. Toward the end of his career he starred in the romantic films \"Indiscreet\" (1958), \"Operation Petticoat\" (1959), \"That Touch of Mink\" (1962), and \"Charade\" (1963). He is remembered by critics for his unusually broad appeal as a handsome, suave actor who did not take himself too seriously, and in comedies was able to toy with his dignity without sacrificing it entirely.\nGrant was married five times, three of them elopements with actresses Virginia Cherrill (1934\u20131935), Betsy Drake (1949\u20131962), and Dyan Cannon (1965\u20131968). He had daughter Jennifer Grant with Cannon. He retired from film acting in 1966 and pursued numerous business interests, representing cosmetics firm Faberg\u00e9 and sitting on the board of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. He died of a stroke in 1986 at the age of 82.\nEarly life and education.\nGrant was born Archibald Alec Leach on January 18, 1904, at 15 Hughenden Road in Horfield, a suburb of Bristol. He was the second child of Elias James Leach and Elsie Maria Leach (n\u00e9e Kingdon). His father worked as a tailor's presser at a clothes factory, while his mother worked as a seamstress. His older brother John William Elias Leach died of tuberculous meningitis two days before his first birthday. Grant may have considered himself partly Jewish but was raised Anglican from his mother's background. He had an unhappy upbringing; his father was an alcoholic and his mother had clinical depression.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe had such a traumatic childhood, it was horrible. I work with a lot of kids on the street and I've heard a lot of stories about what happens when a family breaks down\u00a0\u2014 but his was just horrendous.\n\u2014Grant's wife Dyan Cannon on his childhood\nGrant's mother taught him song and dance when he was four, and she was keen on him having piano lessons. She occasionally took him to the cinema, where he enjoyed the performances of Charlie Chaplin, Chester Conklin, Fatty Arbuckle, Ford Sterling, Mack Swain, and Broncho Billy Anderson. He moved a short distance to 50 Berkeley Road at about age 4, and was sent to Bishop Road Primary School when he was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442. He lived at six addresses in Bristol, but said his time at Berkeley Road were his childhood \"happiest days\".\nGrant's biographer Graham McCann claimed that his mother \"did not know how to give affection and did not know how to receive it either\". Biographer Geoffrey Wansell notes that his mother blamed herself bitterly for the death of Grant's brother John, and never recovered from it. Grant acknowledged that his negative experiences with his mother affected his relationships with women later in life. She frowned on alcohol and tobacco, and would reduce his pocket money for minor mishaps. Grant attributed her behavior to overprotectiveness, fearing that she would lose him as she did John.\nWhen Grant was nine, his father placed his mother in Glenside Hospital, a mental institution, and told him she had gone away on a \"long holiday\", later declaring that she had died. Grant grew up resenting his mother, particularly after being told she left the family. After she was institutionalised, Grant and his father moved into Grant's grandmother's home in Bristol. When Grant was ten, his father remarried and started a new family. Grant did not learn that his mother was still alive until he was 31, his father confessing to the lie shortly before his own death. Grant made arrangements for his mother to leave the institution in June 1935, shortly after he learned of her whereabouts. He visited her regularly, including after filming \"Gunga Din\" in October 1938.\nGrant enjoyed the theater, particularly pantomimes at Christmas, which he attended with his father. He befriended a troupe of acrobatic dancers known as The Penders or the Bob Pender Stage Troupe. He subsequently trained as a stilt walker and began touring with them. Jesse Lasky was a Broadway producer at the time and saw Grant performing at the Wintergarten theater in Berlin around 1914.\nIn 1915, Grant won a scholarship to attend Fairfield Grammar School in Bristol, although his father could barely afford to pay for the uniform. He was quite capable in most academic subjects, but he excelled at sports, particularly fives, and his good looks and acrobatic talents made him a popular figure. He developed a reputation for mischief, and frequently refused to do his homework. A former classmate referred to him as a \"scruffy little boy\", while an old teacher remembered \"the naughty little boy who was always making a noise in the back row and would never do his homework\".\nHe spent his evenings working backstage in Bristol theatres, and at the age of 13, was responsible for the lighting for magician David Devant at the Bristol Empire in 1917. He began hanging around backstage at the theatre at every opportunity, and volunteered for work in the summer as a messenger boy and guide at the military docks in Southampton, to escape the unhappiness of his home life. The time spent at Southampton strengthened his desire to travel; he was eager to leave Bristol and tried to sign on as a ship's cabin boy, but he was too young.\nOn March 13, 1918, the 14-year-old Grant was expelled from Fairfield. Several explanations were given, including being discovered in the girls' lavatory and assisting two other classmates with theft in the nearby town of Almondsbury. Wansell claims that Grant had set out intentionally to get himself expelled from school to pursue a career in entertainment with the troupe, and he did rejoin Pender's troupe three days after being expelled. His father had a better-paying job in Southampton, and Grant's expulsion brought local authorities to Pender's door with questions about why he was living in Bristol and not with his father in Southampton. His father then co-signed a three-year contract between Grant and Pender that stipulated Grant's weekly salary, along with room and board, dancing lessons, and other training for his profession until age 18. There was also a provision in the contract for salary raises based on job performance.\nVaudeville and performing career.\nThe Pender Troupe began touring the country, and Grant's performing pantomime developed his physical skills, broadening the range of his acting. The troupe traveled on the to conduct a tour of the United States on July 21, 1920, when he was 16, arriving a week later. Biographer Richard Schickel writes that Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford were aboard the same ship, returning from their honeymoon; Grant played shuffleboard with Fairbanks, who became an important role model for him. After arriving in New York, the group performed at the New York Hippodrome, the largest theater in the world at the time with a capacity of 5,697. They performed there for nine months, putting on 12 shows a week, and they had a successful production of \"Good Times\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDoing stand-up comedy is extremely difficult. Your timing has to change from show to show and from town to town. You're always adjusting to the size of the audience and the size of the theatre.\n\u2014Grant on stand-up comedy.\nGrant became a part of the vaudeville circuit and began touring, performing in places such as St. Louis, Missouri, Cleveland, and Milwaukee, and he decided to stay in the US with several of the other members when the rest of the troupe returned to Britain. He became fond of the Marx Brothers during this period, and Zeppo Marx was an early role model for him. In July 1922, he performed in a group called the \"Knockabout Comedians\" at the Palace Theater on Broadway. He formed another group that summer called \"The Walking Stanleys\" with several of the former members of the Pender Troupe, and he starred in a variety show named \"Better Times\" at the Hippodrome towards the end of the year. While serving as a paid escort for the opera singer Lucrezia Bori at a Park Avenue party, he met George C. Tilyou Jr., whose family owned Steeplechase Park. Learning of his acrobatic experience, Tilyou hired him to work as a stilt-walker and attract large crowds on the newly opened Coney Island Boardwalk, wearing a bright greatcoat and a sandwich board that advertised the amusement park.\nGrant spent the next couple of years touring the United States with \"The Walking Stanleys\". He visited Los Angeles for the first time in 1924, which made a lasting impression on him. The group split up and he returned to New York, where he began performing at the National Vaudeville Artists Club on West 46th Street, doing comic sketches, juggling, performing acrobatics, and as \"Rubber Legs\", riding a unicycle. The experience was a particularly demanding one, but it gave Grant the opportunity to improve his comic technique and to develop skills that benefitted him later in Hollywood.\nGrant became a leading man alongside Jean Dalrymple and decided to form the \"Jack Janis Company\", which began touring vaudeville. He was sometimes mistaken for an Australian during this period and was nicknamed \"Kangaroo\" or \"Boomerang\". His accent seemed to have changed as a result of moving to London with the Pender troupe and working in so many music halls in the UK and the US, eventually developing a sort of transatlantic or mid-Atlantic accent. In 1927, he was cast as an Australian in Reggie Hammerstein's musical \"Golden Dawn\", for which he earned $75 a week. The show was not well received, but it lasted for 184 performances and several critics started to notice Grant as the \"pleasant new juvenile\" or \"competent young newcomer\".\nIn 1928, he joined the William Morris Agency and was offered another juvenile part by Hammerstein in his play \"Polly\", an unsuccessful production. One critic wrote that Grant \"has a strong masculine manner, but unfortunately fails to bring out the beauty of the score\". Wansell notes that the pressure of a failing production began to make him fret, and he was eventually dropped from the run after six weeks of poor reviews. Despite the setback, Hammerstein's rival Florenz Ziegfeld made an attempt to buy Grant's contract, but Hammerstein sold it to the Shubert Brothers instead.\nJ. J. Shubert cast him in a small role as a Spaniard opposite Jeanette MacDonald in the French risqu\u00e9 comedy \"Boom-Boom\" at the Casino Theater on Broadway, which premiered on January 28, 1929, ten days after his 25th birthday. MacDonald later admitted that Grant was \"absolutely terrible in the role\", but he exhibited a charm that endeared him to people and effectively saved the show from failure. The play ran for 72 shows, and Grant earned $350 a week before moving to Detroit, and then to Chicago.\nTo console himself, Grant bought a 1927 Packard sport phaeton. He visited his half-brother Eric in England, and he returned to New York to play the role of Max Grunewald in a Shubert production of \"A Wonderful Night\". It premiered at the Majestic Theatre on October 31, 1929, two days after the Wall Street Crash, and lasted until February 1930 with 125 shows. The play received mixed reviews; one critic criticized his acting, likening it to a \"mixture of John Barrymore and cockney\", while another announced that he had brought a \"breath of elfin Broadway\" to the role. Grant found it difficult forming relationships with women, remarking that he \"never seemed able to fully communicate with them\" even after many years \"surrounded by all sorts of attractive girls\" in the theater, on the road, and in New York.\nIn 1930, Grant toured for nine months in a production of the musical \"The Street Singer\". It ended in early 1931, and the Shuberts invited him to spend the summer performing on the stage at The Muny in St. Louis, Missouri; he appeared in 12 different productions, putting on 87 shows. He received praise from local newspapers for these performances, gaining a reputation as a romantic leading man. Significant influences on his acting in this period were Gerald du Maurier, A. E. Matthews, Jack Buchanan, and Ronald Squire. He admitted that he was drawn to acting because of a \"great need to be liked and admired\".\nHe was eventually fired by the Shuberts at the end of the summer season when he refused to accept a pay cut because of financial difficulties caused by the Depression. His unemployment was short-lived, however; impresario William B. Friedlander offered him the romantic lead in his musical \"Nikki\", and Grant starred opposite Fay Wray as a soldier in post-World War I France. The production opened on September 29, 1931, in New York, but was stopped after just 39 performances due to the effects of the Depression.\nFilm career.\n1932\u20131936: Debut and early roles.\nGrant's role in \"Nikki\" was praised by Ed Sullivan of \"The New York Daily News\", who noted that the \"young lad from England\" had \"a big future in the movies\". The review led to another screen test by Paramount Publix, resulting in an appearance as a sailor in \"Singapore Sue\" (1931), a ten-minute short film by Casey Robinson. Grant delivered his lines \"without any conviction\" according to McCann. Through Robinson, Grant met with Jesse L. Lasky and B. P. Schulberg, the co-founder and general manager of Paramount Pictures, respectively. After a successful screen-test directed by Marion Gering, Schulberg signed a contract with the 27-year-old Grant on December 7, 1931, for five years, at a starting salary of $450 a week. Schulberg demanded that he change his name to \"something that sounded more all-American like Gary Cooper\", and they eventually agreed on Cary Grant.\nGrant set out to establish himself as what McCann calls the \"epitome of masculine glamour\", and made Douglas Fairbanks his first role model. McCann notes that Grant's career in Hollywood immediately took off because he exhibited a \"genuine charm\", which made him stand out among the other good looking actors at the time, making it \"remarkably easy to find people who were willing to support his embryonic career\". He made his feature film debut with the Frank Tuttle-directed comedy \"This is the Night\" (1932), playing an Olympic javelin thrower opposite Thelma Todd and Lili Damita. Grant disliked his role and threatened to leave Hollywood, but to his surprise a critic from \"Variety\" praised his performance, and thought that he looked like a \"potential femme rave\".\nIn 1932, Grant played a wealthy playboy opposite Marlene Dietrich in \"Blonde Venus\", directed by Josef von Sternberg. Grant's role is described by William Rothman as projecting the \"distinctive kind of nonmacho masculinity that was to enable him to incarnate a man capable of being a romantic hero\". Grant found that he conflicted with the director during the filming and the two often argued in German. He played a suave playboy type in a number of films: \"Merrily We Go to Hell\" opposite Fredric March and Sylvia Sidney, \"Devil and the Deep\" with Tallulah Bankhead, Gary Cooper and Charles Laughton (Cooper and Grant had no scenes together), \"Hot Saturday\" opposite Nancy Carroll and Randolph Scott, and \"Madame Butterfly\" with Sidney. According to biographer Marc Eliot, while these films did not make Grant a star, they did well enough to establish him as one of Hollywood's \"new crop of fast-rising actors\".\nIn 1933, Grant gained attention for appearing in the pre-Code films \"She Done Him Wrong\" and \"I'm No Angel\" opposite Mae West. West would later claim that she had discovered Cary Grant. Of course Grant had already made \"Blonde Venus\" the previous year in which he was Marlene Dietrich's leading man. Pauline Kael noted that Grant did not appear confident in his role as a Salvation Army director in \"She Done Him Wrong\", which made it all the more charming. The film was a box office hit, earning more than $2\u00a0million in the United States, and has since won much acclaim. For \"I'm No Angel\", Grant's salary was increased from $450 to $750 a week. The film was even more successful than \"She Done Him Wrong\", and saved Paramount from bankruptcy; Vermilye cites it as one of the best comedy films of the 1930s.\nA string of financially unsuccessful films followed, including roles as a president of a company who is sued for knocking down a boy in an accident in \"Born to Be Bad\" (1934) for 20th Century Fox, a cosmetic surgeon in \"Kiss and Make-Up\" (1934), and a blinded pilot opposite Myrna Loy in \"Wings in the Dark\" (1935). Amid press reports of problems in his marriage to Cherrill, Paramount concluded that Grant was expendable.\nGrant's prospects picked up in the latter half of 1935 when he was loaned out to RKO Pictures. Producer Pandro Berman agreed to take him on in the face of failure because \"I'd seen him do things which were excellent, and [Katharine] Hepburn wanted him too.\" His first venture with RKO, playing a raffish Cockney swindler in George Cukor's \"Sylvia Scarlett\" (1935), was the first of four collaborations with Hepburn. Though a commercial failure, his dominating performance was praised by critics, and Grant always considered the film to have been the breakthrough for his career.\nWhen his contract with Paramount ended in 1936 with the release of \"Wedding Present\", Grant decided not to renew it and wished to work freelance. Grant claimed to be the first freelance actor in Hollywood. His first venture as a freelance actor was \"The Amazing Quest of Ernest Bliss\" (1936), which was shot in England. The film was a box office bomb and prompted Grant to reconsider his decision. Critical and commercial success with \"Suzy\" later that year in which he played a French airman opposite Jean Harlow and Franchot Tone, led to him signing joint contracts with RKO and Columbia Pictures, enabling him to choose the stories that he felt suited his acting style. His Columbia contract was a four-film deal over two years, guaranteeing him $50,000 each for the first two and $75,000 each for the others.\n1937\u20131945: Hollywood stardom.\nIn 1937, Grant began the first film under his contract with Columbia Pictures, \"When You're in Love\", portraying a wealthy American artist who eventually woos a famous opera singer (Grace Moore). His performance received positive feedback from critics, with Mae Tinee of \"The Chicago Daily Tribune\" describing it as the \"best thing he's done in a long time\". After a commercial failure in his second RKO venture \"The Toast of New York\", Grant was loaned to Hal Roach's studio for \"Topper\", a screwball comedy film distributed by MGM, which became his first major comedy success. Grant played one half of a wealthy, freewheeling married couple with Constance Bennett, who wreak havoc on the world as ghosts after dying in a car accident. \"Topper\" became one of the most popular movies of the year, with a critic from \"Variety\" noting that both Grant and Bennett \"do their assignments with great skill\". Vermilye described the film's success as \"a logical springboard\" for Grant to star in \"The Awful Truth\" that year, his first film made with Irene Dunne and Ralph Bellamy. Though director Leo McCarey reportedly disliked Grant, who had mocked the director by enacting his mannerisms in the film, he recognized Grant's comic talents and encouraged him to improvise his lines and draw upon his skills developed in vaudeville. The film was a critical and commercial success and made Grant a top Hollywood star, establishing a screen persona for him as a sophisticated light comedy leading man in screwball comedies.\n\"The Awful Truth\" began what film critic Benjamin Schwarz of \"The Atlantic\" later called \"the most spectacular run ever for an actor in American pictures\" for Grant. In 1938, he starred opposite Katharine Hepburn in the screwball comedy \"Bringing Up Baby\", featuring a leopard and frequent bickering and verbal jousting between Grant and Hepburn. He was initially uncertain how to play his character, but was told by director Howard Hawks to think of Harold Lloyd. Grant was given more leeway in the comic scenes, the editing of the film and in educating Hepburn in the art of comedy. Despite losing over $350,000 for RKO, the film earned rave reviews from critics. He again appeared with Hepburn in the romantic comedy \"Holiday\" later that year, which did not fare well commercially, to the point that Hepburn was considered to be \"box office poison\" at the time.\nDespite a series of commercial failures, Grant was now more popular than ever and in high demand. According to Vermilye, in 1939, Grant played roles that were more dramatic, albeit with comical undertones. He played a British army sergeant opposite Douglas Fairbanks Jr. in the George Stevens-directed adventure film \"Gunga Din\", set at a military station in India. Roles as a pilot opposite Jean Arthur and Rita Hayworth in Hawks' \"Only Angels Have Wings\", and a wealthy landowner alongside Carole Lombard in \"In Name Only\" followed.\nIn 1940, Grant played a callous newspaper editor who learns that his ex-wife and former journalist, played by Rosalind Russell, is to marry insurance officer Ralph Bellamy in Hawks' comedy \"His Girl Friday\", which was praised for its strong chemistry and \"great verbal athleticism\" between Grant and Russell. Grant reunited with Irene Dunne in \"My Favorite Wife\", a \"first rate comedy\" according to \"Life\" magazine, which became RKO's second biggest picture of the year, with profits of $505,000. After playing a Virginian backwoodsman in \"The Howards of Virginia\", set during the American Revolution \u2013 which McCann considers to have been Grant's worst film and performance \u2013 his last film of the year was in the critically lauded romantic comedy \"The Philadelphia Story\", in which he played the ex-husband of Hepburn's character. Grant felt his performance was so strong that he was bitterly disappointed not to have received an Oscar nomination, especially since both his lead co-stars, Hepburn and James Stewart, received them, with Stewart winning for Best Actor. Grant joked \"I'd have to blacken my teeth first before the Academy will take me seriously\". Film historian David Thomson wrote that \"the wrong man got the Oscar\" for \"The Philadelphia Story\" and that \"Grant got better performances out of Hepburn than (her long-time companion) Spencer Tracy ever managed.\" Stewart's winning the Oscar \"was considered a gold-plated apology for his being robbed of the award\" for the previous year's \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\". Grant's not being nominated for \"His Girl Friday\" the same year is also a \"sin of omission\" for the Oscars.\nThe following year Grant was considered for the Academy Award for Best Actor for \"Penny Serenade\"\u2014his first nomination from the academy. Wansell claims that Grant found the film to be an emotional experience, because he and wife-to-be Barbara Hutton had started to discuss having their own children. Later that year he appeared in the romantic psychological thriller \"Suspicion\", the first of Grant's four collaborations with director Alfred Hitchcock. Grant did not warm to co-star Joan Fontaine, finding her to be temperamental and unprofessional. Film critic Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" considered that Grant was \"provokingly irresponsible, boyishly gay and also oddly mysterious, as the role properly demands\". Hitchcock later stated that he thought the conventional happy ending of the film (with the wife discovering her husband is innocent rather than his being guilty and she letting him kill her with a glass of poisoned milk) \"a complete mistake because of making that story with Cary Grant. Unless you have a cynical ending it makes the story too simple\". Geoff Andrew of \"Time Out\" believes \"Suspicion\" served as \"a supreme example of Grant's ability to be simultaneously charming and sinister\".\nIn 1942, Grant participated in a three-week tour of the United States as part of a group to help the war effort and was photographed visiting wounded marines in hospital. He appeared in several routines of his own during these shows and often played the straight man opposite Bert Lahr. In May 1942, when he was 38, the ten-minute propaganda short \"Road to Victory\" was released, in which he appeared alongside Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra and Charles Ruggles. On film, Grant played Leopold Dilg, a convict on the run in \"The Talk of the Town\" (1942), who escapes after being wrongly convicted of arson and murder. He hides in a house with characters played by Jean Arthur and Ronald Colman, and gradually plots to secure his freedom. Crowther praised the script, and noted that Grant played Dilg with a \"casualness which is slightly disturbing\". After a role as a foreign correspondent opposite Ginger Rogers and Walter Slezak in the off-beat comedy \"Once Upon a Honeymoon\", in which he was praised for his scenes with Rogers, he appeared in \"Mr. Lucky\" the following year, playing a gambler in a casino aboard a ship. The commercially successful submarine war film \"Destination Tokyo\" (1943) was shot in just six weeks in September and October, which left him exhausted; the reviewer from \"Newsweek\" thought it was one of the finest performances of his career.\nIn 1944, Grant starred alongside Priscilla Lane, Raymond Massey and Peter Lorre, in Frank Capra's dark comedy \"Arsenic and Old Lace\", playing the manic Mortimer Brewster, who belongs to a bizarre family that includes two murderous aunts and an uncle claiming to be President Teddy Roosevelt. Grant took up the role after it was originally offered to Bob Hope, who turned it down owing to schedule conflicts. Grant found the macabre subject matter of the film difficult to contend with and believed that it was the worst performance of his career. That year he received his second Oscar nomination for a role, opposite Ethel Barrymore and Barry Fitzgerald in the Clifford Odets-directed film \"None but the Lonely Heart\", set in London during the Depression. Late in the year he featured in the CBS Radio series \"Suspense\", playing a tormented character who hysterically discovers that his amnesia has affected the masculine order in society in \"The Black Curtain\".\n1946\u20131953: Post-War success and slump.\nAfter making a brief cameo appearance opposite Claudette Colbert in \"Without Reservations\" (1946), Grant portrayed Cole Porter in the musical \"Night and Day\" (1946). The production proved to be problematic, with scenes often requiring multiple takes, frustrating the cast and crew. Grant next appeared with Ingrid Bergman and Claude Rains in the Hitchcock-directed film \"Notorious\" (1946), playing a government agent who recruits the American daughter of a convicted Nazi spy (Bergman) to infiltrate a Nazi organization in Brazil after World War II. During the course of the film Grant and Bergman's characters fall in love and share one of the longest kisses in film history at around two and a half minutes. Wansell notes how Grant's performance \"underlined how far his unique qualities as a screen actor had matured in the years since \"The Awful Truth\"\".\nIn 1947, Grant played an artist who becomes involved in a court case when charged with assault in the comedy \"The Bachelor and the Bobby-Soxer\" (released in the U.K. as \"Bachelor Knight\"), opposite Myrna Loy and Shirley Temple. The film was praised by the critics, who admired the picture's slapstick qualities and chemistry between Grant and Loy; it became one of the biggest-selling films at the box office that year. Later that year he starred opposite David Niven and Loretta Young in the comedy \"The Bishop's Wife\", playing an angel who is sent down from heaven to straighten out the relationship between the bishop (Niven) and his wife (Loretta Young). The film was a major commercial and critical success, and was nominated for five Academy Awards. \"Life\" magazine called it \"intelligently written and competently acted\".\nThe following year, Grant played neurotic Jim Blandings, the title-sake in the comedy \"Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House\", again with Loy. Though the film lost money for RKO, Philip T. Hartung of \"Commonweal\" thought that Grant's role as the \"frustrated advertising man\" was one of his best screen portrayals. In \"Every Girl Should Be Married\", an \"airy comedy\", he appeared with Betsy Drake and Franchot Tone, playing a bachelor who is trapped into marriage by Drake's conniving character. He finished the year as the fourth most popular film star at the box office. In 1949, Grant starred alongside Ann Sheridan in the comedy \"I Was a Male War Bride\" in which he appeared in scenes dressed as a woman, wearing a skirt and a wig. During the filming he was taken ill with infectious hepatitis and lost weight, affecting the way he looked in the picture. The film, based on the autobiography of Belgian resistance fighter Roger Charlier, proved to be successful, becoming the highest-grossing film for 20th Century Fox that year with over $4.5\u00a0million in takings and being likened to Hawks's screwball comedies of the late 1930s. By this point he was one of the highest paid Hollywood stars, commanding $300,000 per picture.\nThe early 1950s marked the beginning of a slump in Grant's career. His roles as a top brain surgeon who is caught in the middle of a bitter revolution in a Latin American country in \"Crisis\", and as a medical-school professor and orchestra conductor opposite Jeanne Crain in \"People Will Talk\" were poorly received. Grant had become tired of being Cary Grant after twenty years, being successful, wealthy and popular, and remarked: \"To play yourself, your \"true\" self, is the hardest thing in the world\". In 1952, Grant starred in the comedy \"Room for One More\", playing an engineer husband who, with his wife (Betsy Drake), adopt two children from an orphanage. He reunited with Howard Hawks to film the off-beat comedy \"Monkey Business\", co-starring Ginger Rogers and Marilyn Monroe. Though the critic from \"Motion Picture Herald\" wrote gushingly that Grant had given a career's best with an \"extraordinary and agile performance\", which was matched by Rogers, it received a mixed reception overall. Grant had hoped that starring opposite Deborah Kerr in the romantic comedy \"Dream Wife\" would salvage his career, but it was a critical and financial failure upon release in July 1953, when Grant was 49. Though he was offered the leading part in \"A Star is Born\", Grant decided against playing that character. He believed that his film career was over, and briefly left the industry.\n1955\u20131966: Film resurgence and final roles.\nIn 1955, Grant agreed to star opposite Grace Kelly in \"To Catch a Thief\", playing a retired jewel thief named John Robie, nicknamed \"The Cat\", living in the French Riviera. Grant and Kelly worked well together during the production, which was one of the most enjoyable experiences of Grant's career. He found Hitchcock and Kelly to be very professional, and later stated that Kelly was \"possibly the finest actress I've ever worked with\". Grant was one of the first actors to go independent by not renewing his studio contract, effectively leaving the studio system, which almost completely controlled all aspects of an actor's life. He decided which films he was going to appear in, often had personal choice of directors and co-stars, and at times negotiated a share of the gross revenue, something uncommon at the time. Grant received more than $700,000 for his 10% of the gross of the successful \"To Catch a Thief\", while Hitchcock received less than $50,000 for directing and producing it. Though critical reception to the overall film was mixed, Grant received high praise for his performance, with critics commenting on his suave, handsome appearance in the film.\nIn 1957, Grant starred opposite Deborah Kerr in the romance \"An Affair to Remember\", playing an international playboy who becomes the object of her affections. Schickel sees the film as one of the definitive romantic pictures of the period, but remarks that Grant was not entirely successful in trying to supersede the film's \"gushing sentimentality\". That year, Grant also appeared opposite Sophia Loren in \"The Pride and the Passion\". He had expressed an interest in playing William Holden's character in \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\" at the time, but found that it was not possible because of his commitment to \"The Pride and the Passion\". The film was shot on location in Spain and was problematic, with co-star Frank Sinatra irritating his colleagues and leaving the production after just a few weeks. Although Grant had an affair with Loren during filming, Grant's attempts to woo Loren to marry him during the production proved fruitless, which led to him expressing anger when Paramount cast her opposite him in \"Houseboat\" (1958) as part of her contract. The sexual tension between the two was so great during the making of \"Houseboat\" that the producers found it almost impossible to make. Later in 1958, Grant starred opposite Bergman in the romantic comedy \"Indiscreet\", playing a successful financier who has an affair with a famous actress (Bergman) while pretending to be a married man. During the filming he formed a closer friendship and gained new respect for her as an actress. Schickel stated that he thought the film was possibly the finest romantic comedy film of the era, and that Grant himself had professed that it was one of his personal favorites. Grant received his first of five Golden Globe Award for Best Actor\u00a0\u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nominations for his performance and finished the year as the most popular film star at the box office.\nIn 1959, Grant starred in the Hitchcock-directed film \"North by Northwest\", playing an advertising executive who becomes embroiled in a case of mistaken identity. Like \"Indiscreet\", it was warmly received by the critics and was a major commercial success, and is now often listed as one of the greatest films of all time. Weiler, writing in \"The New York Times\", praised Grant's performance, remarking that the actor \"was never more at home than in this role of the advertising-man-on-the-lam\" and handled the role \"with professional aplomb and grace\". Grant wore one of his most well-known suits in the film, which became very popular, a fourteen-gauge, mid-gray, subtly plaid, worsted wool that was custom-made on Savile Row. Grant finished the year playing a U.S. Navy submarine skipper opposite Tony Curtis in the comedy \"Operation Petticoat\". The reviewer from \"Daily Variety\" saw Grant's comic portrayal as a classic example of how to attract the laughter of the audience without lines, remarking that \"In this film, most of the gags play off him. It is his reaction, blank, startled, etc., always underplayed, that creates or releases the humor\". The film was major box office success, and in 1973, Deschner ranked the film as the highest earning film of Grant's career at the US box office, with takings of $9.5\u00a0million.\nIn 1960, Grant appeared opposite Deborah Kerr, Robert Mitchum, and Jean Simmons in \"The Grass Is Greener\", which was shot in England at Osterley Park and Shepperton Studios. McCann notes that Grant took great relish in \"mocking his aristocratic character's over-refined tastes and mannerisms\", though the film was panned and was seen as his worst since \"Dream Wife\". In 1962, Grant starred in the romantic comedy \"That Touch of Mink\", playing suave, wealthy businessman Philip Shayne romantically involved with an office worker, played by Doris Day. He invites her to his apartment in Bermuda, but her guilty conscience begins to take hold. The picture was praised by critics, and it received three Academy Award nominations and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Comedy Picture, in addition to landing Grant another Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actor. Deschner ranked the film as the second highest grossing of Grant's career.\nProducers Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman originally sought Grant for the role of James Bond in \"Dr. No\" (1962) but discarded the idea as Grant would be committed to only one feature film; therefore, the producers decided to go after someone who could be part of a franchise after James Mason would only agree to commit to three films. In 1963, Grant appeared in his last typically suave, romantic role opposite Audrey Hepburn in \"Charade\". Grant found the experience of working with Hepburn \"wonderful\" and believed that their close relationship was clear on camera, though according to Hepburn, he was particularly worried during the filming that he would be criticized for being far too old for her and seen as a \"cradle snatcher\". Author Chris Barsanti writes: \"It's the film's canny flirtatiousness that makes it such ingenious entertainment. Grant and Hepburn play off each other like the pros that they are\". The film, well received by the critics, is often called \"the best Hitchcock film Hitchcock never made\".\nIn 1964, Grant changed from his typically suave, distinguished screen persona to play a grizzled beachcomber who is coerced into serving as a coastwatcher on an uninhabited island in the World War II romantic comedy \"Father Goose\". The film was a major commercial success, and upon its release at Radio City at Christmas 1964 it took over $210,000 at the box-office in the first week, breaking the record set by \"Charade\" the previous year. Grant's final film, \"Walk, Don't Run\" (1966), a comedy co-starring Jim Hutton and Samantha Eggar, was shot on location in Tokyo, and is set amid the backdrop of the housing shortage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. \"Newsweek\" concluded: \"Though Grant's personal presence is indispensable, the character he plays is almost wholly superfluous. Perhaps the inference to be taken is that a man in his 50s or 60s has no place in romantic comedy except as a catalyst. If so, the chemistry is wrong for everyone\". Hitchcock had asked Grant to star in \"Torn Curtain\" that year, only to learn that he had decided to retire.\nLater years.\nIn 1966, when his daughter Jennifer Grant was born, Grant retired from the screen so he could focus on bringing her up and to provide a sense of permanence and stability in her life. He had become increasingly disillusioned with cinema in the 1960s, rarely finding a script of which he approved. He remarked: \"I could have gone on acting and playing a grandfather or a bum, but I discovered more important things in life\". He knew after he had made \"Charade\" that the \"Golden Age\" of Hollywood was over. Grant expressed little interest in making a career comeback, and would respond to the suggestion with \"fat chance\". He did, however, briefly appear in the audience for Elvis Presley's 1970 Las Vegas concert documentary \"\". In the 1970s, he was given the negatives from a number of his films, and he sold them to television for a sum of over $2\u00a0million in 1975 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;).\nMorecambe and Stirling argue that Grant's absence from film after 1966 was not because he had \"irrevocably turned his back on the film industry,\" but because he was \"caught between a decision made and the temptation to eat a bit of humble pie and re-announce himself to the cinema-going public\". In the 1970s, MGM was keen on remaking \"Grand Hotel\" (1932) and hoped to lure Grant out of retirement. Hitchcock had long wanted to make a film based on the idea of \"Hamlet\", with Grant in the lead role. Grant stated that Warren Beatty had made a big effort to get him to play the role of Mr. Jordan in \"Heaven Can Wait\" (1978), which eventually went to James Mason. Morecambe and Stirling claim that Grant had also expressed an interest in appearing in \"A Touch of Class\" (1973), \"The Verdict\" (1982), and a film adaptation of William Goldman's 1983 book about screenwriting, \"Adventures in the Screen Trade\".\nIn the late 1970s and early '80s, Grant became troubled by the deaths of many close friends, including Howard Hughes in 1976, Howard Hawks in 1977, Lord Mountbatten and Barbara Hutton in 1979, Alfred Hitchcock in 1980, Grace Kelly and Ingrid Bergman in 1982, and David Niven in 1983. At the funeral of Mountbatten, he was quoted as remarking to a friend: \"I'm absolutely pooped, and I'm so goddamned old. ...I'm going to quit all next year. I'm going to lie in bed... I shall just close all doors, turn off the telephone, and enjoy my life\". Grace Kelly's death was the hardest on him, as it was unexpected and the two had remained close friends after filming \"To Catch a Thief\". Grant visited Monaco three or four times each year during his retirement, and showed his support for Kelly by joining the board of the Princess Grace Foundation.\nIn 1980, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art put on a two-month retrospective of more than 40 of Grant's films. In 1982, he was honored with the \"Man of the Year\" award by the New York Friars Club at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. He turned 80 on January 18, 1984, and Peter Bogdanovich noticed that a \"serenity\" had come over him. Grant was in good health until he had a mild stroke in October that year. In the last few years of his life, he undertook tours of the United States in the one-man show \"A Conversation with Cary Grant\", in which he would show clips from his films and answer audience questions. He made some 36 public appearances in his last four years, from New Jersey to Texas, and his audiences ranged from elderly film buffs to enthusiastic college students discovering his films for the first time. Grant admitted that the appearances were \"ego-fodder\", remarking that \"I know who I am inside and outside, but it's nice to have the outside, at least, substantiated\".\nCritical reception and commentary.\nFilm critic Pauline Kael, a fan of Grant's, once described him as \"the most publicly seduced male the world has ever known.\" Of his persona, Kael wrote: \"The little bit of shyness and reserve in Grant is pure box-office gold, and being the pursued doesn't make him seem weak or passively soft. It makes him glamorous, and since he's not available as other men, far more desirable.\" \nBusiness interests.\nStirling refers to Grant as \"one of the shrewdest businessmen ever to operate in Hollywood\". His long-term friendship with Howard Hughes from the 1930s onward saw him invited into the most glamorous circles in Hollywood and their lavish parties. Biographers Morecambe and Stirling state that Hughes played a major role in the development of Grant's business interests so that by 1939, he was \"already an astute operator with various commercial interests\". Scott also played a role, encouraging Grant to invest his money in shares, making him a wealthy man by the end of the 1930s. In the 1940s, Grant and Barbara Hutton invested heavily in real estate development in Acapulco at a time when it was little more than a fishing village, and teamed up with Richard Widmark, Roy Rogers, and Red Skelton to buy a hotel there. Behind his business interests was a particularly intelligent mind, to the point that his friend David Niven once said: \"Before computers went into general release, Cary had one in his brain\". Film critic David Thomson believes that Grant's intelligence came across on screen, and stated that \"no one else looked so good and so intelligent at the same time\".\nAfter Grant retired from the screen, he became more active in business. He accepted a position on the board of directors at Faberg\u00e9. This position was not honorary, as some had assumed; Grant regularly attended meetings and traveled internationally to support them. His pay was modest in comparison to the millions of his film career, a salary of a reported $15,000 a year. Such was Grant's influence on the company that George Barrie once claimed that Grant had played a role in the growth of the firm to annual revenues of about $50\u00a0million in 1968, a growth of nearly 80% since the inaugural year in 1964. The position also permitted the use of a private plane, which Grant could use to fly to see his daughter wherever her mother, Dyan Cannon, was working.\nIn 1975, Grant was an appointed director of MGM. In 1980, he sat on the board of MGM Films and MGM Grand Hotels following the division of the parent company. He played an active role in the promotion of MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas when it opened in 1973, and he continued to promote the city throughout the 1970s. When Allan Warren met Grant for a photo shoot that year he noticed how tired Grant looked, and his \"slightly melancholic air\". Grant later joined the boards of Hollywood Park, the Academy of Magical Arts (The Magic Castle, Hollywood, California), and Western Airlines (acquired by Delta Air Lines in 1987).\nPersonal life.\nGrant became a naturalized United States citizen on June 26, 1942, aged 38, at which time he also legally changed his name to Cary Grant. At the time of his naturalization, he listed his middle name as Alexander rather than Alec.\nOne of the wealthiest stars in Hollywood, Grant owned houses in Beverly Hills, Malibu, and Palm Springs. He was immaculate in his personal grooming, and Edith Head, the renowned Hollywood costume designer, appreciated his \"meticulous\" attention to detail and considered him to have had the greatest fashion sense of any actor she had worked with. McCann attributed his \"almost obsessive maintenance\" with tanning, which deepened the older he got, to Douglas Fairbanks, who also had a major influence on his refined sense of dress. McCann notes that because Grant came from a working-class background and was not well educated, he made a particular effort over the course of his career to mix with high society and absorb their knowledge, manners, and etiquette. His image was meticulously crafted from the early days in Hollywood, where he would frequently sunbathe; he avoided being photographed smoking despite smoking two packs a day at the time. Grant quit smoking in the early 1950s through hypnotherapy. He remained health-conscious, staying very trim and athletic even into his late career, though he claimed that he \"never crook[ed] a finger to keep fit\", saying that he did \"everything in moderation. Except making love.\"\nGrant's daughter, Jennifer, said that her father made hundreds of friends from all walks of life, and that their house was frequently visited by the likes of Frank and Barbara Sinatra, Quincy Jones, Gregory Peck and his wife Veronique, Johnny Carson and his wife, Kirk Kerkorian, and Merv Griffin. She said that Grant and Sinatra were the closest of friends, that the two men had a similar radiance and \"indefinable incandescence of charm\", and that they were eternally \"high on life\". While raising Jennifer, Grant archived artifacts of her childhood and adolescence in a bank-quality, room-sized vault he had installed in the house. Jennifer attributed this meticulous collection to the fact that artifacts of his own childhood had been destroyed during the Luftwaffe's bombing of Bristol in World War II (an event that also claimed the lives of his uncle, aunt, cousin, and his cousin's husband and grandson), and he may have wanted to prevent her from experiencing a similar loss.\nGrant lived with costume designer Orry-Kelly from 1925 to 1931 in the West Village, New York, until both moved to Hollywood. They met when Grant was a struggling performer who had just been evicted from a boarding house for nonpayment; they had a volatile, on-and-off relationship over three decades until Orry-Kelly died in 1964, when Grant became one of his pallbearers. While Kelly stops short of claiming that Grant was his boyfriend in his memoir, director Gillian Armstrong's documentary on Kelly's memoir states so outright.\nGrant lived with actor Randolph Scott off and on for 12 years. The two met early in Grant's career, in 1932, at the Paramount studio when Scott was filming \"Sky Bride\" while Grant was shooting \"Sinners in the Sun;\" they moved in together soon afterwards. Whether the relationship was romantic is a matter of biographical dispute. Richard Blackwell, then an actor at RKO, Jerome Zerbe, a photographer who shot a series of publicity photographs of the men in their home, and Scotty Bowers, a Hollywood pimp, all claimed to have slept with the pair. Blackwell wrote in his autobiography that Grant and Scott \"were deeply, madly in love, their devotion was complete\". Biographer and friend of Grant's, Bill Royce, claimed that in old age Grant confessed to him that he and Scott had been bisexual, and that their relationship was the first time he had ever been in love, characterising the memory as: \"Have you ever heard of gravity collapse?\" However, he allegedly also told Royce that while Scott had loved him \"on some profound level\", Scott had not desired him physically to the same degree, but that they had explored the imbalance of their attraction. Since Grant's death, journalists such as David Canfield writing for \"Vanity Fair\" have revisited the rumours and speculation.\nGrant's daughter, Jennifer, has denied her father was bisexual. His ex-wife Dyan Cannon believed he was queer. When Chevy Chase joked on television in 1980 that Grant was a \"homo. What a gal!\", Grant sued him for slander, and Chase was forced to retract his words. Grant became a fan of comedians Morecambe and Wise in the 1960s, and remained friends with Eric Morecambe until his death in 1984.\nGrant began experimenting with LSD in the late 1950s, before it became more widely popular. His wife at the time, Betsy Drake, displayed a keen interest in psychotherapy, and through her Grant developed a considerable knowledge of the field of psychoanalysis. Radiologist Mortimer Hartman began treating him with LSD in the late 1950s, with Grant optimistic that it could make him feel better about himself and rid him of the inner turmoil from his childhood and failed relationships. He had an estimated 100 sessions over several years. For a long time, Grant viewed the drug positively, saying that it was the solution after many years of \"searching for his peace of mind\", and that for the first time in his life he was \"truly, deeply and honestly happy\". Dyan Cannon claimed during a court hearing that he was an \"apostle of LSD\", and that he was still taking the drug in 1967 as part of a remedy to save their relationship. Grant later remarked that \"taking LSD was an utterly foolish thing to do but I was a self-opinionated boor, hiding all kinds of layers and defences, hypocrisy and vanity. I had to get rid of them and wipe the slate clean.\"\nMarriages.\nGrant was married five times. He wed Virginia Cherrill on February 9, 1934, at the Caxton Hall register office in London. She divorced him on March 26, 1935, following charges that he had hit her. They were involved in a bitter divorce case which was widely reported in the press, with Cherrill demanding $1,000 a week from him in benefits from his Paramount earnings. Grant then dated actress Phyllis Brooks from 1937. They considered marriage and vacationed together in Europe in mid-1939, visiting the Roman villa of Dorothy Taylor Dentice di Frasso in Italy, but the relationship ended later that year.\nHe married Barbara Hutton in 1942, one of the wealthiest women in the world, following a $50\u00a0million inheritance from her grandfather Frank Winfield Woolworth. They were derisively nicknamed \"Cash and Cary\", although Grant refused any financial settlement in a prenuptial agreement to avoid the accusation that he married for money. Toward the end of their marriage they lived in a white mansion at 10615 Bellagio Road in Bel Air. They divorced in 1945, although they remained the \"fondest of friends\". He dated Betty Hensel for a period, then married Betsy Drake, the co-star of two of his films, on December 25, 1949. In 1957 Grant had an affair with Sophia Loren. Drake and Grant separated in 1958, divorcing on August 14, 1962. It was his longest marriage.\nGrant married Dyan Cannon on July 22, 1965, at the Desert Inn in Las Vegas, and their daughter Jennifer, his only child, was born on February 26, 1966; he frequently called her his \"best production\". He said of fatherhood:\nMy life changed the day Jennifer was born. I've come to think that the reason we're put on this earth is to procreate. To leave something behind. Not films, because you know that I don't think my films will last very long once I'm gone. But another human being. That's what's important.\nGrant and Cannon separated in August 1967. Grant was abusive towards Cannon.\nOn March 12, 1968, Grant was involved in a car accident in Queens, New York, en route to JFK Airport, when a truck hit the side of his limousine. He was hospitalized for 17 days with three broken ribs and bruising. A female companion, Baroness Gratia von Furstenberg, was also injured in the accident. Grant and Cannon divorced nine days later.\nGrant had a brief affair with actress Cynthia Bouron in the late 1960s. He had been at odds with the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences since 1958, but received an Academy Honorary Award in 1970. He announced that he would attend the awards ceremony to accept it, ending his 12-year boycott of the ceremony. Two days after his announcement, Bouron filed a paternity suit against him and publicly stated that he was the father of her seven-week-old daughter, and she named him as the father on the child's birth certificate. Grant challenged her to a blood test and Bouron failed to provide one, and the court ordered her to remove his name from the certificate. Between 1973 and 1977, he dated British photojournalist Maureen Donaldson, followed by the much younger Victoria Morgan.\nOn April 11, 1981, Grant married Barbara Harris, a British hotel public relations agent 46 years his junior. They met in 1976 at the Royal Lancaster Hotel in London, where Harris was working at the time and Grant was attending a Faberg\u00e9 conference. They became friends, but it was not until 1979 that she moved to live with him in California. Grant's friends felt that she had a positive impact on him, and Prince Rainier of Monaco remarked that Grant had \"never been happier\" than he was in his last years with her.\nPolitics.\nBiographer Nancy Nelson noted that Grant did not openly align himself with political causes but occasionally commented on current events. Grant spoke out against the blacklisting of his friend Charlie Chaplin during the period of McCarthyism, arguing that Chaplin was not a communist and that his status as an entertainer was more important than his political beliefs. In 1950, he told a reporter that he would like to see a female president of the United States but asserted a reluctance to comment on political affairs, believing it was not the place of actors to do so. Grant supported Thomas Dewey in the 1944 United States presidential election, appearing at a rally at the Los Angeles Coliseum after the New York governor won the Republican nomination.\nIn 1963, Grant visited Washington, D.C., and joined Attorney General Robert Kennedy on a visit to a schoolyard and a nearby junkyard, as the two considered how transforming the space into a playground might benefit the city's children.\nOn December 10, 1967, Grant attended the Democratic National Committee Fundraising Dinner at the Plaza Hotel in New York City.\nIn 1976, Grant made a public appearance at the Republican Party National Convention in Kansas City during which he gave a speech in support of Gerald Ford's reelection and for female equality before introducing Betty Ford onto the stage. A 1977 interview with Grant in \"The New York Times\" noted his political beliefs to be conservative but observed that Grant did not actively campaign for candidates.\nDeath.\nGrant was at the Adler Theater in Davenport, Iowa, on the afternoon of Saturday, November 29, 1986, preparing for his performance in \"A Conversation with Cary Grant\" when he was taken ill; he had been feeling unwell as he arrived at the theater. Basil Williams photographed him there and thought that he still looked his usual suave self, but he noticed that he seemed very tired and that he stumbled once in the auditorium. Williams recalls that Grant rehearsed for half an hour before \"something seemed wrong\" all of a sudden, and he disappeared backstage. Grant was taken back to the Blackhawk Hotel where he and his wife had checked in, and a doctor was called and discovered that Grant was having a massive stroke, with a blood pressure reading of 210 over 130. Grant refused to be taken to the hospital. The doctor recalled: \"The stroke was getting worse. In only fifteen minutes he deteriorated rapidly. It was terrible watching him die and not being able to help. But he wouldn't let us.\" By 8:45\u00a0p.m., Grant had slipped into a coma and was taken to St. Luke's Hospital in Davenport, Iowa. He spent 45 minutes in the emergency room before being transferred to intensive care. He died at 11:22\u00a0pm, aged 82.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDeath? Of course I think of it. But I don't want to dwell on it\u00a0... I think the thing you think about when you're my age is how you're going to do it and whether you'll behave well.\n\u2014Grant at age 73\nAn editorial in \"The New York Times\" stated: \"Cary Grant was not supposed to die. ... Cary Grant was supposed to stick around, our perpetual touchstone of charm and elegance and romance and youth.\" His body was taken back to California, where it was cremated and his ashes scattered in the Pacific Ocean. No funeral was conducted for him following his request, which Roderick Mann remarked was appropriate for \"the private man who didn't want the nonsense of a funeral\". His estate was worth in the region of sixty to eighty\u00a0million dollars; the bulk of it went to Barbara Harris and Jennifer.\nScreen persona.\nMcCann wrote that one of the reasons why Grant's film career was so successful is that he was not conscious of how handsome he was on screen, acting in a fashion that was most unexpected and unusual from a Hollywood star of that period. George Cukor once stated: \"You see, he didn't depend on his looks. He wasn't a narcissist, he acted as though he were just an ordinary young man. And that made it all the more appealing, that a handsome young man was funny; that was especially unexpected and good because we think, 'Well, if he's a Beau Brummel, he can't be either funny or intelligent', but he proved otherwise\". Jennifer Grant acknowledged that her father neither relied on his looks nor was a character actor, and said that he was just the opposite of that, playing the \"basic man\".\nGrant's appeal was unusually broad among both men and women. Pauline Kael remarked that men wanted to be him and women dreamed of dating him. She noticed that Grant treated his female co-stars differently than many of the leading men at the time, regarding them as subjects with multiple qualities rather than \"treating them as sex objects\". Leslie Caron said that he was the most talented leading man she worked with. David Shipman writes that \"more than most stars, he belonged to the public\". A number of critics have argued that Grant had the rare star ability to turn a mediocre picture into a good one. Philip T. Hartung of \"The Commonweal\" stated in his review for \"Mr. Lucky\" (1943) that, if it \"weren't for Cary Grant's persuasive personality, the whole thing would melt away to nothing at all\". Political theorist C. L. R. James saw Grant as a \"new and very important symbol\", a new type of Englishman who differed from Leslie Howard and Ronald Colman, who represented the \"freedom, natural grace, simplicity, and directness which characterise such different American types as Jimmy Stewart and Ronald Reagan\", which ultimately symbolized the growing relationship between Britain and America.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnce he realized that each movement could be stylized for humor, the eyepopping, the cocked head, the forward lunge, and the slightly ungainly stride became as certain as the pen strokes of a master cartoonist.\n\u2014Film critic Pauline Kael on the development of Grant's comic acting in the late 1930s\nMcCann notes that Grant typically played \"wealthy privileged characters who never seemed to have any need to work in order to maintain their glamorous and hedonistic lifestyle\". Martin Stirling thought that Grant had an acting range that was \"greater than any of his contemporaries\", but felt that a number of critics underrated him as an actor. He believes that Grant was always at his \"physical and verbal best in situations that bordered on farce\". Charles Champlin identifies a paradox in Grant's screen persona, in his unusual ability to \"mix polish and pratfalls in successive scenes\". He remarks that Grant was \"refreshingly able to play the near-fool, the fey idiot, without compromising his masculinity or surrendering to camp for its own sake\". Wansell further notes that Grant could, \"with the arch of an eyebrow or the merest hint of a smile, question his own image\". Stanley Donen stated that his real \"magic\" came from his attention to minute details and always seeming real, which came from \"enormous amounts of work\" rather than being God-given. Grant remarked of his career: \"I guess to a certain extent I did eventually become the characters I was playing. I played at being someone I wanted to be until I became that person, or he became me\". He professed that the real Cary Grant was more like his scruffy, unshaven fisherman in \"Father Goose\" than the \"well-tailored charmer\" of \"Charade\".\nGrant often poked fun at himself with statements such as, \"Everyone wants to be Cary Grant\u2014even I want to be Cary Grant\", and in ad-lib lines such as in \"His Girl Friday\" (1940): \"Listen, the last man who said that to me was Archie Leach, just a week before he cut his throat.\" In \"Arsenic and Old Lace\" (1944), a gravestone is seen bearing the name Archie Leach. Alfred Hitchcock thought that Grant was very effective in darker roles, with a mysterious, dangerous quality, remarking that \"there is a frightening side to Cary that no one can quite put their finger on\". Wansell notes that this darker, mysterious side extended to his personal life, which he took great lengths to cover up to retain his debonair image. In a profile, Tom Wolfe wrote that \"Cary Grant plays a wonderful Cary Grant.\" Upon being recognized by a fan, Wolfe writes that Grant \"cocks his head and gives her the Cary Grant mock-quizzical look\u2014just like he does in the movies\u2014the look that says, 'I don't know what's happening, but we're not going to take it very seriously, are we? Or are we?'\"\nHonors and awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNo other man seemed so classless and self-assured\u00a0... at ease with the romantic as the comic\u00a0... aged so well and with such fine style\u00a0... in short, played the part so well: Cary Grant made men seem like a good idea.\n\u2014Biographer Graham McCann on Cary Grant.\nBiographers Morecambe and Stirling believe that Cary Grant was the \"greatest leading man Hollywood had ever known\". Schickel stated that there are \"very few stars who achieve the magnitude of Cary Grant, art of a very high and subtle order\" and thought that he was the \"best star actor there ever was in the movies\". David Thomson and directors Stanley Donen and Howard Hawks concurred that Grant was the greatest and most important actor in the history of the cinema. He was a favorite of Hitchcock's, who admired him and called him \"the only actor I ever loved in my whole life\". He remained one of Hollywood's top box-office attractions for almost 30 years. Pauline Kael stated that the world still thinks of him affectionately because he \"embodies what seems a happier time\u2212a time when we had a simpler relationship to a performer\".\nGrant was nominated for Academy Awards for \"Penny Serenade\" (1941) and \"None But the Lonely Heart\" (1944), but he never won a competitive Oscar. He did, however, receive a special Academy Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1970. The inscription on his statuette read \"To Cary Grant, for his unique mastery of the art of screen acting with respect and affection of his colleagues\". Presenting the award to Grant, Frank Sinatra announced: \"No one has brought more pleasure to more people for so many years than Cary has, and nobody has done so many things so well\".\nGrant was awarded a special plaque at the Straw Hat Awards in New York in May 1975, which recognized him as a \"star and superstar in entertainment\". In July 1976, Betty Ford invited him to attend the Bicentennial dinner for Queen Elizabeth II at the White House and to give a speech introducing her at the Republican National Convention in Kansas City the following month. He was invited to a royal charity gala in 1978 at the London Palladium. In 1979, he hosted the American Film Institute's tribute to Alfred Hitchcock, and presented Laurence Olivier with his honorary Oscar.\nIn 1981, Grant was accorded the Kennedy Center Honors. In 1984, a theater on the MGM lot was renamed the \"Cary Grant Theatre\". In 1995, more than 100 leading film directors were asked to reveal their favorite actor of all time in a \"Time Out\" poll, and Grant came second only to Marlon Brando. In December 2001, a statue of Grant by Graham Ibbeson was unveiled in Millennium Square, a regenerated area next to Bristol Harbour, Bristol, the city where he was born. In November 2005, Grant again came first in \"Premiere\" magazine's list of \"The 50 Greatest Movie Stars of All Time\". The biennial Cary Comes Home Festival was established in 2014 in his hometown Bristol. McCann declared that Grant was \"quite simply, the funniest actor cinema has ever produced\".\nThere is a street named after Grant in San Antonio, Texas.\nIn November 2024, a Historic England national blue plaque was unveiled on his childhood home at 50 Berkeley Road, Bishopston, Bristol, where he lived from about age four to six, by Heritage Minister Sir Chris Bryant.\nPortrayals.\nGrant was portrayed by John Gavin in the 1980 made-for-television biographical film ', and in the similar 1987 TV serialisation ', James Read played Grant as Barbara Hutton's third husband.\nThe British miniseries \"Archie\", covering Grant's life, was broadcast from November 2023 on ITV. Grant is portrayed by Dainton Anderson, Oaklee Pendergast, Calam Lynch and Jason Isaacs at successive stages of his life.\nFilmography and stage work.\nFrom 1932 to 1966, Grant starred in over seventy films. In 1999, the American Film Institute named him the second-greatest male star of Golden Age Hollywood cinema (after Humphrey Bogart). He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for \"Penny Serenade\" (1941) and \"None but the Lonely Heart\" (1944).\nWidely recognized for comedic and dramatic roles, among his best-known films are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "38966", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38966", "title": "Aqueduct (structure)", "text": ""}
{"id": "38972", "revid": "34670598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38972", "title": "Chinatown", "text": "Ethnic enclave of Chinese expatriates\nChinatown () is a common term used to describe an ethnic enclave of Chinese people located outside of Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan, typically situated in an urban area. Chinatowns can be found around the world, including in Europe, Asia, Africa, Oceania, and the Americas. The history of Chinatowns date back to the Tang dynasty in the 10th century, arising from the nation's important role in global trade.\nBinondo in Manila, established in 1594, is recognized as the world's oldest standing Chinatown. Notable early examples outside Asia include San Francisco's Chinatown in the United States and Melbourne's Chinatown in Australia, which were founded in the early 1850s during the California and Victoria gold rushes, respectively. A more modern example, in Montville, Connecticut, was caused by the displacement of Chinese workers in New York's Manhattan Chinatown following the September 11th attacks in 2001.\nDefinition.\nOxford Dictionaries defines \"Chinatown\" as \"...a district of any non-Asian town, especially a city or seaport, in which the population is predominantly of Chinese origin\". However, some Chinatowns may have little to do with China. Some \"Vietnamese\" enclaves are in fact a city's \"second Chinatown\", and some Chinatowns are in fact pan-Asian, meaning they could also be counted as a Koreatown or Little India. One example includes Asiatown in Cleveland, Ohio. It was initially referred to as a Chinatown but was subsequently renamed due to the influx of non-Chinese Asian Americans who opened businesses there. Today the district acts as a unifying factor for the Chinese, Taiwanese, Korean, Japanese, Filipino, Indian, Vietnamese, Cambodian, Laotian, Nepalese and Thai communities of Cleveland.\nFurther ambiguities with the term can include Chinese ethnoburbs which by definition are \"...suburban ethnic clusters of residential areas and business districts in large metropolitan areas An article in \"The New York Times\" blurs the line further by categorizing very different Chinatowns such as Chinatown, Manhattan, which exists in an urban setting as \"traditional\"; Monterey Park's Chinatown, which exists in a \"suburban\" setting (and labeled as such); and Austin, Texas's Chinatown, which is in essence a \"fabricated\" Chinese-themed mall. This contrasts with narrower definitions, where the term only described Chinatown in a city setting.\nHistory.\nTrading centers populated predominantly by Chinese men and their native spouses have long existed throughout Southeast Asia. Emigration to other parts of the world from China accelerated in the 1860s with the signing of the Treaty of Peking (1860), which opened China's borders to free movement. Early emigrants came primarily from the coastal provinces of Guangdong (Canton, Kwangtung) and Fujian (Fukien, Hokkien) in southeastern China \u2013 where the people generally speak Toishanese, Cantonese, Hakka, Teochew (Chiuchow), and Hokkien. In the late 19th century and early 20th century, a significant amount of Chinese emigration to North America originated from four counties called Sze Yup, located west of the Pearl River Delta in Guangdong province, making Toishanese a dominant variety of the Chinese language spoken in Chinatowns in Canada and the United States.\nAs conditions in China have improved in recent decades, many Chinatowns have lost their initial mission, which was to provide a transitional place into a new culture. As net migration has slowed in them, the smaller Chinatowns have slowly decayed, often to the point of becoming purely historical and no longer serving as ethnic enclaves.\nIn Asia.\nIn the Spanish Philippines, where the oldest surviving Chinatowns are located, the district where Chinese migrants (\"sangleyes\") were required to live is called a pari\u00e1n, which were originally a marketplace for trade goods. Most of them were established in the late 16th century and became settlements of Chinese migrants due to the early Spanish colonial policy of ethnic segregation. There were numerous pari\u00e1ns throughout the Philippines in various locations, the names of which still survive into modern district names. This include the Pari\u00e1n de Arroceros of Intramuros, Manila (which was eventually moved several times, ending up in Binondo). The term was also carried into Latin America by Filipino migrants. The central market place of Mexico City (now part of Z\u00f3calo) selling imported goods from the Manila galleons in the 18th and early 19th centuries was called \"Pari\u00e1n de Manila\" (or just \"Pari\u00e1n\").\nAlong the coastal areas of Southeast Asia, several Chinese settlements existed as early as the 16th century according to Zheng He and Tom\u00e9 Pires' travel accounts. Melaka during the Portuguese colonial period, for instance, had a large Chinese population in Campo China. They settled down at port towns under the authority's approval for trading. After the European colonial powers seized and ruled the port towns in the 16th century, Chinese supported European traders and colonists, and created autonomous settlements.\nSeveral Asian Chinatowns, although not yet called by that name, have a long history. Those in Nagasaki, Kobe, Kuwana, and Yokohama, Japan, Binondo in Manila, Hoi An and Bao Vinh in central Vietnam all existed in 1600. Glodok, the Chinese quarter of Jakarta, Indonesia, dates to 1740.\nChinese presence in India dates back to the 5th century CE, with the first recorded Chinese settler in Calcutta named Young Atchew around 1780. Chinatowns first appeared in the Indian cities of Kolkata, Mumbai, and Chennai.\nThe Chinatown centered on Yaowarat Road in Bangkok, Thailand, was founded at the same time as the city itself, in 1782.\nOutside of Asia.\n Many Chinese immigrants arrived in Liverpool in the late 1850s in the employ of the Blue Funnel Shipping Line, a cargo transport company established by Alfred Holt. The commercial shipping line created strong trade links between the cities of Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Liverpool, mainly in the importation of silk, cotton, and tea. They settled near the docks in south Liverpool, this area was heavily bombed during World War II, causing the Chinese community moving to the current location Liverpool Chinatown on Nelson Street.\nThe Chinatown in San Francisco is one of the largest in North America and the oldest north of Mexico. It served as a port of entry for early Chinese immigrants from the 1850s to the 1900s. The area was the one geographical region deeded by the city government and private property owners which allowed Chinese persons to inherit and inhabit dwellings within the city. Many Chinese found jobs working for large companies seeking a source of labor, most famously as part of the Central Pacific on the Transcontinental Railroad. Since it started in Omaha, that city had a notable Chinatown for almost a century. Other cities in North America where Chinatowns were founded in the mid-nineteenth century include almost every major settlement along the West Coast from San Diego to Victoria. Other early immigrants worked as mine workers or independent prospectors hoping to strike it rich during the 1849 Gold Rush.\nEconomic opportunity drove the building of further Chinatowns in the United States. The initial Chinatowns were built in the Western United States in states such as California, Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Utah, Colorado and Arizona. As the transcontinental railroad was built, more Chinatowns started to appear in railroad towns such as St. Louis, Chicago, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh and Butte, Montana. Chinatowns then subsequently emerged in many East Coast cities, including New York City, Boston, Philadelphia, Providence and Baltimore. With the passage of the Emancipation Proclamation, many southern states such as Arkansas, Louisiana and Georgia began to hire Chinese for work in place of slave labor.\nThe history of Chinatowns was not always peaceful, especially when labor disputes arose. Racial tensions flared when lower-paid Chinese workers replaced white miners in many mountain-area Chinatowns, such as in Wyoming with the Rock Springs Massacre. Many of these frontier Chinatowns became extinct as American racism surged and the Chinese Exclusion Act was passed.\nIn Australia, the Victorian gold rush, which began in 1851, attracted Chinese prospectors from the Guangdong area. A community began to form in the eastern end of Little Bourke Street, Melbourne by the mid-1850s; the area is still the center of the Melbourne Chinatown, making it the oldest continuously occupied Chinatown in a western city (since the San Francisco one was destroyed and rebuilt). Gradually expanding, it reached a peak in the early 20th century, with Chinese business, mainly furniture workshops, occupying a block wide swath of the city, overlapping into the adjacent 'Little Lon' red light district. With restricted immigration it shrunk again, becoming a strip of Chinese restaurants by the late 1970s, when it was celebrated with decorative arches. However, with a recent huge influx of students from mainland China, it is now the center of a much larger area of noodle shops, travel agents, restaurants, and groceries. The Australian gold rushes also saw the development of a Chinatown in Sydney, at first around The Rocks, near the docks, but it has moved twice, first in the 1890s to the east side of the Haymarket area, near the new markets, then in the 1920s concentrating on the west side. Nowadays, Sydney's Chinatown is centered on Dixon Street.\nOther Chinatowns in European capitals, including Paris and London, were established at the turn of the 20th century. The first Chinatown in London was located in the Limehouse area of the East End of London at the start of the 20th century. The Chinese population engaged in business which catered to the Chinese sailors who frequented the Docklands. The area acquired a bad reputation from exaggerated reports of opium dens and slum housing.\nFrance received a large settlement of Chinese immigrant laborers, mostly from the city of Wenzhou, in the Zhejiang province of China. Significant Chinatowns sprung up in Belleville and the 13th arrondissement of Paris.\n1970s to the present.\nBy the late 1970s, refugees and exiles from the Vietnam War played a significant part in the redevelopment of Chinatowns in developed Western countries. As a result, many existing Chinatowns have become pan-Asian business districts and residential neighborhoods. By contrast, most Chinatowns in the past had been largely inhabited by Chinese from southeastern China.\nIn 2001, the events of September 11 resulted in a mass migration of about 14,000 Chinese workers from Manhattan's Chinatown to Montville, Connecticut, due to the fall of the garment industry. Chinese workers transitioned to casino jobs fueled by the development of the Mohegan Sun casino.\nIn 2012, Tijuana's Chinatown formed as a result of availability of direct flights to China. The La Mesa District of Tijuana was formerly a small enclave, but has tripled in size as a result of direct flights to Shanghai. It has an ethnic Chinese population rise from 5,000 in 2009 to roughly 15,000 in 2012, overtaking Mexicali's Chinatown as the largest Chinese enclave in Mexico.\nThe New York metropolitan area, consisting of New York City, Long Island, and nearby areas within the states of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania, is home to the largest Chinese-American population of any metropolitan area within the United States and the largest Chinese population outside of China, enumerating an estimated 893,697 in 2017, and including at least 12 Chinatowns, including nine in New York City proper alone. Steady immigration from mainland China, both legal and illegal, has fueled Chinese-American population growth in the New York metropolitan area. New York's status as an alpha global city, its extensive mass transit system, and the New York metropolitan area's enormous economic marketplace are among the many reasons it remains a major international immigration hub. The Manhattan Chinatown contains the largest concentration of ethnic Chinese in the Western Hemisphere, and the Flushing Chinatown in Queens has become the world's largest Chinatown.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected tourism and business in Chinatown, San Francisco and Chinatown, Chicago, Illinois as well as others worldwide.\nCharacteristics.\nThe features described below are characteristic of many modern Chinatowns.\nDemographics.\nThe early Chinatowns such as those in San Francisco and Los Angeles in the United States were naturally destinations for people of Chinese descent as migration were the result of opportunities such as the California Gold Rush and the Transcontinental Railroad drawing the population in, creating natural Chinese enclaves that were almost always 100% exclusively Han Chinese, which included both people born in China and in the enclave, in this case American-born Chinese. In some free countries such as the United States and Canada, housing laws that prevent discrimination also allows neighborhoods that may have been characterized as \"All Chinese\" to also allow non-Chinese to reside in these communities. For example, the Chinatown in Philadelphia has a sizeable non-Chinese population residing within the community.\nA recent study also suggests that the demographic change is also driven by gentrification of what were previously Chinatown neighborhoods. The influx of luxury housing is speeding up the gentrification of such neighborhoods. The trend for emergence of these types of natural enclaves is on the decline (with the exceptions being the continued growth and emergence of newer Chinatowns in Queens and Brooklyn in New York City), only to be replaced by newer \"Disneyland-like\" attractions, such as a new Chinatown that will be built in the Catskills region of New York. This includes the endangerment of existing historical Chinatowns that will eventually stop serving the needs of Chinese immigrants.\nNewer developments like those in Norwich, Connecticut, and the San Gabriel Valley, which are not necessarily considered \"Chinatowns\" in the sense that they do not necessarily contain the Chinese architectures or Chinese language signs as signatures of an officially sanctioned area that was designated either in law or signage stating so, differentiate areas that are called \"Chinatowns\" versus locations that have \"significant\" populations of people of Chinese descent. For example, San Jose, California in the United States has 63,434 people (2010 U.S. Census) of Chinese descent, and yet \"does not have a Chinatown\". Some \"official\" Chinatowns have Chinese populations much lower than that.\nTown-Scape.\nMany tourist-destination metropolitan Chinatowns can be distinguished by large red arch entrance structures known in Mandarin Chinese as \"Paifang\" (sometimes accompanied by imperial guardian lion statues on either side of the structure, to greet visitors). Other Chinese architectural styles such as the Chinese Garden of Friendship in Sydney Chinatown and the Chinese stone lions at the gate to the Victoria, British Columbia Chinatown are present in some Chinatowns. Mahale Chiniha, the Chinatown in Iran, contains many buildings that were constructed in the Chinese architectural style.\nPaifangs usually have special inscriptions in Chinese. Historically, these gateways were donated to a particular city as a gift from the Republic of China and People's Republic of China, or local governments (such as Chinatown, San Francisco) and business organizations. The long-neglected Chinatown in Havana, Cuba, received materials for its paifang from the People's Republic of China as part of the Chinatown's gradual renaissance. Construction of these red arches is often financed by local financial contributions from the Chinatown community. Some of these structures span an entire intersection, and some are smaller in height and width. Some paifang can be made of wood, masonry or steel and may incorporate an elaborate or simple design.\nBenevolent and business associations.\nA major component of many Chinatowns is the family benevolent association, which provides some degree of aid to immigrants. These associations generally provide social support, religious services, death benefits (members' names in Chinese are generally enshrined on tablets and posted on walls), meals, and recreational activities for ethnic Chinese, especially for older Chinese migrants. Membership in these associations can be based on members sharing a common Chinese surname or belonging to a common clan, spoken Chinese dialect, specific village, region or country of origin, and so on. Many have their own facilities.\nSome examples include San Francisco's prominent Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association (\u4e2d\u83ef\u7e3d\u6703\u9928 \"Zh\u014dnghu\u00e1 Z\u01d2ng Hu\u00ecgu\u01cen\"), aka Chinese Six Companies and Los Angeles' Southern California Teochew Association. The Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association is among the largest umbrella groups of benevolent associations in the North America, which branches in several Chinatowns. Politically, the CCBA has traditionally been aligned with the Kuomintang and the Republic of China.\nThe London Chinatown Chinese Association is active in Chinatown, London. Chinatown, Paris has an institution in the \"Association des R\u00e9sidents en France d'origine indochinoise\" and it servicing overseas Chinese immigrants in Paris who were born in the former French Indochina.\nTraditionally, Chinatown-based associations have also been aligned with ethnic Chinese business interests, such as restaurant, grocery, and laundry (antiquated) associations in Chinatowns in North America. In Chicago's Chinatown, the On Leong Merchants Association was active.\nNames.\nEnglish.\n\"Chinatown\" is the most common name in the English language today, but several alternate English names for Chinatown include China Town (generally used in British and Australian English), The Chinese District, Chinese Quarter, Little Canton, Little China, and China Alley (an antiquated term used primarily in several rural towns in the western United States for a Chinese community; some of these are now historical sites). In the case of Lillooet, British Columbia, Canada, China Alley was a parallel commercial street adjacent to the town's Main Street, enjoying a view over the river valley adjacent and also over the main residential part of Chinatown, which was largely of adobe construction. All traces of Chinatown and China Alley there have disappeared, despite a once large and prosperous community.\nThe earliest known use of the term \"Chinatown\" dates back to 1606, though it would not become widely used until centuries later. Its modern usage appears to have emerged in connection with thee Chinese quarter of Singapore, which by 1844 was being called \"China Town\" or \"Chinatown\" by the British colonial government. This may have been a word-for-word translation into English of the Malay name for that quarter, which in those days was probably \"Kampong China\" or possibly \"Kota China\" or \"Kampong Tionghua/Chunghwa/Zhonghua\".\nThe first modern appearance of the term \"Chinatown\" outside Singapore may have been in 1852, in a book by the Rev. Hatfield, who applied the term to the Chinese part of the main settlement on the remote South Atlantic island of St. Helena. The island was a regular way-station on the voyage to Europe and North America from Indian Ocean ports, including Singapore. Chinatowns in the United States were initially called \"China Quarter\", or \"Little Canton\" because most Chinese immigrants were Taishanese people from Guangdong province. \"Little Canton\" was also used in Australia and Mexico.\nInspired by its use in St. Helena, the term \"Chinatown\" was popularized in the United States by the San Francisco press beginning in 1853. One of the earliest American usages dates to 1855, when San Francisco newspaper \"The Daily Alta California\" described a \"pitched battle on the streets of [SF's] Chinatown\". Other \"Alta\" articles from the late 1850s make it clear that areas called \"Chinatown\" existed at that time in several other California cities, including Oroville and San Andres. By 1869, \"Chinatown had acquired its full modern meaning all over the U.S. and Canada. For instance, an Ohio newspaper wrote: \"From San Diego to Sitka..., every town and hamlet has its 'Chinatown'.\"\nIn British publications before the 1890s, \"Chinatown\" appeared mainly in connection with California. At first, Australian and New Zealand journalists also regarded Chinatowns as Californian phenomena. However, they began using the term to denote local Chinese communities as early as 1861 in Australia and 1873 in New Zealand. In most other countries, the custom of calling local Chinese communities \"Chinatowns\" is not older than the twentieth century.\nIn Chinese.\nIn Chinese, Chinatown is usually called , in Cantonese \"Tong jan gai\", in Mandarin \"T\u00e1ngr\u00e9nji\u0113\", in Hakka \"Tong ngin gai\", and in Toisan \"Hong ngin gai\", literally meaning \"Tang people's street(s)\". The Tang dynasty was a zenith of the Chinese civilization, after which some Chinese call themselves. Some Chinatowns are indeed just one single street, such as the relatively short Fisgard Street in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.\nA more modern Chinese name is (Cantonese: Waa Fau, Mandarin: Hu\u00e1b\u00f9) meaning \"Chinese City\", used in the semi-official Chinese translations of some cities' documents and signs. \"B\u00f9\", pronounced sometimes in Mandarin as \"f\u00f9\", usually means \"seaport\"; but in this sense, it means \"city\" or \"town\". \"Tong jan fau\" ( \"Tang people's town\") is also used in Cantonese nowadays. The literal word-for-word translation of \"Chinatown\"\u2014\"Zh\u014dnggu\u00f3 Ch\u00e9ng\" () is also used, but more frequently by visiting Chinese nationals rather than immigrants of Chinese descent who live in various Chinatowns.\nChinatowns in Southeast Asia have unique Chinese names used by the local Chinese, as there are large populations of people who are Overseas Chinese, living within the various major cities of Southeast Asia. As the population of Overseas Chinese, is widely dispersed in various enclaves, across each major Southeast Asian city, specific Chinese names are used instead.\nFor example, in Singapore, where 2.8 million ethnic Chinese constitute a majority 74% of the resident population, the Chinese name for Chinatown is \"Ni\u00fach\u0113sh\u01d4i\" (, Hokkien POJ: \"G\u00fb-chia-ch\u00fai\"), which literally means \"ox-cart water\" from the Malay 'Kreta Ayer' in reference to the water carts that used to ply the area. The Chinatown in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, (where 2 million ethnic Chinese comprise 30% of the population of Greater Kuala Lumpur) while officially known as Petaling Street (Malay: \"Jalan Petaling\"), is referred to by Malaysian Chinese by its Cantonese name \"ci4 cong2 gaai1\" (, pinyin: \"C\u00edch\u01ceng Ji\u0113\"), literally \"tapioca factory street\", after a tapioca starch factory that once stood in the area. In Manila, Philippines, the area is called M\u00ednl\u00fanlu\u00f2 Q\u016b , literally meaning the \"M\u00edn and Lu\u00f2 Rivers confluence district\" but is actually a transliteration of the local term \"Binondo\" and an allusion to its proximity to the Pasig River.\nOther languages.\nIn Philippine Spanish, the term used for Chinatown districts is pari\u00e1n, a Spanish term derived from Cebuano (\"market\", \"bazaar\", or \"trading place\"). In the rest of the Spanish Empire, the Spanish-language term is usually barrio chino (\"Chinese neighborhood\"; plural: \"barrios chinos\"), used in Spain and Latin America. (However, \"barrio chino\" or its Catalan cognate \"barri xin\u00e8s\" do not always refer to a Chinese neighborhood: these are also common terms for a disreputable district with drugs and prostitution, and often no connection to the Chinese.).\nIn Portuguese, Chinatown is often referred to as Bairro chin\u00eas (\"the Chinese Neighbourhood\"; plural: \"bairros chineses\").\nIn Francophone regions (such as France and Quebec), Chinatown is often referred to as le quartier chinois (\"the Chinese Neighbourhood\"; plural: \"les quartiers chinois\"). The most prominent Francophone Chinatowns are located in Paris and Montreal.\nThe Vietnamese term for Chinatown is \"Khu ng\u01b0\u1eddi Hoa\" (Chinese district) or \"ph\u1ed1 T\u00e0u\" (Chinese street). Vietnamese language is prevalent in Chinatowns of Paris, Los Angeles, Boston, Philadelphia, Toronto, and Montreal as ethnic Chinese from Vietnam have set up shop in them.\nIn Japanese, the term \"ch\u016bkagai\" (\u4e2d\u83ef\u8857, literally \"Chinese Street\") is the translation used for Yokohama and Nagasaki Chinatown.\nIn Indonesia, Chinatown is known as Pecinan, a shortened term of \"pe-cina-an\", means everything related to the Chinese people. Most of these pecinans are usually located in Java.\nSome languages have adopted the English-language term, such as Dutch and German.\nLocations.\nAfrica.\nThere are three noteworthy Chinatowns in Africa located in the coastal African nations of Madagascar, Mauritius and South Africa. South Africa has the largest Chinatown and the largest Chinese population of any African country and remains a popular destination for Chinese immigrants coming to Africa. Derrick Avenue in Cyrildene, Johannesburg, hosts South Africa's largest Chinatown.\nAmerica.\nIn the Americas, which includes North America, Central America and South America, Chinatowns have been around since the 1800s. The most prominent ones exist in the United States and Canada in New York, Boston, San Francisco, Chicago, Toronto and Vancouver. The New York City metropolitan area is home to the largest ethnically Chinese population outside of Asia, comprising an estimated 893,697 uniracial individuals as of 2017, including at least 12 Chinatowns \u2013 six (or nine, including the emerging Chinatowns in Corona and Whitestone, Queens, and East Harlem, Manhattan) in New York City proper, and one each in Nassau County, Long Island; Edison, New Jersey; and Parsippany-Troy Hills, New Jersey, not to mention fledgling ethnic Chinese enclaves emerging throughout the New York City metropolitan area. San Francisco, a Pacific port city, has the oldest and longest continuous running Chinatown in the Western Hemisphere. In Canada, The Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area is home to the 2nd largest ethnically Chinese population outside of Asia, comprising 694,970 individuals as of the 2021 Census. Vancouver's Chinatown is the country's largest.\nThe oldest Chinatown in the Americas is in Mexico City and dates back to at least the early 17th century. Since the 1970s, new arrivals have typically hailed from Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan. Latin American Chinatowns may include the descendants of original migrants \u2013 often of mixed Chinese and Latin parentage \u2013 and more recent immigrants from East Asia. Most Asian Latin Americans are of Cantonese and Hakka origin. Estimates widely vary on the number of Chinese descendants in Latin America. Notable Chinatowns also exist in Chinatown, Lima, Peru.\nIn Brazil, the Liberdade neighborhood in S\u00e3o Paulo has, along with a large Japanese community, an important Chinese community. There is a project for a Chinatown in the Mercado neighborhood, close to the Municipal Market and the commercial Rua 25 de Mar\u00e7o.\nAsia.\nChinatowns in Asia are widespread with a large concentration of overseas Chinese in East Asia and Southeast Asia and ethnic Chinese whose ancestors came from southern China \u2013 particularly the provinces of Guangdong, Fujian, and Hainan \u2013 and settled in countries such as Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Singapore, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam centuries ago\u2014starting as early as the Tang dynasty, but mostly notably in the 17th through the 19th centuries (during the reign of the Qing dynasty), and well into the 20th century. Today the Chinese diaspora in Asia is largely concentrated in Southeast Asia however the legacy of the once widespread overseas Chinese communities in Asia is evident in the many Chinatowns that are found across East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia.\nVietnam houses the largest Chinatown by size in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon).\nAustralia and Oceania.\nThe Chinatown of Melbourne lies within the Melbourne central business district and centers on the eastern end of Little Bourke Street. It extends between the corners of Swanston and Exhibition Streets. Melbourne's Chinatown originated during the Victorian gold rush in 1851, and is notable as the oldest Chinatown in Australia. It has also been claimed to be the longest continuously running Chinese community outside of Asia, but only because the 1906 San Francisco earthquake all but destroyed the Chinatown in San Francisco in California.\nSydney's main Chinatown centers on Sussex Street in the Sydney downtown. It stretches from Central Station in the east to Darling Harbour in the west, and is Australia's largest Chinatown.\nThe Chinatown of Adelaide was originally built in the 1960s and was renovated in the 1980s. It is located near Adelaide Central Market and the Adelaide Central bus station.\nChinatown Gold Coast is a precinct in the Central Business District of Southport, Queensland, that runs through Davenport Street and Young Street. The precinct extends between Nerang Street in the north and Garden Street/Scarborough Street east-west. Redevelopment of the precinct was established in 2013 and completed in 2015 in time for Chinese New Year celebrations.\nThere are additional Chinatowns in Brisbane, Perth, and Broome in Australia.\nEurope.\nSeveral urban Chinatowns exist in major European capital cities. There is Chinatown, London, England as well as major Chinatowns in Birmingham, Liverpool, Newcastle, and Manchester. Berlin, Germany has one established Chinatown in the area around Kantstrasse of Charlottenburg in the West. Antwerp, Belgium has also seen an upstart Chinese community, that has been recognized by the local authorities since 2011. The city council of Cardiff has plans to recognize the Chinese Diaspora in the city.\nThe Chinatown in Paris, located in the 13th arrondissement, is the largest in Europe, where many Vietnamese \u2013 specifically ethnic Chinese refugees from Vietnam \u2013 have settled and in Belleville in the northeast of Paris as well as in Lyon. In Italy, there is a Chinatown in Milan between Via Luigi Canonica and Via Paolo Sarpi and others in Rome and Prato. In the Netherlands, Chinatowns exist in Amsterdam, Rotterdam and the Hague.\nIn the United Kingdom, several exist in Birmingham, Liverpool, London, Manchester and Newcastle Upon Tyne. The Chinatown in Liverpool is the oldest Chinese community in Europe. The Chinatown in London was established in the Limehouse district in the late 19th century. The Chinatown in Manchester is located in central Manchester.\nIn popular culture.\nChinatowns have been portrayed in various films including \"The Joy Luck Club\", \"Big Trouble in Little China\", \"Year of the Dragon\", \"Flower Drum Song\", \"The Lady from Shanghai\" and \"Chinatown\". Within the context of the last film \"Chinatown\" is used primarily as an extended metaphor for any situation in which an outside entity seeks to intervene without having the local knowledge required to understand the consequences of that intervention. The neighborhood or district is often associated with being outside the normal rule of law or isolated from the social norms of the larger society.\nChinatowns have also been mentioned in the songs \"Queen of Chinatown\" by Amanda Lear and \"Kung Fu Fighting\" by Carl Douglas whose song lyrics says \"...There was funky China men from funky Chinatown...\"\nThe martial arts actor Bruce Lee is well known as a person who was born in the Chinatown of San Francisco. Other notable Chinese Americans such as politician Gary Locke and NBA player Jeremy Lin grew up in suburbs with lesser connections to traditional Chinatowns. Neighborhood activists and politicians have increased in prominence in some cities, and some are starting to attract support from non-Chinese voters.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38974", "revid": "32743227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38974", "title": "McTwist", "text": ""}
{"id": "38975", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38975", "title": "Skateboarding trick", "text": "Trick performed on a skateboard\nA skateboarding trick, or simply a trick, is a manoeuvre performed while riding a skateboard, in a specific way to achieve the desired outcome, often involving flips, rotations, or aerial movements. \nHistory.\nThough skateboards emerged in the 1900s, skateboarding tricks like the ones done today did not appear until decades later. In the 1970s and earlier, the most common tricks were \"2D\" freestyle types such as manuals and pivots. Only later in the 1980s and early 1990s were common modern-day tricks like the ollie and heel-flip invented by Alan Gelfand and Rodney Mullen, setting the stage for other aerial tricks. The invention of these tricks changed the skateboarding lifestyle for many years to come.\nTypes.\nOllie.\nAn ollie is a jump where the front wheels leave the ground first. This motion is attained with a snap of the tail (from the back foot) and sliding one's front foot forward to reach any altitude. A lot of technical tricks transpire from this element (e.g. the kickflip, heelflip, 360-flip). A \"nollie\" is when the back wheels leave the ground first by snapping the nose of the board, with the back foot sliding towards the tail. There is also a switch ollie, which is simply an ollie in switch stance position. The switch stance position is the opposite position of how the rider would normally ride.\nGrabs.\nA grab involves floating in the air, while using either hand to hold the board against the feet or keeping constant and careful pressure on the board with the feet to keep it from floating away. The Indy grab usually combines rotation with different grabs. This class of tricks was first popularized when Tony Hawk became famous for his frontside airs in empty swimming pools in the late 1970s and has expanded to include the bulk of skateboarding tricks to this day, including the ollie and all of its variations. The 900 and 1080 fall under the class of aerials, though these are commonly confused with aerial grabs.\nFlip tricks.\nFlip tricks are a subset of aerials which are all based on the ollie. An example is the kickflip, the most widely known and performed flip trick. The board can be spun around many different axes as part of a flip trick, thus combining several rotations into one trick. These tricks are undoubtedly most popular among street skateboarding purists, although skaters with other styles perform them as well. The famous placing of the board on the feet and then jumping was created in 1987 by Nathan Lipor. Combining spins and flips is extremely popular in today's culture. A common trick in skateboarding lines is a 360 flip, or tre flip. A 360 flip is the combination of a skateboard spinning 360 degrees and a kickflip. There are also double kickflips and triple kickflips, which are very difficult.\nFreestyle.\nFreestyle skateboarding tricks are tricks specifically associated with freestyle skateboarding. They are part of the building blocks and some of the most important reference points for tricks which have evolved to form street skateboarding.\nSlides and grinds.\nSlides and grinds involve getting the board up on some type of ledge, rail, or coping and sliding or grinding along the board or trucks, respectively. When it is primarily the board which is contacting the edge, it is called a slide; when it is the truck, it is a grind. Grinding and sliding skateboards started with sliding the board on parking blocks and curbs, then extended to using the coping on swimming pools, then stairway handrails, and has now been expanded to include almost every possible type of edge. Grinds and slides on street environments were brought to mainstream skateboarding by professional skateboarders Natas Kaupas and Mark Gonzales.\nManuals.\nA manual is a balancing trick where a skateboarder balances on either the front two or rear two wheels, without the other two wheels or any other part of the skateboard touching the ground for the entire duration of the trick. The trick is often performed at speed and technical skateboarders such as Daewon Song are renowned for performing tricks such as the kickflip both in and out of the trick, whilst also simultaneously doing so up onto, over and off ledges, blocks, benches and other street obstacles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38976", "revid": "23738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38976", "title": "Cab jump", "text": ""}
{"id": "38977", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38977", "title": "Fakie position", "text": ""}
{"id": "38978", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38978", "title": "Skateboarding tricks", "text": ""}
{"id": "38979", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38979", "title": "Photosphere", "text": "Star's outer shell from which light is radiated\nThe photosphere is a star's outer shell from which light is radiated. It extends into a star's surface until the plasma becomes opaque, equivalent to an optical depth of approximately &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443, or equivalently, a depth from which 50% of light will escape without being scattered.\nA photosphere is the region of a luminous object, usually a star, that is transparent to photons of certain wavelengths.\nStars, except neutron stars, have no solid or liquid surface. Therefore, the photosphere is typically used to describe the Sun's or another star's visual surface.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"photosphere\" is derived from Ancient Greek roots, \u03c6\u1ff6\u03c2, \u03c6\u03c9\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2/\"phos\", \"photos\" meaning \"light\" and \u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1/\"sphaira\" meaning \"sphere\", in reference to it being a spherical surface that is perceived to emit light.\nTemperature.\nThe surface of a star is defined to have a temperature given by the effective temperature in the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law. Various stars have photospheres of various temperatures.\nComposition of the Sun.\nThe Sun is composed primarily of the chemical elements hydrogen and helium; they account for 74.9% and 23.8%, respectively, of the mass of the Sun in the photosphere. All heavier elements, colloquially called \"metals\" in stellar astronomy, account for less than 2% of the mass, with oxygen (roughly 1% of the Sun's mass), carbon (0.3%), neon (0.2%), and iron (0.2%) being the most abundant.\nSun's photosphere.\nThe Sun's photosphere has a temperature between (with an effective temperature of ) meaning human eyes perceive it as an overwhelmingly bright surface, and with a sufficiently strong neutral density filter, as a hueless, gray surface. It has a density of about 3\u00d710-4 kg/m3; increasing with increasing depth. The Sun's photosphere is 100\u2013400 kilometers thick.\nPhotospheric phenomena.\nIn the Sun's photosphere, the most ubiquitous phenomenon are granules\u2014convection cells of plasma each approximately in diameter with hot rising plasma in the center and cooler plasma falling in the spaces between them, flowing at velocities of . Each granule has a lifespan of only about twenty minutes, resulting in a continually shifting \"boiling\" pattern. Grouping the typical granules are supergranules up to in diameter with lifespans of up to 24 hours and flow speeds of about , carrying magnetic field bundles to the edges of the cells. Other magnetically related phenomena in the Sun's photosphere include sunspots and solar faculae dispersed between granules. These features are too fine to be directly observed on other stars; however, sunspots have been indirectly observed, in which case they are referred to as \"starspots\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38981", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38981", "title": "Boardsports", "text": ""}
{"id": "38983", "revid": "51033304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38983", "title": "Boardsport", "text": "Sports that are played with a board as primary equipment\nBoardsports are active outdoor sports that are played with any sort of board as the primary equipment. These sports take place on a variety of terrains, from paved flat-ground and snow-covered hills to water and air. Most boardsports are considered action sports or extreme sports, and thus often appeal to youth. Some board sports were marginalized in the past. However, many board sports are gaining mainstream recognition, and with this recognition, they have gotten wider broadcasting, sponsorship and inclusion in institutional sporting events, including the Olympic Games.\nSurfing is the first known boardsport, originating from Polynesian culture. Skateboarding was then invented by surfers looking to \"surf\" on land. It is hard to estimate when most boardsports were invented because people have been making homemade versions throughout history. For example, it is not hard to conceive of a person, who is familiar with the concept of skiing or sledding, standing sideways on a plank of wood and riding down a snow-covered slope. M.J. \"Jack\" Burchett is credited with first doing this in 1929, using horse reins and clothesline to secure his feet on the plank of wood. Most boardsports have similar, equally unknown origins.\nUsing data collected in the past decade, it is estimated there are 18-50 million skateboarders, 5-25 million surfers, and 10-20 million snowboarders in the world. Approximately 100 million people participate in boardsports worldwide.\nClassifications.\nVarious board sports are characterized by terrain: Surf, Snow, Wake, and Skate are the primary ones.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38985", "revid": "47668471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38985", "title": "Water skiing", "text": "Surface water sport\nWater skiing (also waterskiing or water-skiing) is a surface water sport in which an individual is pulled behind a boat or a cable ski installation over a body of water, skimming the surface on one or two skis. The sport requires sufficient area on a stretch of water, one or two skis, a tow boat with tow rope, two or three people (depending on local boating laws), and a personal flotation device. In addition, the skier must have adequate upper and lower body strength, muscular endurance, and good balance.\nThere are water ski participants around the world, in Asia and Australia, Europe, Africa, and the Americas. In the United States alone, there are approximately 11 million water skiers and over 900 sanctioned water ski competitions every year. Australia boasts 1.3 million water skiers.\nThere are many options for recreational or competitive water skiers. These include speed skiing, trick skiing, show skiing, slaloming, jumping, barefoot skiing and wakeski. Similar, related sports are wakeboarding, kneeboarding, discing, tubing, and sit-down hydrofoil.\nBasic technique.\nWater skiers can start their ski set in one of two ways: wet is the most common, but dry is possible. Water skiing typically begins with a deep-water start. The skier enters the water with their skis on or they jump in without the skis on their feet, having the skis floated to them, and put them on while in the water. Most times it can be easier to put the skis on when they are wet. Once the skier has their skis on they will be thrown a tow rope from the boat, which they position between their skis or, if on only one ski, to the left if right foot forward and to the right if left foot forward. In the deep-water start, the skier crouches down in the water while holding onto the ski rope; they are in a cannonball position with their legs tucked into their chest, with skis pointing towards the sky and approximately of the ski out of the water. The skier can also perform a \"dry start\" by standing on the shore or a pier; however, this type of entry is recommended for professionals only. When the skier is ready (usually acknowledged by them yelling \"in gear,\": followed by \"hit it\"), the driver accelerates the boat. As the boat accelerates and takes up the slack on the rope, the skier allows the boat to pull them out of the water by applying some muscle strength to get into an upright body position.\nBy leaning back and keeping the legs slightly bent, the skis will eventually plane out and the skier will start to glide over the water. The skier turns by shifting weight left or right. The skier's body weight should be balanced between the balls of the feet and the heels. While being towed, the skier's arms should be relaxed but still fully extended so as to reduce stress on the arms. The handle can be held vertically or horizontally, depending on whichever position is more comfortable for the skier.\nIn addition to the driver and the skier, a third person known as the \"spotter\" or the \"observer\" should be present. The spotter's job is to watch the skier and inform the driver if the skier falls. The spotter usually sits in a chair on the boat facing backwards to see the skier. The skier and the boat's occupants communicate using hand signals (see the Safety section below).\nEquipment.\nWater.\nWater skiing can take place on any type of water \u2013 such as a river, lake, or ocean \u2013 but calmer waters are ideal for recreational skiing. There should be a skiing space and the water should be at least deep. There must be enough space for the water skier to safely \"get up\", or successfully be in the upright skiing position. Skiers and their boat drivers must also have sufficient room to avoid hazards. Most competitive skiers ski on man-made ski lakes. The first was in Barstow, California, built by Jack Horton in 1969. The second, built by Herb O'Brien, was built in 1972 in Redmond Washington.\nSkis.\nYounger skiers generally start out on children's skis, which consist of two skis tied together at their back and front. These connections mean that less strength is necessary for the child to keep the skis together. Sometimes these skis can come with a handle to help balance the skier as well. Children's skis are short \u2013 usually long \u2013 reflecting the skier's smaller size. Once a person is strong enough to hold the skis together themselves there are various options depending upon their skill level and weight.\nWater skiers can use two skis (one on each foot, also called \"combo skiing\") or one ski (dominant foot in front of the other foot, also called \"slalom skiing\"). Generally the heavier the person, the bigger the skis will be. Length will also vary based on the type of water skiing being performed; jump skis, for example, are longer than skis used in regular straight-line recreational skiing or competitive slalom and trick skiing. A trick ski is around 40 inches long and wider than combo skis. Again the skier rides it with his or her dominant foot in front. It has no fins which allows for spins to be performed.\nModern water skis have evolved from wooden barrels and snow skis to sophisticated composites of thermoplastics, aluminum, Kevlar, and carbon fiber. These materials make the skis not only high-performing but also sustainable, as manufacturers now use recycled materials to reduce waste and environmental impact. The incorporation of these advanced materials has led to skis that are incredibly strong, lightweight, and flexible, enhancing both performance and durability. Classic water skis are approximately 1.7 meters (5.5 feet) long and 15 centimeters (6 inches) wide, equipped with a stabilizing fin and rubber foot bindings for safety during falls. In contrast, skis used for trick or figure waterskiing are shorter, lack fins for complete rotation capability.\nBoat.\nCompetition skiing uses specifically designed towboats. Most towboats have a very small hull and a flat bottom to minimize wake. A true tournament ski boat will have a direct drive motor shaft that centers the weight in the boat for an optimal wake shape. However, some recreational ski boats will have the motor placed in the back of the boat (v-drive), which creates a bigger wake. Permitted towboats used for tournament water skiing are the MasterCraft ProStar 197, MasterCraft ProStar 190, Ski Nautique 200, Malibu Response TXi, and Centurion Carbon Pro. These boats have ability to pull skiers for trick skiing, jumping, and slalom.\nRecreational boats can serve as water skiing platforms as well as other purposes such as cruising and fishing. Popular boat types include bowriders, deckboats, cuddy cabins, and jetboats.\nThe towboat must be capable of maintaining the proper speed. Speeds vary with the skier's weight, experience level, comfort level, and type of skiing. For example, a child on two skis would require speeds of , whereas an adult on one ski might require as high as . Barefoot skiing requires speeds of approximately . Competition speeds have a wide range: as slow as up to for slalom water skiing, and approaching in water ski racing.\nThe boat must be equipped with a ski rope and handle. The tow rope must be sufficiently long for maneuvering, with a recommended length of (within tolerance) although length varies widely depending on the type of water skiing and the skier's skill level. Competition requirements on rope construction have changed over the years, from \"quarter-inch polypropylene rope\" in 1992 to the 2003 flexibility as long as the same specification is used \"for the entire event.\" The handle width and diameter sizes are based on skier preference, and the handle grip is a tough rubber material. Skiers will often wear gloves to assist in holding the handle at the higher speeds as well as keep from hurting their hands. The rope and handle are anchored to the boat and played out at the stern. This anchor point on a recreation boat is commonly a tow ring or cleat, mounted on the boat's stern. For more dedicated skiers, a metal ski pylon is placed in the center of the boat in front of the engine to connect the skier. This pylon must be mounted securely, since a skilled slalom skier can put a considerable amount of tension on the ski rope and the pylon.\nSafety measures.\nAs water skiing is a potentially dangerous sport, safety is important.\nThere should be a wide skiing space and the water should be at least deep. The towboat should stay at least from docks, swim areas, and the shore, and other boats should steer clear of skiers by at least 100 feet. Without proper space and visibility skiing can be extremely dangerous. Skiers should wear a life jacket regardless of swimming ability, although the expectation that all skiers are also competent swimmers is advisable as well. Specially-designed life jackets or ski vests allow movement needed for the sport while still providing floatation for a downed or injured skier. The most common water ski injuries involve the lower legs, such as the knee, because a fall at high speed can create irregular angles of collision between the skier's body and the water surface. Another common cause of injury is colliding with objects on or near the water, like docks.\nThe tow boat must contain at least two people: a driver and an observer. In most locales, the observer will need to be at least 12 years of age. The driver maintains a steady course, free of obstacles to the skier. The observer continually observes the skier, relays the condition of the skier to the boat driver, and if necessary, raises the \"skier down\" warning flag, as required, when a skier is in the water, returning to the boat, or in some localities, the entire time the skier is out of the boat. The skier and observer should agree on a set of standard hand-signals for easy communication: stop, speed up, turn, I'm OK, skier in the water, etc.\nHistory.\nWater skiing was invented in 1922 when Ralph Samuelson used a pair of boards as skis and a clothesline as a towrope on Lake Pepin in Lake City, Minnesota. Samuelson experimented with different positions on the skis for several days until 2 July 1923. Samuelson discovered that leaning backwards in the water with ski tips up and poking out of the water at the tip was the optimal method. His brother Ben towed him and they reached a speed of . Samuelson spent 15 years performing shows and teaching water skiing to people in the United States.\nSamuelson went through several iterations of equipment in his quest to ski on water. His first equipment consisted of barrel staves for skis. He later tried snow skis, but finally fabricated his own design out of lumber with bindings made of strips of leather. The ski rope was made from a long window sash cord. Samuelson never patented any of his ski equipment.\nThe first patent for water skis was issued to Fred Waller, of Huntington, NY, on 27 October 1925, for skis he developed independently and marketed as \"Dolphin Akwa-Skees.\" Waller's skis were constructed of kiln-dried mahogany, as were some boats at that time. Jack Andresen patented the first trick ski, a shorter, fin-less water ski, in 1940.\nIn 1928, Don Ibsen developed his own water skis out in Bellevue, Washington, never having heard of Samuelson or Waller. In 1941, Don Ibsen founded The Olympic Water Ski Club in Seattle, Washington. It was the first such club in America. Ibsen, a showman and entrepreneur, was one of the earliest manufacturers of water skis and was a leading enthusiast and promoter of the sport. In 1983, he was inducted into the Water Ski Hall of Fame in Winter Haven, Florida.\nThe sport of water skiing remained an obscure activity for several years after 1922, until Samuelson performed water ski shows from Michigan to Florida. The American Water Ski Association formally acknowledged Samuelson in 1966 as the first recorded water skier in history. Samuelson was also the first ski racer, slalom skier, and the first organizer of a water ski show.\nParallel to this, an avid sailor, sportsman and early adopter of water skiing, the young Swedish engineer Gunnar Ljungstr\u00f6m (1905\u20131999) pioneered water skiing in slalom moves from 1929. A demonstrating behind a motorboat was made to the Swedish public at the 100th anniversary of the Royal Swedish Yacht Club in Sandhamn outside Stockholm in 1930.\nWater skiing gained international attention in the hands of famed promoter, Dick Pope, Sr., often referred to as the \"Father of American Water Skiing\" and founder of Cypress Gardens in Winter Haven, Florida. Pope cultivated a distinct image for his theme-park, which included countless photographs of the water skiers featured at the park. These photographs began appearing in magazines worldwide in the 1940s and 1950s, helping to bring international attention to the sport for the first time. He was also the first person to complete a jump on water skis, jumping over a wooden ramp in 1928, for a distance of 25 feet. His son, Dick Pope, Jr., is the inventor of bare-foot skiing. Both men are in the Water Ski Hall of Fame. Today, Winter Haven, Florida, with its famous Chain of Lakes, remains an important city for water skiing, with several major ski schools operating there.\nWater skiing has developed over time. Water skiing tournaments and water skiing competitions have been organized. As an exhibition sport, water skiing was included in the 1972 Olympics. The first National Show Ski Tournament was held in 1974, and the first ever National Intercollegiate Water Ski Championships were held in 1979. The Home CARE US National Water Ski Challenge, the first competition for people with disabilities, was organized ten years later.\nThe first patented design of a water ski which included carbon fiber was that of Hani Audah at SPORT labs in 2001. Its first inclusion in tournament slalom skiing was in 2003.\nDisciplines.\n3-event tournament water skiing.\nIn the United States, there are over 900 sanctioned water ski competitions each summer. Orlando, Florida is considered to be the competitive 3-event waterskiing capital of the world. Competitive water skiing consists of three events: slalom, jump, and trick.\nSlalom.\nIn an attempt to become as agile as possible, slalom water skiers use only one ski with feet oriented forward, one in front of the other. Slalom skis are narrow and long, at depending on the height and weight of the skier. The two forward-facing bindings vary: they can be made of rubber or thick plastic, and they can be designed more like a snow ski binding or more like a roller blade boot.\nSlalom skiing involves a multi-buoy course that the skier must go around in order to complete the pass. A complete slalom water ski course consists of 26 buoys. There are entrance gates at the beginning and end of the course that the skier must go between, and there are 6 turn buoys that the skier must navigate around in a zigzag pattern. The remainder of the buoys are for the driver to ensure the boat goes straight down the center of the course. For a tournament to be sanctioned as 'record capable' by the International Waterski &amp; Wakeboard Federation (IWWF), the entire course must be surveyed prior to competition by a land surveyor to ensure its accuracy. The drivers boat path must be verified as well to ensure that all skiers are getting a fair pull.\nEvery consecutive pass is harder than the pass before it. When a pass is completed, the boat is sped up by or the rope is shortened by specific increments. The rope is usually not shortened until the maximum speed has been reached for the division, based on the skier's gender and age ( for women and for men). In a tournament, the boat speeds up or the rope shortens until the skier fails to complete the slalom course by falling, not getting around a buoy, or missing an entrance or exit gate.\nA skier's score is based upon the number of successful buoys cleared, the speed of the boat, and the length of the rope. In a tournament, skiers choose the starting boat speed and rope length (with a maximum length of ). Professional water skiers will typically start at the max speed of with a rope that has already been shortened to . The skier with the most buoys wins the competition.\nThe turn buoys are positioned away from the center of the slalom course. As the rope is shortened beyond that, the skiers are required to use the momentum generated through their turns to swing up on the side of the boat and reach out in order to get their ski around the next buoy. At these rope lengths, the skier's body is experiencing intense isometric contractions and extreme upper body torque with loads of up to 600\u00a0kg as they begin accelerating after rounding a turn buoy. Their top speeds will generally be more than double the boat's speed, which means that the Pro men can reach speeds in excess of and each turn will generally generate around 4 g of force. Essentially, slalom water skiers are using their body as a lever, which allows them to withstand loads that would otherwise not be possible for the human body.\nJump.\nWater ski jumpers use two long skis to ride over a water ski jump in an attempt to travel the longest distance. In a tournament, skiers are given three attempts to hit the ramp. The winner is the skier who travels the farthest calculated distance and successfully rides away. There are no style points, simply distance.\nWater ski jumps have specific dimensions and the ramp height is adjustable. Skiers may choose their boat speed and ramp height, although there are maximums based the skier's gender and age. Professional ski jumpers have a maximum boat speed of . The ramp height must be between . As a professional jumper approaches the ramp they will zigzag behind the boat in a series of cuts to generate speed and angle. When the jumper hits the ramp they will generally be going over and the load they have generated on the rope can be over .\nTrick.\nThe Trick competition has been described as the most technical of the three classic water skiing events.\nTrick skiing uses small, oval-shaped or oblong water skis. Beginners generally use two skis while more advanced skiers use one. The shorter, wider Trick ski has a front binding facing forward and a back binding facing at a 45\u00b0. It has a smooth bottom that allows it to turn over the surface of the water. According to official 2013 Tournament Rules for 3-event competition in the United States and the Pan-Am Games, skis used in the Tricks event must be a single ski without fins, although molded rails/grooves less than are allowed, as are a foot pad cemented to the ski as a place for the rear foot; in addition, the ski must float with all bindings, fins, etc., installed. The ski's configuration allows the skier to perform both surface and air tricks in quick succession.\nIn a tournament, skiers are given two 20-second runs during which they perform a series of their chosen tricks. In most cases, one pass is for hand tricks, which includes surface turns, rotations over the wake, and flips. The second pass is for toe tricks, which are done by doing wake turns and rotations with only a foot attaching them to the handle; the foot is either in the toehold part of the handle or, professionally, attached to the rope. The toehold part of the handle does not allow the skier to let go of the handle if they lose their balance and fall into the water, therefore a person in the boat is required to release the rope from the boat using a quick release mechanism installed on the ski pylon. A trick cannot be repeated. Each trick has a point value. A panel of five judges assesses which tricks were completed correctly and assigns that predetermined point value to each successfully completed trick. The skier with the most points wins.\nBarefoot water skiing.\nA barefoot water skier should use a wetsuit instead of a life jacket because the wetsuit covers more of the body in case of a fall at high speed. The wetsuit also allows the skier to do starts in the water where they lie on their back. Unlike a normal life jacket, the \"barefoot wetsuit\" allows the skier to glide on their back on top of the water once they reach a high enough speed. The barefoot wetsuit is generally thicker in the back, rear, and chest for flotation and impact absorption.\nBarefoot skiing requires a higher speed because the skier's feet are smaller than skis, providing less lift. A rule of thumb for barefoot water skiing speed in miles per hour is (M/10)+18=S, where M equals the skier's weight in pounds. In other words, a person would have to divide 175/10, which is 17.5; then simply add 17.5+18 which equals .\nAnother tool used in barefoot water skiing is the barefoot boom. It provides a stable aluminum bar on the side of the boat where a short rope can be attached or the skier can grip the bar itself. The skier is within earshot of the people in the boat, providing a good platform for teaching. Once the bare footer is good enough, he/she will go behind the boat with a long rope.\nA beginner can wear shoes to decrease the necessary speed, lessen foot injury from choppy water, learn better technique, and master the sport.\nShow skiing.\nShow skiing is a type of water skiing where skiers perform tricks somewhat similar to those of gymnasts while being pulled by the boat. Traditional ski show acts include pyramids, ski doubles, freestyle jumping, and swivel skiing. Show skiing is normally performed in water ski shows, with elaborate costumes, choreography, music, and an announcer. Show teams may also compete regionally or nationally. In the US, each team member must be a member of USA Water Ski to compete.\nThe first organized show occurred in 1928. The bi-annual World Show Ski Championship was inaugurated in September 2012 in Janesville, Wisconsin. Past competition included teams from Australia, Belgium, Canada, China, and the United States.\nFreestyle jumping.\nFreestyle jumping is often related to show skiing. The goal is to go off the jump, perform one of many stunts, and successfully land back on the water. The most common freestyle stunts \u2013 in order of usual progression \u2013 would be a heli (360\u00b0), a flip (forwards), a gainer (a back flip), and a m\u00f6bius (back flip with 360\u00b0).\nSki racing.\nWater ski racing consists of 1 or 2 skiers per boat who race around a set course behind boats set up for this type of event. It can occur in a 'circle' or lap format type racing or on river courses offering longer distances and higher speeds. Races can be timed events such as 20 minute races and up to 1 hour or on courses where race distance can be over 100\u00a0km in length.\nSpeeds vary by classes but can reach up to 200\u00a0km/h. Boats can be inboards or outboards and are generally between 19 and 21 feet in length. Outboards are commonly 300HP and Inboards around 1,300HP (majority are turbocharged).\nCurrent format world championship racing involves men's and women's open (unrestricted), and men's and women formula 2 (limited to single rig, 300\u00a0hp outboards, as well as junior classes for under 17's. The World Championships are held every 2 years with the most recent being 2019 in Vichy, France.\nMajor events include the Southern 80 (Echuca Victoria Australia), the Diamond Race (Viersel Belgium), the Catalina ski race (Long Beach CA United States), and the Bridge to Bridge (Sydney Australia). Races can have anywhere from 10 boats to 150 boats competing (grouped by engine size and age classes).\nDisabled.\nDisabled water skiing uses equipment or other adaptations to allow disabled people to compete in standard 3 event skiing. Seated water skis, special handles, audio slalom gear, and other adaptations are all used for different disabilities.\nCriticism.\nWhile water skiing is very popular, it is not universally liked. The fast, powerful boats create noise, cause waves which can cause beach erosion, and sometimes hit swimmers, other boats, or marine life. People operating boats may drink alcohol, which increases the chance of accidents. Water skiing is also criticized for air pollution from the boats' engines, and the unnecessary use of fuel (usually gasoline) and the consequent impact to climate change.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38986", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38986", "title": "2002 Olympic Winter Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "38988", "revid": "43682176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38988", "title": "Eric Heiden", "text": "American speed skater\nEric Arthur Heiden (born June 14, 1958) is an American physician and a former long track speed skater, road cyclist and track cyclist. He won an unprecedented five individual gold medals, and set four Olympic records and one world record at the 1980 Winter Olympics. Heiden was the most successful athlete at those Olympic Games, single-handedly winning more gold medals than all nations except for the Soviet Union (10) and East Germany (9). He is the most successful Winter Olympian from a single edition of any Winter Olympics. He delivered the Athlete's Oath at those same 1980 Games. His coach was Dianne Holum.\nHeiden is an icon in the speed skating community. His victories are significant, as few speed skaters (and athletes in general) have won competitions in both sprint and long-distance events. Heiden is the only athlete in the history of speed skating to have won all five events in a single Olympic tournament and the only one to have won a gold medal in all events. He is considered by some to be the best overall speed skater (short and long distances) in the sport's history. Heiden ranked No. 46 in \"ESPN's SportsCentury 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th Century\" in 1999, the only speed skater to make the list. In 2000, a Dutch newspaper called him the greatest skater ever.\nEarly life, education and family.\nHeiden was born in Madison, Wisconsin on June 14, 1958. His father, Jack Heiden, was a longtime orthopedic surgeon in Madison. His sister, Beth Heiden, also became an accomplished cyclist, speed skater and cross-country skier. In their hometown Shorewood Hills, Wisconsin (a suburb of Madison), Eric and his sister Beth were the driving forces behind the creation of the Heiden Haus, a small outpost where local children can warm up after skating or playing hockey on the ice rink (complete with underground clay platform). He graduated from Madison West High School in 1976.\nAfter starting his undergraduate education at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, Heiden transferred to the University of California, San Diego and then to Stanford University in California, earning a B.S. degree in 1984 and an M.D. degree in 1991.\nAthletic career.\nSpeed skating.\nHeiden won the World Junior Speed Skating Championships in 1977 and 1978. During his short speed skating career, Heiden won three World Allround Championships and four World Sprint Championships, becoming the youngest athlete to do so. Three times he broke the world record in the 1000\u00a0metres, twice in the 3000\u00a0metres, and once each in the 1500\u00a0metres and 10000\u00a0metres. He also broke the points world record in both allround and the sprinting distances.\nHeiden finished his speed skating career by finishing second behind Hilbert van der Duim at the 1980 World Allround Championships in Heerenveen. He stood at the top of the Adelskalender, a ranking system for long-track speed skating, for a record 1,495 days, and he won the Oscar Mathisen Award four times in a row from 1977 until 1980. As of 2025, he still is the only skater who has won the award four times.\nHe received the 1980 James E. Sullivan Award as the top amateur athlete in the United States. In 1983, he was inducted into the United States Olympic Hall of Fame.\nHeiden was elected to the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 1990.\nWorld records.\nOver the course of Heiden's career he skated 15 world records:\nCycling.\nAfter his speed-skating career Heiden became a professional cyclist.\nTrack cycling.\nAs a track cyclist Heiden competed at the 1981 UCI Track Cycling World Championships in Brno, but was not successful. He finished 19th and last in the men's individual pursuit event.\nRoad bicycle racing.\nHeiden became a professional racing cyclist. He was one of the first cross-over athletes, becoming a founding member of the 7-Eleven Cycling Team. Together with his former speed skating coach (and ex-bike racer), Jim Ochowicz, he conceived of the idea of a European-style sponsored team for North American riders Heiden won a few American professional races. He finished the 1985 Giro d'Italia and took part in the 1986 Tour de France, although he did not complete the race, crashing on a downhill stretch and suffering a concussion five days from the finish.\nHeiden is believed to have recorded one of the fastest times at 14:10 (1986 or 1987) on one of the local benchmark climbs in Woodside, California: Old La Honda Road. In 1985, Heiden won the first U.S. Professional Cycling Championship, becoming the American road race champion.\nIn 1999, Heiden was inducted into the United States Bicycling Hall of Fame.\nMedical career.\nHeiden completed medical school at Stanford University in 1991, and orthopedic residency training at University of California, Davis, in 1996, then spent a year at a sports medicine clinic in Birmingham, Alabama. He returned to California to practice as an orthopedic surgeon in Sacramento. At that time, he also served as team physician for the NBA's Sacramento Kings and the Sacramento Monarchs of the WNBA. In 2002, 2006, 2010 and 2014 he was team physician for the U.S. Olympic speed skating team. He opened a sports medicine-based practice at The Orthopedic Specialty Hospital (TOSH) in Murray, Utah and expanded Heiden Orthopaedics with an additional office in Park City, Utah.\nIn 2008, Heiden and Massimo Testa published \"Faster, Better, Stronger\", a book about exercise science and exercise programs.\nIn 2009, Heiden was one of the team of doctors assisting U.S. speed skater J.R. Celski as the latter recovered from a very bad speed skating crash during the U.S. Olympic trials. Despite cutting himself to the bone and requiring 60 stitches, Celski was able to recover in time for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, where he won the bronze medal in both men's 1500 m and 5000 m relay.\nPersonal life.\nHeiden met fellow medical student Karen Drews while the two were studying at Stanford, and they married in 1995. Karen is a hand surgeon. They have a daughter, Zoe, born in 2001.\nHeiden was offered many sponsorship opportunities after his record-setting performance in the 1980 Winter Olympics, but turned down most of them, saying he had enough money, and preferred the anonymity.\nA number of American former gold medal winners, including Heiden, were asked to participate in the ceremonies for the 2002 Winter Olympics held in Salt Lake City, Utah, but Heiden declined after he was passed over for the honor of lighting the Olympic torch. The 1980 U.S. Hockey Team, which won the gold medal at the 1980 games, was given the honor instead. Heiden said in 2009: \"I was probably just too stubborn. I figured if they don't appreciate what I did as a skater, if they don't appreciate now what I am doing as a human being, I'd just as soon hang out with my buddies and watch it. I did not mean to slight the Olympic hockey team in any way.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38989", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38989", "title": "Speedskater", "text": ""}
{"id": "38990", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38990", "title": "1e24 m", "text": ""}
{"id": "38991", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38991", "title": "1e25 m", "text": ""}
{"id": "38992", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38992", "title": "Cosmological constant", "text": "Value representing energy density of space\nIn cosmology, the cosmological constant (usually denoted by the Greek capital letter lambda: \u039b), alternatively called Einstein's cosmological constant, \nis a coefficient that Albert Einstein initially added to his field equations of general relativity. He later removed it; however, much later it was revived to express the energy density of space, or vacuum energy, that arises in quantum mechanics. It is closely associated with the concept of dark energy.\nEinstein introduced the constant in 1917 to counterbalance the effect of gravity and achieve a static universe, which was then assumed. Einstein's cosmological constant was abandoned after Edwin Hubble confirmed that the universe was expanding. From the 1930s until the late 1990s, most physicists thought the cosmological constant to be zero. That changed with the discovery in 1998 that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, implying that the cosmological constant may have a positive value after all.\nSince the 1990s, studies have shown that, assuming the cosmological principle, around 68% of the mass\u2013energy density of the universe can be attributed to dark energy. The cosmological constant \u039b is the simplest possible explanation for dark energy, and is used in the standard model of cosmology known as the \u039bCDM model.\nAccording to quantum field theory (QFT), which underlies modern particle physics, empty space is defined by the vacuum state, which is composed of a collection of quantum fields. All these quantum fields exhibit fluctuations in their ground state (lowest energy density) arising from the zero-point energy existing everywhere in space. These zero-point fluctuations should contribute to the cosmological constant \u039b, but actual calculations give rise to an enormous vacuum energy. The discrepancy between theorized vacuum energy from quantum field theory and observed vacuum energy from cosmology is a source of major contention, with the values predicted exceeding observation by some 120\u00a0orders of magnitude, a discrepancy that has been called \"the worst theoretical prediction in the history of physics!\". This issue is called the cosmological constant problem and it is one of the greatest mysteries in science with many physicists believing that \"the vacuum holds the key to a full understanding of nature\".\nHistory.\nThe cosmological constant was originally introduced in Einstein's 1917 paper entitled \"Cosmological considerations in the General Theory of Relativity\". Einstein included the cosmological constant as a term in his field equations for general relativity because he was dissatisfied that otherwise his equations did not allow for a static universe: gravity would cause a universe that was initially non-expanding to contract. To counteract this possibility, Einstein added the cosmological constant. However, Einstein was not happy about adding this cosmological term. He later stated that \"Since I introduced this term, I had always a bad conscience. ... I am unable to believe that such an ugly thing is actually realized in nature\". Einstein's static universe is unstable against matter density perturbations. Furthermore, without the cosmological constant Einstein could have found the expansion of the universe before Hubble's observations.\nIn 1929, not long after Einstein developed his static theory, observations by Edwin Hubble indicated that the universe appears to be expanding; this was consistent with a cosmological solution to the original general relativity equations that had been found by the mathematician Alexander Friedmann, working on the Einstein equations of general relativity. Einstein reportedly referred to his failure to accept the validation of his equations\u2014when they had predicted the expansion of the universe in theory, before it was demonstrated in observation of the cosmological redshift\u2014as his \"biggest blunder\" (according to George Gamow).\nIt transpired that adding the cosmological constant to Einstein's equations does not lead to a static universe at equilibrium because the equilibrium is unstable: if the universe expands slightly, then the expansion releases vacuum energy, which causes yet more expansion. Likewise, a universe that contracts slightly will continue contracting.\nHowever, the cosmological constant remained a subject of theoretical and empirical interest. Empirically, the cosmological data of recent decades strongly suggest that our universe has a positive cosmological constant. The explanation of this small but positive value is a remaining theoretical challenge, the so-called cosmological constant problem.\nSome early generalizations of Einstein's gravitational theory, known as classical unified field theories, either introduced a cosmological constant on theoretical grounds or found that it arose naturally from the mathematics. For example, Arthur Eddington claimed that the cosmological constant version of the vacuum field equation expressed the \"epistemological\" property that the universe is \"self-gauging\", and Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger's pure-affine theory using a simple variational principle produced the field equation with a cosmological term.\nIn 1990s, Saul Perlmutter at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Brian Schmidt of the Australian National University and Adam Riess of the Space Telescope Science Institute were searching for type Ia supernovae. At that time, they expected to observe the deceleration of the supernovae caused by gravitational attraction of mass according to Einstein's gravitational theory. The first reports published in July 1997 from the Supernova Cosmology Project used the supernova observation to support such deceleration hypothesis. But soon they found that supernovae were accelerating away. Both teams announced this surprising result in 1998. It implied the universe is undergoing accelerating expansion. The cosmological constant is needed to explain such acceleration. Following this discovery, the cosmological constant was reinserted in the general relativity equations.\nEquation.\nThe cosmological constant \u039b appears in the Einstein field equations in the form\nformula_1\nwhere the Ricci tensor \"R\u03bc\u03bd\", Ricci scalar \"R\" and the metric tensor \"g\u03bc\u03bd\" describe the structure of spacetime, the stress\u2013energy tensor \"T\u03bc\u03bd\" describes the energy density, momentum density and stress at that point in spacetime, and \"\u03ba\" = 8\"\u03c0G\"/\"c\"4. The gravitational constant G and the speed of light c are universal constants. When \u039b is zero, this reduces to the field equation of general relativity usually used in the 20th\u00a0century. When \"T\u03bc\u03bd\" is zero, the field equation describes empty space (a vacuum).\nThe cosmological constant has the same effect as an intrinsic energy density of the vacuum, \"\u03c1\"vac (and an associated pressure). In this context, it is commonly moved to the right-hand side of the equation using \u039b = \"\u03ba\u03c1\"vac. It is common to quote values of energy density directly, though still using the name \"cosmological constant\". The dimension of \u039b is generally understood as length\u22122.\nUsing the Planck units, and the value evaluated in 2025 for the Hubble constant \"H\"0 = = , \u039b has the value of formula_2 where formula_3 is the Planck length. A positive vacuum energy density resulting from a cosmological constant implies a negative pressure, and vice versa. If the energy density is positive, the associated negative pressure will drive an accelerated expansion of the universe, as observed. (See \"Dark energy\" and \"Cosmic inflation\" for details.)\nDensity parameter \u03a9.\nThe dimensionless density parameter \u03a9 represents the ratio of the actual density of a component of the universe to the critical density. The total density parameter for a flat universe (concluded by https://), can be expressed as:\nformula_4\nWhere:\nInstead of the cosmological constant itself, cosmologists often refer to the ratio between the energy density due to the cosmological constant and the critical density of the universe, the tipping point for a sufficient density to stop the universe from expanding forever (the dark energy density parameter). This ratio is estimated to be 0.714, according to results published by the Planck Collaboration in 2018 and clearly mentioned on https://. More intuitively, this parameter could be described as the fraction of the universe that is made up of dark energy. Note that this value changes over time: The critical density changes with cosmological time but the energy density due to the cosmological constant remains unchanged throughout the history of the universe, because the amount of dark energy increases as the universe grows but the amount of matter does not.\nEquation of state.\nAnother ratio that is used by scientists is the equation of state, usually denoted w, which is the ratio of pressure that dark energy puts on the universe to the energy per unit volume. This ratio is for the cosmological constant used in the Einstein equations; alternative time-varying forms of vacuum energy such as quintessence generally use a different value. The value w = , measured by the Planck Collaboration (2018) is consistent with , assuming w does not change over cosmic time.\nValue.\nObservations announced in 1998 of distance\u2013redshift relation for Type Ia supernovae indicated that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, if one assumes the cosmological principle. When combined with measurements of the cosmic microwave background radiation these implied a value of \u03a9\u039b \u2248 0.7, a result which has been supported and refined by more recent measurements (as well as previous works). If one assumes the cosmological principle, as in the case for all models that use the Friedmann\u2013Lema\u00eetre\u2013Robertson\u2013Walker metric, while there are other possible causes of an accelerating universe, such as quintessence, the cosmological constant is in most respects the simplest solution. Thus, the Lambda-CDM model, the current standard model of cosmology which uses the FLRW metric, includes the cosmological constant, which is measured to be on the order of . It may be expressed as (multiplying by ) or as 10\u2212122\u00a0\"\u2113\"P\u22122 (where \"\u2113\"P is the Planck length). The value is based on recent measurements of vacuum energy density, \"\u03c1\"vac = \u2258 = . However, due to the Hubble tension and the CMB dipole, recently it has been proposed that the cosmological principle is no longer true in the late universe and that the FLRW metric breaks down, so it is possible that observations usually attributed to an accelerating universe are simply a result of the cosmological principle not applying in the late universe.\nAs was only recently seen, by works of 't Hooft, Susskind and others, a positive cosmological constant has surprising consequences, such as a finite maximum entropy of the observable universe (see \"Holographic principle\").\nPredictions.\nQuantum field theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nWhy does the zero-point energy of the quantum vacuum not cause a large cosmological constant? What cancels it out?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nA major outstanding problem is that most quantum field theories predict a huge value for the quantum vacuum. A common assumption is that the quantum vacuum is equivalent to the cosmological constant. Although no theory exists that supports this assumption, arguments can be made in its favor.\nSuch arguments are usually based on dimensional analysis and effective field theory. If the universe is described by an effective local quantum field theory down to the Planck scale, then we would expect a cosmological constant of the order of formula_5 (formula_6 in reduced Planck units). As noted above, the measured cosmological constant is smaller than this by a factor of ~10120. This discrepancy has been called \"the worst theoretical prediction in the history of physics\".\nSome supersymmetric theories require a cosmological constant that is exactly zero, which further complicates things. This is the cosmological constant problem, the worst problem of fine-tuning in physics: there is no known natural way to derive the tiny cosmological constant used in cosmology from particle physics.\nNo vacuum in the string theory landscape is known to support a metastable, positive cosmological constant, and in 2018 a group of four physicists advanced a controversial conjecture which would imply that no such universe exists.\nAnthropic principle.\nOne possible explanation for the small but non-zero value was noted by Steven Weinberg in 1987 following the anthropic principle. Weinberg explains that if the vacuum energy took different values in different domains of the universe, then observers would necessarily measure values similar to that which is observed: the formation of life-supporting structures would be suppressed in domains where the vacuum energy is much larger. Specifically, if the vacuum energy is negative and its absolute value is substantially larger than it appears to be in the observed universe (say, a factor of 10 larger), holding all other variables (e.g. matter density) constant, that would mean that the universe is closed; furthermore, its lifetime would be shorter than the age of our universe, possibly too short for intelligent life to form. On the other hand, a universe with a large positive cosmological constant would expand too fast, preventing galaxy formation. According to Weinberg, domains where the vacuum energy is compatible with life would be comparatively rare. Using this argument, Weinberg predicted that the cosmological constant would have a value of less than a hundred times the currently accepted value. In 1992, Weinberg refined this prediction of the cosmological constant to 5 to 10 times the matter density.\nThis argument depends on the vacuum energy density being constant throughout spacetime, as would be expected if dark energy were the cosmological constant. There is no evidence that the vacuum energy does vary, but it may be the case if, for example, the vacuum energy is (even in part) the potential of a scalar field such as the residual inflaton (also see \"Quintessence\"). Another theoretical approach that deals with the issue is that of multiverse theories, which predict a large number of \"parallel\" universes with different laws of physics and/or values of fundamental constants. Again, the anthropic principle states that we can only live in one of the universes that is compatible with some form of intelligent life. Critics claim that these theories, when used as an explanation for fine-tuning, commit the inverse gambler's fallacy.\nIn 1995, Weinberg's argument was refined by Alexander Vilenkin to predict a value for the cosmological constant that was only ten times the matter density, i.e. about three times the current value since determined.\nFailure to detect dark energy.\nAn attempt to directly observe and relate quanta or fields like the chameleon particle or the symmetron theory to dark energy, in a laboratory setting, failed to detect a new force. Inferring the presence of dark energy through its interaction with baryons in the cosmic microwave background has also led to a negative result, although the current analyses have been derived only at the linear perturbation regime. It is also possible that the difficulty in detecting dark energy is due to the fact that the cosmological constant describes an existing, known interaction (e.g. electromagnetic field).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary literature: news, popular science articles &amp; books.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary literature: review articles, monographs and textbooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38993", "revid": "1276887435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38993", "title": "Optical depth", "text": "Physics concept\nIn physics, optical depth or optical thickness is the natural logarithm of the ratio of incident to \"transmitted\" radiant power through a material.\nThus, the larger the optical depth, the smaller the amount of transmitted radiant power through the material. \nSpectral optical depth or spectral optical thickness is the natural logarithm of the ratio of incident to transmitted spectral radiant power through a material. Optical depth is dimensionless, and in particular is not a length, though it is a monotonically increasing function of optical path length, and approaches zero as the path length approaches zero. The use of the term \"optical density\" for optical depth is discouraged.\nIn chemistry, a closely related quantity called \"absorbance\" or \"decadic absorbance\" is used instead of optical depth: the common logarithm of the ratio of incident to transmitted radiant power through a material. It is the optical depth divided by \"log\"\"e\"(10), because of the different logarithm bases used.\nMathematical definitions.\nOptical depth.\nThe optical depth of a material, denoted formula_1, is given by:formula_2where\nThe absorbance formula_6 is related to optical depth by:formula_7\nSpectral optical depth.\nThe spectral optical depth in frequency (denoted formula_8) or in wavelength (formula_9) of a material is given by:\nformula_10formula_11\nwhere\nSpectral absorbance is related to spectral optical depth by:\nformula_18formula_19\nwhere\nRelationship with attenuation.\nAttenuation.\nOptical depth measures the attenuation of the transmitted radiant power in a material. Attenuation can be caused by absorption, but also reflection, scattering, and other physical processes. Optical depth of a material is approximately equal to its attenuation when both the absorbance is much less than 1 and the emittance of that material (not to be confused with radiant exitance or emissivity) is much less than the optical depth:\nformula_22formula_23\nwhere\nand according to the Beer\u2013Lambert law,\nformula_24so:formula_25\nAttenuation coefficient.\nOptical depth of a material is also related to its attenuation coefficient by:formula_26where\nand if \"\u03b1\"(\"z\") is uniform along the path, the attenuation is said to be a linear attenuation and the relation becomes: formula_27\nSometimes the relation is given using the attenuation cross section of the material, that is its attenuation coefficient divided by its number density:formula_28 where\nand if formula_29 is uniform along the path, i.e., formula_30, the relation becomes:formula_31\nApplications.\nAtomic physics.\nIn atomic physics, the spectral optical depth of a cloud of atoms can be calculated from the quantum-mechanical properties of the atoms. It is given byformula_32where\nAtmospheric sciences.\nIn atmospheric sciences, one often refers to the optical depth of the atmosphere as corresponding to the vertical path from Earth's surface to outer space; at other times the optical path is from the observer's altitude to outer space. The optical depth for a slant path is \"\u03c4\" = \"m\u03c4\"\u2032, where \"\u03c4\u2032\" refers to a vertical path, \"m\" is called the relative airmass, and for a plane-parallel atmosphere it is determined as \"m\" = sec \"\u03b8\" where \"\u03b8\" is the zenith angle corresponding to the given path. Therefore,formula_33The optical depth of the atmosphere can be divided into several components, ascribed to Rayleigh scattering, aerosols, and gaseous absorption. The optical depth of the atmosphere can be measured with a Sun photometer.\nThe optical depth with respect to the height within the atmosphere is given by\nformula_34\nand it follows that the total atmospheric optical depth is given by\nformula_35\nIn both equations:\nThe optical depth of a plane parallel cloud layer is given byformula_36where:\nSo, with a fixed depth and total liquid water path, formula_37.\nAstronomy.\nIn astronomy, the photosphere of a star is defined as the surface where its optical depth is 2/3. This means that each photon emitted at the photosphere suffers an average of less than one scattering before it reaches the observer. At the temperature at optical depth 2/3, the energy emitted by the star (the original derivation is for the Sun) matches the observed total energy emitted.\nNote that the optical depth of a given medium will be different for different colors (wavelengths) of light.\nFor planetary rings, the optical depth is the (negative logarithm of the) proportion of light blocked by the ring when it lies between the source and the observer. This is usually obtained by observation of stellar occultations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38994", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38994", "title": "Nucleosynthetic", "text": ""}
{"id": "38995", "revid": "45366078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38995", "title": "Pepper", "text": "Pepper(s) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38996", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38996", "title": "Lobbyist", "text": ""}
{"id": "38997", "revid": "351369525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38997", "title": "Half life", "text": ""}
{"id": "38998", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38998", "title": "Vulcanization", "text": "Process of hardening rubber\nVulcanisation (American English: vulcanization) is a range of processes for hardening rubbers. The term originally referred exclusively to the treatment of natural rubber with sulfur and heat, which remains the most common practice. It has also grown to include the hardening of other (synthetic) rubbers via various means. Examples include silicone rubber via room temperature vulcanising and chloroprene rubber (neoprene) using metal oxides. \nVulcanisation can be defined as the curing of elastomers, with the terms 'vulcanisation' and 'curing' sometimes used interchangeably in this context. It works by forming cross-links between sections of the polymer chain which results in increased rigidity and durability, as well as other changes in the mechanical and electrical properties of the material. Vulcanisation, in common with the curing of other thermosetting polymers, is generally irreversible.\nThe word was suggested by William Brockedon (a friend of Thomas Hancock who attained the British patent for the process) based on the god Vulcan who was associated with heat and sulfur in volcanoes.\nHistory.\nIn ancient Mesoamerican cultures, rubber was used to make balls, sandal soles, elastic bands, and waterproof containers. It was cured using sulfur-rich plant juices, an early form of vulcanisation.\nIn the 1830s, Charles Goodyear worked to devise a process for strengthening rubber tires. Tires of the time would become soft and sticky with heat, accumulating road debris that punctured them. Goodyear tried heating rubber in order to mix other chemicals with it. This seemed to harden and improve the rubber, though this was due to the heating itself and not the chemicals used. Not realizing this, he repeatedly ran into setbacks when his announced hardening formulas did not work consistently. One day in 1839, when trying to mix rubber with sulfur, Goodyear accidentally dropped the mixture in a hot frying pan. To his astonishment, instead of melting further or vaporizing, the rubber remained firm and, as he increased the heat, the rubber became harder. Goodyear worked out a consistent system for this hardening, and by 1844 patented the process and was producing the rubber on an industrial scale.\nOn 21 November 1843, British inventor, Thomas Hancock took out a patent for the vulcanisation of rubber using sulfur, eight weeks before Charles Goodyear did the same in the US (30 January 1844). Accounts differ as to whether Hancock's patent was informed by inspecting samples of American rubber from Goodyear and whether inspecting such samples could have provided information sufficient to recreate Goodyear's process.\nApplications.\nThere are many uses for vulcanised materials, some examples of which are rubber hoses, shoe soles, toys, erasers, hockey pucks, shock absorbers, conveyor belts, vibration mounts/dampers, insulation materials, tires, and bowling balls. Most rubber products are vulcanised as this greatly improves their lifespan, function, and strength.\nOverview.\nIn contrast with thermoplastic processes (the melt-freeze process that characterize the behaviour of most modern polymers), vulcanisation, in common with the curing of other thermosetting polymers, is generally irreversible.\nFive types of curing systems are in common use:\nVulcanisation with sulfur.\nThe most common vulcanising methods depend on sulfur. Sulfur, by itself, is a slow vulcanising agent and does not vulcanise synthetic polyolefins. Accelerated vulcanisation is carried out using various compounds that modify the kinetics of crosslinking; this mixture is often referred to as a cure package. The main polymers subjected to sulfur vulcanisation are polyisoprene (natural rubber) and styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), which are used for most street-vehicle tires. The cure package is adjusted specifically for the substrate and the application. The reactive sites\u2014cure sites\u2014are allylic hydrogen atoms. These C-H bonds are adjacent to carbon-carbon double bonds (&gt;C=C&lt;). During vulcanisation, some of these C-H bonds are replaced by chains of sulfur atoms that link with a cure site of another polymer chain. These bridges contain between one and several atoms. The number of sulfur atoms in the crosslink strongly influences the physical properties of the final rubber article. Short crosslinks give the rubber better heat resistance. Crosslinks with higher number of sulfur atoms give the rubber good dynamic properties but less heat resistance. Dynamic properties are important for flexing movements of the rubber article, e.g., the movement of a side-wall of a running tire. Without good flexing properties these movements rapidly form cracks, and ultimately will make the rubber article fail.\nVulcanisation of polychloroprene.\nThe vulcanisation of neoprene or polychloroprene rubber (CR rubber) is carried out using metal oxides (specifically MgO and ZnO, sometimes Pb3O4) rather than sulfur compounds which are presently used with many natural and synthetic rubbers. In addition, because of various processing factors (principally scorch, this being the premature cross-linking of rubbers due to the influence of heat), the choice of accelerator is governed by different rules to other diene rubbers. Most conventionally used accelerators are problematic when CR rubbers are cured and the most important accelerant has been found to be ethylene thiourea (ETU), which, although being an excellent and proven accelerator for polychloroprene, has been classified as reprotoxic. From 2010 to 2013, the European rubber industry had a research project titled SafeRubber to develop a safer alternative to the use of ETU.\nVulcanisation of silicones.\nRoom-temperature vulcanizing (RTV) silicone is constructed of reactive oil-based polymers combined with strengthening mineral fillers. There are two types of room-temperature vulcanising silicone:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38999", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38999", "title": "Boles\u0142aw I the Brave", "text": "Duke and King of Poland (r. 992\u20131025)\nBoles\u0142aw I the Brave (c.\u2009967\u00a0\u2013 17 June 1025), less often known as Boles\u0142aw the Great, was Duke of Poland from 992 to 1025 and the first King of Poland in 1025. He was also Duke of Bohemia between 1003 and 1004 as Boleslaus IV. A member of the Piast dynasty, Boles\u0142aw was a capable monarch and a strong mediator in Central European affairs. He continued to proselytise Western Christianity among his subjects and raised Poland to the rank of a kingdom, thus becoming the first Polish ruler to hold the title of \"rex\", Latin for king.\nThe son of Mieszko I of Poland by his first wife Dobrawa of Bohemia, Boles\u0142aw ruled Lesser Poland already during the final years of Mieszko's reign. When the country became divided in 992, he banished his father's widow, Oda of Haldensleben, purged his half-brothers along with their adherents and successfully reunified Poland by 995. As a devout Christian, Boles\u0142aw supported the missionary endeavours of Adalbert of Prague and Bruno of Querfurt. The martyrdom of Adalbert in 997 and Boles\u0142aw's successful attempt to ransom the bishop's remains, paying for their weight in gold, consolidated Poland's autonomy from the Holy Roman Empire.\nAt the Congress of Gniezno (11 March 1000), Emperor Otto III permitted the establishment of a Polish church structure with a metropolitan see at Gniezno, independent from the Archbishopric of Magdeburg. Bishoprics were also established in Krak\u00f3w, Wroc\u0142aw, and Ko\u0142obrzeg, and Boles\u0142aw formally repudiated paying tribute to the Empire. Following Otto's death in 1002, Boles\u0142aw fought a series of wars against Otto's cousin and heir, Henry II, ending in the Peace of Bautzen (1018). In the summer of 1018, in one of his expeditions, Boles\u0142aw I captured Kiev, where he installed his son-in-law Sviatopolk I as ruler. According to legend, Boles\u0142aw chipped his blade when striking Kiev's Golden Gate. In honour of this legend, the \"Szczerbiec\" (\"Jagged Sword\") would later become the coronation sword of Polish kings.\nBoles\u0142aw is widely considered one of Poland's most accomplished Piast monarchs; he was an able strategist and statesman, who transformed Poland into an entity comparable to a hereditary monarchy. Boles\u0142aw conducted successful military campaigns to the west, south and east of his realm, and conquered territories in modern-day Slovakia, Moravia, Red Ruthenia, Meissen, Lusatia, and Bohemia. He established the \"Prince's Law\" and sponsored the construction of churches, monasteries, military forts as well as waterway infrastructure. He also introduced the first Polish monetary unit, the \"grzywna\", divided into 240 denarii, and minted his own coinage.\nEarly life.\nBoles\u0142aw was born in 966 or 967, the first child of Mieszko I of Poland and his wife, the Bohemian princess Dobrawa, known in Czech as Doubravka. His \"Epitaph\", which was written in the middle of the 11th century, emphasised that Boles\u0142aw had been born to a \"faithless\" father and a \"true-believing\" mother, suggesting that he was born before his father's baptism. Boles\u0142aw was baptised shortly after his birth. He was named after his maternal grandfather, Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia. Not much is known about Boles\u0142aw's childhood. His \"Epitaph\" recorded that he underwent the traditional hair-cutting ceremony at the age of seven and a lock of his hair was sent to Rome. The latter act suggests that Mieszko wanted to place his son under the protection of the Holy See. Historian Tadeusz Manteuffel says that Boles\u0142aw needed that protection because his father had sent him to the court of Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor in token of his allegiance to the emperor. However, historian Marek Kazimierz Bara\u0144ski notes that the claim that Boles\u0142aw was sent as a hostage to the imperial court is disputed.\nBoles\u0142aw's mother, Dobrawa, died in 977; his widowed father married Oda of Haldensleben who had already been a nun. Around that time, Boles\u0142aw became the ruler of Lesser Poland, through it is not exactly clear in what circumstances. Jerzy Strzelczyk says that Boles\u0142aw received Lesser Poland from his father; Tadeusz Manteuffel states that he seized the province from his father with the local lords' support; and Henryk \u0141owmia\u0144ski writes that his uncle, Boleslav II of Bohemia, granted the region to him.\nAccession and consolidation.\nMieszko I died on 25 May 992. The contemporaneous Thietmar of Merseburg recorded that Mieszko left \"his kingdom to be divided among many claimants\", but Boles\u0142aw unified the country \"with fox-like cunning\" and expelled his stepmother and half-brothers from Poland. Two Polish lords Odilien and Przibiwoj, who had supported Oda and her sons, were blinded on Boles\u0142aw's order. How long it took him to take control of all of Poland is a matter of dispute, but the consensus is within a few years.\nBoles\u0142aw's first coins were issued around 995. One of them bore the inscription Vencievlavus, showing that he regarded his mother's uncle Duke Wenceslaus I of Bohemia as the patron saint of Poland. Boles\u0142aw sent reinforcements to the Holy Roman Empire to fight against the Polabian Slavs in summer 992. Boles\u0142aw personally led a Polish army to assist the imperial troops in invading the land of the Abodrites or Veleti in 995. During the campaign, he met the young German monarch, Otto III.\nSob\u011bslav, the head of the Bohemian Slavn\u00edk dynasty, also participated in the 995 campaign. Taking advantage of Sob\u011bslav's absence, Boleslav II of Bohemia invaded the Slavn\u00edks' domains and had most members of the family murdered. After learning of his kinsmen's fate, Sob\u011bslav settled in Poland. Boles\u0142aw gave shelter to him \"for the sake of [Sob\u011bslav's] holy brother\", Bishop Adalbert of Prague, according to the latter's hagiographies. Adalbert (known as Wojciech before his consecration) also came to Poland in 996, because Boles\u0142aw \"was quite amicably disposed towards him\". Adalbert's hagiographies suggest that the bishop and Boles\u0142aw closely cooperated. In early 997 Adalbert left Poland to proselytise among the Prussians, who had been invading the eastern borderlands of Boles\u0142aw's realm. However, the pagans murdered him on 23 April 997. Boles\u0142aw ransomed Adalbert's remains, paying its weight in gold, and buried it in Gniezno. He sent parts of the martyr bishop's corpse to Emperor Otto III who had been Adalbert's friend.\nCongress of Gniezno and its aftermath (999\u20131002).\nEmperor Otto III held a synod in Rome where Adalbert was canonised on the emperor's request on 29 June 999. Before 2 December 999, Adalbert's brother, Radim Gaudentius, was consecrated \"Saint Adalbert's archbishop\". Otto III made a pilgrimage to Saint Adalbert's tomb in Gniezno, accompanied by Pope Sylvester II's legate, Robert, in early 1000. Thietmar of Merseburg mentioned that it \"would be impossible to believe or describe\" how Boles\u0142aw received the emperor and conducted him to Gniezno. A century later, Gallus Anonymus added that \"[m]arvelous and wonderful sights Boles\u0142aw set before the emperor when he arrived: the ranks first of the knights in all their variety, and then of the princes, lined up on a spacious plain like choirs, each separate unit set apart by the distinct and varied colors of its apparel, and no garment there was of inferior quality, but of the most precious stuff that might anywhere be found.\"\nBoles\u0142aw took advantage of the emperor's pilgrimage. After the Emperor's visit in Gniezno, Poland started to develop into a sovereign state, in contrast with Bohemia, which remained a vassal state, incorporated in the Kingdom of Germany. Thietmar of Merseburg condemned Otto III for \"making a lord out of a tributary\" in reference to the relationship between the Emperor and Boles\u0142aw. Gallus Anonymus emphasised that Otto III declared Boles\u0142aw \"his brother and partner\" in the Holy Roman Empire, also calling Boles\u0142aw \"a friend and ally of the Roman people\". The same chronicler mentioned that Otto III \"took the imperial diadem from his own head and laid it upon the head of Boles\u0142aw in pledge of friendship\" in Gniezno. Boles\u0142aw also received \"one of the nails from the cross of our Lord with the lance of St. Maurice\" from the Emperor.\nGallus Anonymus claimed that Boles\u0142aw was \"gloriously raised to kingship by the emperor\" through these acts, but the Emperor's acts in Gniezno only symbolised that Boles\u0142aw received royal prerogatives, including the control of the Church in his realm. Radim Gaudentius was installed as the archbishop of the newly established Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Gniezno. At the same time, three suffragan bishoprics, subordinated to the see of Gniezno\u2014the dioceses of Ko\u0142obrzeg, Krak\u00f3w and Wroc\u0142aw\u2014were set up. Boles\u0142aw had promised that Poland would pay Peter's Pence to the Holy See to obtain the pope's sanction to the establishment of the new archdiocese. Unger, who had been the only prelate in Poland and was opposed to the creation of the archdiocese of Gniezno, was made bishop of Pozna\u0144, directly subordinated to the Holy See. However, Polish commoners only slowly adopted Christianity: Thietmar of Merseburg recorded that Boles\u0142aw forced his subjects with severe punishments to observe fasts and to refrain from adultery:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If anyone in this land should presume to abuse a foreign matron and thereby commit fornication, the act is immediately avenged through the following punishment. The guilty party is led on to the market bridge, and his scrotum is affixed to it with a nail. Then, after a sharp knife has been placed next to him, he is given the harsh choice between death or castration. Furthermore, anyone found to have eaten meat after Septuagesima is severely punished, by having his teeth knocked out. The law of God, newly introduced in these regions gains more strength from such acts of force than from any fast imposed by the bishops\u2014\u200a\nDuring the time the Emperor spent in Poland, Boles\u0142aw also showed off his affluence. At the end of the banquets, he \"ordered the waiters and the cupbearers to gather the gold and silver vessels ... from all three days' coursis, that is, the cups and goblets, the bowls and plates and the drinking-horns, and he presented them to the emperor as a toke of honor ... [h]is servants were likewise told to collect the wall-hangings and the coverlets, the carpets and tablecloths and napkins and everything that had been provided for their needs and take them to the emperor's quarters\", according to Gallus Anonymus. Thietmar of Merseburg recorded that Boles\u0142aw presented Otto III with a troop of \"three hundred armoured warriors\". Boles\u0142aw also gave Saint Adalbert's arm to the Emperor.\nAfter the meeting, Boles\u0142aw escorted Otto III to Magdeburg in Germany where \"they celebrated Palm Sunday with great festivity\" on 25 March 1000. A continuator of the chronicle of Ad\u00e9mar de Chabannes recorded, decades after the events, that Boles\u0142aw also accompanied Emperor Otto from Magdeburg to Aachen where Otto III had Charlemagne's tomb reopened and gave Charlemagne's golden throne to Boles\u0142aw.\nAn illustrated Gospel, made for Otto III around 1000, depicted four women symbolising Roma, Gallia, Germania and Sclavinia as doing homage to the Emperor who sat on his throne. Historian Alexis P. Vlasto writes that \"Sclavinia\" referred to Poland, proving that it was regarded as one of the Christian realms subjected to the Holy Roman Empire in accordance with Otto III's idea of \"Renovatio imperii\"\u2014the renewal of the Roman Empire based on a federal concept. Within that framework, Poland, along with Hungary, was upgraded to an eastern \"foederatus\" of the Holy Roman Empire, according to historian Jerzy Strzelczyk.\nCoins struck for Boles\u0142aw shortly after his meeting with the emperor bore the inscription Gnezdun Civitas, showing that he regarded Gniezno as his capital. The name of Poland was also recorded on the same coins referring to the Princes Polonie [\"sic\"]. The title \"princeps\" was almost exclusively used in Italy around that time, suggesting that it also represented the Emperor's idea of the renewal of the Roman Empire. However, Otto's premature death on 23 January 1002 put an end to his ambitious plans. The contemporaneous Bruno of Querfurt stated that \"nobody lamented\" the 22-year-old emperor's \"death with greater grief than Boles\u0142aw\".\nIn 1000 Boles\u0142aw issued a law prohibiting hunting beavers and created an office called \"Bobrowniczy\" whose task was to enforce prince's ordinances.\nExpansion (1002\u20131018).\nThree candidates were competing with each other for the German crown after Otto III's death. One of them, Duke Henry IV of Bavaria, promised the Margraviate of Meissen to Boles\u0142aw in exchange for his assistance against Eckard I, Margrave of Meissen who was the most powerful contender. However, Eckard was murdered on 30 April 1002, which enabled Henry of Bavaria to defeat his last opponent, Herman II, Duke of Swabia. Fearing that Henry II would side with elements in the German Church hierarchy which were unfavorable towards Poland, and taking advantage of the chaos that followed Margrave Eckard's death and Henry of Bavaria's conflict with Henry of Schweinfurt, Boles\u0142aw invaded Lusatia and Meissen. He \"seized Margrave Gero's march as far as the river Elbe\", and also Bautzen, Strehla and Meissen. At the end of July, he participated at a meeting of the Saxon lords where Henry of Bavaria, who had meanwhile been crowned king of Germany, only confirmed Boles\u0142aw's possession of Lusatia, and granted Meissen to Margrave Eckard's brother, Gunzelin, and Strehla to Eckard's oldest son, Herman. The relationship between King Henry and Boles\u0142aw became tense after assassins tried to murder Boles\u0142aw in Merseburg, because he accused the king of conspiracy against him. In retaliation, he seized and burned Strehla and took the inhabitants of the town into captivity.\nDuke Boleslaus III of Bohemia was dethroned and the Bohemian lords made Vladivoj, who had earlier fled to Poland, duke in 1002. The Czech historian Du\u0161an T\u0159e\u0161t\u00edk writes that Vladivoj seized the Bohemian throne with Boles\u0142aw's assistance. After Vladivoj died in 1003, Boles\u0142aw invaded Bohemia and restored Boleslaus III who had many Bohemian noblemen murdered. The Bohemian lords who survived the massacre \"secretly sent representatives\" to Boles\u0142aw, asking \"him to rescue them from fear of the future\", according to Thietmar of Merseburg. Boles\u0142aw invaded Bohemia and had Boleslaus III blinded. He entered Prague in March 1003 where the Bohemian lords proclaimed him duke. King Henry sent his envoys to Prague, demanding that Boles\u0142aw take an oath of loyalty and pay tribute to him, but Boles\u0142aw refused to obey. He also allied himself with the king's opponents, including Henry of Schweinfurt to whom he sent reinforcements. King Henry defeated Henry of Schweinfurt, forcing him to flee to Bohemia in August 1003. Boles\u0142aw invaded the Margraviate of Meissen, but Margrave Gunzelin refused to surrender his capital. It is also likely that Polish forces took control of Moravia and the northern parts of the Kingdom of Hungary (present-day mostly Slovakia) in 1003 as well. The proper conquest date of the Hungarian territories is 1003 or 1015 and this area stayed a part of Poland until 1018.\nKing Henry allied himself with the pagan Lutici, and broke into Lusatia in February 1004, but heavy snows forced him to withdraw. He invaded Bohemia in August 1004, taking the oldest brother of the blinded Boleslaus III of Bohemia, Jarom\u00edr, with him. The Bohemians rose up in open rebellion and murdered the Polish garrisons in the major towns. Boles\u0142aw left Prague without resistance, and King Henry made Jarom\u00edr duke of Bohemia on 8 September. Boles\u0142aw's ally Sob\u011bslav died in this campaign.\nDuring the next part of the offensive King Henry retook Meissen and in 1005, his army advanced as far into Poland as the city of Pozna\u0144 where a peace treaty was signed. According to the peace treaty Boles\u0142aw lost Lusatia and Meissen and likely gave up his claim to the Bohemian throne. Also in 1005, a pagan rebellion in Pomerania overturned Boles\u0142aw's rule and resulted in the destruction of the newly established local bishopric.\nIn 1007, after learning about Boles\u0142aw's efforts to gain allies among Saxon nobles and giving refuge to the deposed duke of Bohemia, Old\u0159ich, King Henry denounced the Peace of Pozna\u0144, which caused Boles\u0142aw's attack on the Archbishopric of Magdeburg as well as the re-occupation of the marches of Lusatia, though he stopped short of retaking Meissen. The German counter-offensive began three years later (previously, Henry was occupied with rebellion in Flanders), in 1010, but it was of no significant consequence. In 1012, another ineffective campaign by archbishop Walthard of Magdeburg was launched, as he died during that campaign and, consequently, his forces returned home. Later that year, Boles\u0142aw once again invaded Lusatia. Boles\u0142aw's forces pillaged and burned the city of Lubusz (Lebus). In 1013, a peace accord was signed at Merseburg. As part of the treaty, Boles\u0142aw paid homage to King Henry for the March of Lusatia (including the town of Bautzen) and Sorbian Meissen as fiefs. A marriage of Boles\u0142aw's son Mieszko with Richeza of Lotharingia, daughter of the Count Palatine Ezzo of Lotharingia and granddaughter of Emperor Otto II, was also performed. During the brief period of peace on the western frontier that followed, Boles\u0142aw took part in a short campaign in the east, towards the Kievan Rus' territories.\nIn 1014, Boles\u0142aw sent his son Mieszko to Bohemia in order to form an alliance with Duke Oldrich against Henry, by then crowned emperor. Oldrich imprisoned Mieszko and turned him over to Henry, who, however, released him in a gesture of good will after being pressured by Saxon nobles. Boles\u0142aw nonetheless refused to aid the emperor militarily in his Italian expedition. This led to imperial intervention in Poland and so in 1015 a war erupted once again. The war started out well for the emperor, as he was able to defeat the Polish forces at the Battle of Ciani. Once the imperial forces crossed the river Oder, Boles\u0142aw sent a detachment of Moravian knights in a diversionary attack against the Eastern March of the empire. Soon after, the imperial army, having suffered a defeat near the B\u00f3br marshes, retreated from Poland without any permanent gains. After this event, Boles\u0142aw's forces took the initiative. Margrave Gero II of Meissen was defeated and killed during a clash with the Polish forces in late 1015. In 1015 and 1017, Boles\u0142aw I attacked the Eastern March and was defeated twice by Henry the Strong and his forces.\nLater that year, Boles\u0142aw's son Mieszko was sent to plunder Meissen. His attempt at conquering the city, however, failed. In 1017, Boles\u0142aw defeated Duke Henry V of Bavaria. In that same year, supported by his Slavic allies, Emperor Henry once again invaded Poland, albeit once again to very little effect. He did besiege the cities of G\u0142og\u00f3w and Niemcza, but was unable to conquer them. The imperial forces once again were forced to retreat, suffering significant losses. Taking advantage of the involvement of Czech troops, Boles\u0142aw ordered his son to invade Bohemia, where Mieszko met very little resistance. On 30 January 1018, the Peace of Bautzen was signed. The Polish ruler was able to keep the contested marches of Lusatia and Sorbian Meissen not as fiefs, but as a part of Polish territory, and also received military aid in his expedition against Rus'. Also, Boles\u0142aw (then a widower) strengthened his dynastic bonds with the German nobility through his marriage with Oda, daughter of Margrave Eckard I of Meissen. The wedding took place four days later, on 3 February in the castle of \"Cziczani\" (also \"Sciciani\", at the site of either modern Gro\u00df-Seitschen or Z\u00fctzen).\nWar in Kiev (1018).\nBoles\u0142aw organised his first expedition east, to support his son-in-law Sviatopolk I of Kiev, in 1013, but the decisive engagements were to take place in 1018 after the Peace of Bautzen was already signed. At the request of Sviatopolk I, in what became known as the Kiev Expedition of 1018, the Polish duke sent an expedition to Kievan Rus' with an army of 2,000\u20135,000 Polish warriors, in addition to Thietmar's reported 1,000 Pechenegs, 300 German knights, and 500 Hungarian mercenaries. After collecting his forces during June, Boles\u0142aw led his troops to the border in July and on 23 July at the banks of the Bug River, near Wo\u0142y\u0144, he defeated the forces of Yaroslav the Wise, Prince of Kiev, in what became known as the Battle of the River Bug. All primary sources agree that the Polish prince was victorious in battle. Yaroslav retreated north to Novgorod, opening the road to Kiev. The city, which suffered from fires caused by the Pecheneg siege, surrendered upon seeing the main Polish force on 14 August. The entering army, led by Boles\u0142aw, was ceremonially welcomed by the local archbishop and the family of Vladimir I of Kiev. According to popular legend Boles\u0142aw notched his sword (Szczerbiec) hitting the Golden Gate of Kiev. Although Sviatopolk lost the throne soon afterwards and lost his life the following year, during this campaign Poland re-annexed the Red Strongholds, later called Red Ruthenia, lost by Boles\u0142aw's father in 981.\nLast years (1019\u20131025).\nIn 1018, Boles\u0142aw attempted to establish diplomatic relations with the Byzantines, although it is unclear whether they responded.\nHistorians dispute the exact date of Boles\u0142aw's coronation. The year 1025 is most widely accepted by scholars, though the year 1000 is also likely. According to an epitaph, the crowning took place when Otto bestowed upon Boles\u0142aw royal regalia at the Congress of Gniezno. However, independent German sources confirmed that after Henry II's death in 1024, Boles\u0142aw took advantage of the interregnum in Germany and crowned himself king in 1025. It is generally assumed that the coronation took place on Easter Sunday 27 March 1025. However Tadeusz Wojciechowski believes that the coronation took place prior to that, on 24 December 1024. The basis for this assertion is that the coronations of kings were usually held during religious festivities. The exact place of the coronation is also highly debated, with the cathedrals of Gniezno or Pozna\u0144 being the most probable locations. Poland was thereafter raised to the rank of a kingdom before its neighbour, Bohemia.\nWipo of Burgundy in his chronicle describes the event:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[In 1025] Boleslaus [of the Slavic nation], duke of the Poles, took for himself in injury to King Conrad the regal insignia and the royal name. Death swiftly killed his temerity.\u2014\u200a\nIt is widely believed that Boles\u0142aw had to receive permission for his coronation from the newly-elected Pope John XIX. John was known to be corrupt, and it is likely that consent was or may have been obtained through bribes. However, Rome also hoped for a potential alliance to defend itself from Byzantine Emperor Basil II, who launched a military expedition to recover the island of Sicily and could subsequently threaten the Papal States from the south. Stanis\u0142aw Zakrzewski put forward the theory that the coronation had the tacit consent of Conrad II and that the pope only confirmed that fact. That is corroborated by Conrad's confirmation of the royal title to Mieszko II, his agreement with the counts of Tusculum and the papal interactions with Conrad and Boles\u0142aw.\nDeath and burial.\nAccording to Cosmas of Prague, Boles\u0142aw I died shortly after his coronation on 17 June 1025. Already in advanced age for the time, the true cause of death is unknown and remains a matter of speculation. Chronicler Jan D\u0142ugosz (and followed by modern historians and archaeologists) writes that Boles\u0142aw was laid to rest at the Archcathedral Basilica of St. Peter and St. Paul in Pozna\u0144. In the 14th century, Casimir III the Great reportedly ordered the construction of a new, presumably Gothic, sarcophagus to which he transferred Boles\u0142aw's remains.\nThe medieval sarcophagus was partially damaged on 30 September 1772 during a fire, and completely destroyed in 1790 due to the collapse of the southern tower. Boles\u0142aw's remains were subsequently excavated from the rubble and moved to the cathedral's chapter house. Three bone fragments were donated to Tadeusz Czacki in 1801, at his request. Czacki, a notable Polish historian, pedagogue, and numismatist, placed one of the bone fragments in his ancestral mausoleum in Poryck (now Pavlivka) in the Volhynia region; the other two were given to Princess Izabela Flemming Czartoryska, who placed them in her recently founded Czartoryski Museum in Pu\u0142awy. \nAfter many historical twists, the burial place of Boles\u0142aw I ultimately remained at Pozna\u0144 Cathedral, in the Golden Chapel. The content of his epitaph is known to historians. It is Boles\u0142aw's epitaph, which, in part, came from the original tombstone, that is one of the first sources (dated to the period immediately after Boles\u0142aw's death, probably during the reign of Mieszko II) that gave the King his widely known nickname of \"Brave\" (Polish: \"Chrobry\"). Later, Gallus Anonymus, in Chapter 6 of his , named the Polish ruler as \"Bolezlavus qui dicebatur Gloriosus seu Chrabri\".\nFamily.\nThe contemporaneous Thietmar of Merseburg recorded Boles\u0142aw's marriages, also mentioning his children. Boles\u0142aw's first wife was a daughter of Rikdag, Margrave of Meissen. Historian Manteuffel says that the marriage was arranged in the early 980s by Mieszko I who wanted to strengthen his links with the Saxon lords and to enable his son to succeed Rikdag in Meissen. Boles\u0142aw \"later sent her away\", according to Thietmar's \"Chronicon\". Historian Marek Kazimierz Bara\u0144ski writes that Boles\u0142aw repudiated his first wife after her father's death in 985 which left the marriage without any political value.\nBoles\u0142aw \"took a Hungarian woman\" as his second wife. Most historians identify her as a daughter of the Hungarian ruler G\u00e9za, but this theory has not been universally accepted. She gave birth to a son, Bezprym, but Boles\u0142aw repudiated her.\nBoles\u0142aw's third wife, Emnilda, was \"a daughter of the venerable lord, Dobromir\". Her father was a West Slavic or Lechitic prince, either a local ruler from present-day Brandenburg who was closely related to the imperial Liudolfing dynasty, or the last independent prince of the Vistulans, before their incorporation into Poland. Wiszewski dates the marriage of Boles\u0142aw and Emnilda to 988. Emnilda exerted a beneficial influence on Boles\u0142aw, reforming \"her husband's unstable character\", according to Thietmar of Merseburg's report. Boles\u0142aw's and Emnilda's oldest (unnamed) daughter \"was an abbess\" of an unidentified abbey. Their second daughter Regelinda, who was born in 989, was given in marriage to Herman I, Margrave of Meissen in 1002 or 1003. Mieszko II Lambert who was born in 990 was Boles\u0142aw's favorite son and successor. The name of Boles\u0142aw's and Emnilda's third daughter, who was born in 995, is unknown; she married Sviatopolk I of Kiev between 1005 and 1012. Boles\u0142aw's youngest son, Otto, was born in 1000.\nBoles\u0142aw's fourth marriage, from 1018 until his death, was to Oda (c. 995\u20131025), daughter of Margrave Eckard I of Meissen. They had a daughter, Matilda (c. 1018\u20131036), betrothed (or married) on 18 May 1035 to Otto of Schweinfurt.\nPredslava, a daughter of Vladimir the Great and Rogneda, whom, along with her sister Mstislava, he had taken from Kiev in 1018, was his concubine.\nMarriages and Issue:\nOda/Hunilda?, daughter of Rikdag\nUnknown Hungarian woman (sometimes identified as Judith of Hungary):\nEmnilda, daughter of Dobromir:\nOda of Meissen\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39001", "revid": "6569922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39001", "title": "Machester Mark I", "text": ""}
{"id": "39002", "revid": "2813350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39002", "title": "Solar power satellite", "text": ""}
{"id": "39003", "revid": "869314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39003", "title": "Rand Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "39004", "revid": "39732090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39004", "title": "Robert Broom", "text": "South African doctor and palaeontologist (1866\u20131951)\nRobert Broom FRS FRSE (30 November 1866\u00a0\u2013 6 April 1951) was a British- South African medical doctor and palaeontologist. He qualified as a medical practitioner in 1895 and received his DSc in 1905 from the University of Glasgow.\nFrom 1903 to 1910, he was professor of zoology and geology at Victoria College, Stellenbosch, South Africa, and subsequently he became keeper of vertebrate palaeontology at the South African Museum, Cape Town.\nLife.\nBroom was born at 66 Back Sneddon Street in Paisley, Renfrewshire, Scotland, the son of John Broom, a designer of calico prints and Paisley shawls, and Agnes Hunter Shearer.\nIn 1893, he married Mary Baird Baillie, his childhood sweetheart.\nIn his medical studies at the University of Glasgow Broom specialised in obstetrics. After graduating in 1895 he travelled to Australia, supporting himself by practising medicine. He settled in South Africa in 1897, just prior to the South African War. From 1903 to 1910, he was professor of Zoology and Geology at Victoria College, Stellenbosch (later Stellenbosch University), but was forced out of this position for promoting belief in evolution. He established a medical practice in the Karoo region of South Africa, an area rich in therapsid fossils. Based on his continuing studies of these fossils and mammalian anatomy he was made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1920. Following the discovery of the Taung child he became interested in the search for human ancestors and commenced work on much more recent fossils from the dolomite caves north-west of Johannesburg, particularly Sterkfontein Cave (now part of the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site). As well as describing many mammalian fossils from these caves he identified several hominin fossils, the most complete of which was an australopithecine skull, nicknamed Mrs Ples, and a partial skeleton that indicated that australopithecines walked upright.\nBroom died in Pretoria, South Africa in 1951.\nContributions.\nBroom was first known for his study of therapsids. After Raymond Dart's discovery of the Taung Child, an infant australopithecine, Broom's interest in palaeoanthropology was heightened. Broom's career seemed over and he was sinking into poverty, when Dart wrote to Jan Smuts about the situation. Smuts, exerting pressure on the South African government, managed to obtain a position for Broom in 1934 with the staff of the Transvaal Museum in Pretoria as an Assistant in Palaeontology.\nBroom has been described as \"one of the great Karoo (and, in particular, therapsid) palaeontologists\", having managed to describe 369 therapsid holotypes in his lifetime, which he ascribed to 168 new genera. Broom has a reputation as a \"splitter\" that has resulted in only around 57% of his holotypes still being considered valid as of 2003.\nIn the following years, he and John T. Robinson made a series of spectacular finds, including fragments from six hominins in Sterkfontein, which they named \"Plesianthropus transvaalensis\", popularly called Mrs. Ples, but which was later classified as an adult \"Australopithecus africanus\", as well as more discoveries at sites in Kromdraai and Swartkrans. In 1937, Broom made his most famous discovery, by defining the robust hominin genus \"Paranthropus\" with his discovery of \"Paranthropus robustus\". These discoveries helped support Dart's claims for the Taung species.\nFor his volume, \"The South Africa Fossil Ape-Men, The Australopithecinae\", in which he proposed the Australopithecinae subfamily, Broom was awarded the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal from the National Academy of Sciences in 1946.\nThe remainder of Broom's career was devoted to the exploration of these sites and the interpretation of the many early hominin remains discovered there. He continued to write to the last. Shortly before his death he finished a monograph on the Australopithecines and remarked to his nephew:\n\"Now that's finished ... and so am I.\"\nSpiritual evolution.\nBroom was a nonconformist and was deeply interested in the paranormal and spiritualism; he was a critic of Darwinism and materialism. Broom was a believer in spiritual evolution. In his book \"The Coming of Man: Was it Accident or Design?\" (1933) he claimed that \"spiritual agencies\" had guided evolution as animals and plants were too complex to have arisen by chance. According to Broom, there were at least two different kinds of spiritual forces, and psychics are capable of seeing them. Broom claimed there was a plan and purpose in evolution and that the origin of \"Homo sapiens\" is the ultimate purpose behind evolution. According to Broom \"Much of evolution looks as if it had been planned to result in man, and in other animals and plants to make the world a suitable place for him to dwell in.\"\nAfter discovering the skull of Mrs. Ples, Broom was asked if he excavated at random, Broom replied that spirits had told him where to find his discoveries.\nResearch on the Khoisan.\nBroom had a noted interest in the Khoisan peoples, which included collecting their remains, including those of the recently deceased, as well as by digging up old graves. Broom first began collecting modern human remains in 1897, shortly after he moved to South Africa. In that year he collected the remains of three elderly \"Hottentot\" people that had died around Port Nolloth following a drought in the region. Broom stated that he \"cut their heads off and boiled them in paraffin tins on the kitchen stove\". Their skulls were later sent to the medical school of the University of Edinburgh, alongside a 7 month old foetus, from which Broom had removed the brain which he preserved separately. Broom also obtained remains of deceased prisoners, stating: \"If a prisoner dies and you want his skeleton, probably two or three regulations stand in the way, but the enthusiast does not worry about such regulations.\" Broom said that he had buried several corpses in his garden allowing them to decay before later retrieving their bones. These include the remains of two men who were imprisoned in Douglas jail: Andreas Links, an 18 year old !Ora man, (catalogued as MMK 264), as well an unnamed 18 year old \"bushman\" from Langeberg (catalogued as MMK 283), who was photographed while alive at the request of Broom, despite this being against policy. The skeletons of both men were added to the collections of the McGregor Museum in 1921.\nBroom described the Khoisan peoples as a \"degenerate\" and \"degraded race\", speculating in 1907 that they descended from \"the race which built the Pyramids\" and \"Mongoloids\", but had \"degenerated\" due to South Africa's hot climate. In his later works he divided the Khoisan peoples into three races, the Bushmen, Hottentot and Korana, based on supposed typological differences, with the type specimen of the Korana race being the skeleton of Links. Other contemporary anthropologists questioned this classification scheme, especially the Korana race. Broom later said that he had \"invented the Korana\". All such typological racial classification schemes are discredited today, due to being based on vague criteria, resulting in the rigid categorization ultimately being arbitrary. Anatomist Goran \u0160trkalj wrote that: \"It is obvious that Broom's anthropological work was ... influenced by the racist stereotypes and prejudices of the day\".\nPublications.\nAmong hundreds of articles contributed by him to scientific journals, the most important include:\nBooks\nLegacy.\nRobert Broom is commemorated in the scientific name of a species of Australian blind snake, \"Anilios broomi\", the Triassic archosauromorph reptile \"Prolacerta broomi\", the rhinesuchid amphibian \"Broomistega\", the Permian dicynodont \"Robertia broomiana\" and millerettid \"Broomia\" and the aloe plant species \"Aloe broomii\".\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39005", "revid": "50446187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39005", "title": "Antenna", "text": "Antenna (pl.: antennas or antennae) most commonly refers to:\nAntenna, antennas, antennae or antena may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39006", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39006", "title": "Normoxic", "text": ""}
{"id": "39007", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39007", "title": "Wall", "text": "Vertical structure, usually solid, that defines and sometimes protects an area\nA wall is a structure and a surface that defines an area; carries a load; provides security, shelter, or soundproofing; or serves a decorative purpose. There are various types of walls, including border barriers between countries, brick walls, defensive walls in fortifications, and retaining walls that hold back dirt, stone, water, or noise. Walls can also be found in buildings, where they support roofs, floors, and ceilings, enclose spaces, and provide shelter and security.\nThe construction of walls can be categorized into framed walls and mass-walls. Framed walls transfer the load to the foundation through posts, columns, or studs and typically consist of structural elements, insulation, and finish elements. Mass-walls are made of solid materials such as masonry, concrete, adobe, or rammed earth. Walls may also house utilities like electrical wiring or plumbing and must conform to local building and fire codes.\nWalls have historically served defensive purposes, with the term \"wall\" originally referring to defensive walls and ramparts. Examples of famous defensive walls include the Great Wall of China and Hadrian's Wall. In addition to their functional roles, walls can also be decorative, contributing to the aesthetic appeal of a space.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"wall\" comes from the Latin meaning \"an earthen wall or rampart set with palisades, a row or line of stakes, a wall, a rampart, fortification\", while the Latin word refers to a defensive stone wall. English uses the same word to mean an external wall and the internal sides of a room, but this is not universal, and many languages distinguish between the two. This distinction can be seen In German between and , and in Spanish between and .\nDefensive wall.\nThe word wall originally referred to defensive walls and ramparts.\nBuilding wall.\nThe purposes of walls in buildings are to support roofs, floors and ceilings; to enclose a space as part of the building envelope along with a roof to give buildings form; and to provide shelter and security. In addition, the wall may house various types of utilities such as electrical wiring or plumbing. Walls may or may not be load-bearing. Walls are required to conform to the local building and/or fire codes.\nWall construction falls into two basic categories: \"framed walls\" or \"mass-walls\". In framed walls, the load is transferred to the foundation through posts, columns or studs. Framed walls most often have three or more separate components: the structural elements (such as 2\u00d74 studs in a house wall), insulation, and finish elements or surfaces (such as drywall or panelling). Mass-walls are of a solid material, such as masonry, concrete including slipform stonemasonry, log building, cordwood construction, adobe, rammed earth, cob, earthbag construction, bottles, tin cans, straw-bale construction, or ice.\nThere are three basic methods through which walls control water intrusion: moisture storage, drained cladding, or face-sealed cladding. Moisture storage is typical of stone and brick \"mass-wall\" buildings where moisture is absorbed and released by the walls of the structure itself. \"Drained cladding\", also known as \"screened walls,\" acknowledges moisture will penetrate the cladding so a \"moisture barrier\" such as housewrap or felt paper inside the cladding provides a second line of defense, and sometimes a \"drainage plane\" or \"air gap\" allows a path for the moisture to drain down through and exit the wall. Sometimes ventilation is provided in addition to the drainage plane such as in rainscreen construction. \"Face-sealed\" cladding, also called \"barrier wall\" or \"perfect barrier\" cladding, relies on maintaining a leak-free surface of the cladding. Examples of face sealed cladding are the early exterior insulation finishing systems, structural glazing, metal clad panels, and corrugated metal.\nBuilding walls frequently become works of art, externally and internally, such as when featuring mosaic work or when murals are painted on them; or as design foci when they exhibit textures or painted finishes for effect.\nCurtain wall.\nIn architecture and civil engineering, curtain wall refers to a building facade that is not load-bearing but provides decoration, finish, front, face, or historical preservation.\nPrecast wall.\nPrecast walls are walls which have been manufactured in a factory and then shipped to where it is needed, ready to install. Compared to walls made of other materials, such as brick, it is faster to install and may have a lower cost.\nMullion wall.\nMullion walls are a structural system that carries the load of the floor slab on prefabricated panels around the perimeter.\nPartition wall.\nA partition wall is a usually thin wall that is used to separate or divide a room, primarily a pre-existing one. Partition walls are usually not load-bearing, and can be constructed out of many materials, including steel panels, bricks, cloth, plastic, plasterboard, wood, blocks of clay, terracotta, concrete, and glass (such as sheet glass).\nGlass partition walls are a series of individual toughened glass panels mounted in wood or metal framing. They may be suspended from or slide along a robust aluminium ceiling track. The system does not require the use of a floor guide, which allows easy operation and an uninterrupted threshold.\nA timber partition consists of a wooden framework, supported on the floor or by side walls. Metal lath and plaster, properly laid, forms a reinforced partition wall. Partition walls constructed from fibre cement backer board are popular as bases for tiling in kitchens or in wet areas like bathrooms. Galvanized sheet fixed to wooden or steel members are mostly adopted in works of temporary character. Plain or reinforced partition walls may also be constructed from concrete, including pre-cast concrete blocks. Metal framed partitioning is also available. This partition consists of track (used primarily at the base and head of the partition) and studs (vertical sections fixed into the track typically spaced at ).\nInternal wall partitions, .also known as office partitioning, are usually made of plasterboard (drywall) or varieties of glass. Toughened glass is a common option, as low-iron glass (better known as \"opti-white glass\") increases light and solar heat transmission.\nWall partitions are constructed using beads and tracking that is either hung from the ceiling or fixed into the ground. The panels are inserted into the tracking and fixed. Some wall partition variations specify their fire resistance and acoustic performance rating.\nMovable partitions are walls that open to join two or more rooms into one large floor area. These include:\nParty wall.\nParty walls are walls that separate buildings or units within a building. They provide fire resistance and sound resistance between occupants in a building. The minimum fire resistance and sound resistance required for the party wall is determined by a building code and may be modified to suit a variety of situations. Ownership of such walls can become a legal issue. It is not a load-bearing wall and may be owned by different people.\nInfill wall.\nAn infill wall is the supported wall that closes the perimeter of a building constructed with a three-dimensional framework structure.\nFire wall.\nFire walls resist spread of fire within or between structures to provide passive fire protection. A delay in the spread of fire gives occupants more time to escape and fire fighters more time to extinguish the fire. Some fire walls allow fire resistive window assemblies, and are made of non-combustible material such as concrete, cement block, brick, or fire rated drywall. Wall penetrations are sealed with fire resistive materials. A doorway in a firewall must have a rated fire door. Fire walls provide varying resistance to the spread of fire, (one to four hours). Firewalls can also act as smoke barriers when constructed vertically from slab to roof deck and horizontally from an exterior wall to exterior wall subdividing a building into sections.\nShear wall.\nShear walls resist lateral forces such as in an earthquake or severe wind. There are different kinds of shear walls such as the steel plate shear wall.\nKnee wall.\nKnee walls are short walls that either support rafters or add height in the top floor rooms of houses. In a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442-story house, the knee wall supports the \"half story\".\nCavity wall.\nCavity walls are walls made with a space between two \"skins\" to inhibit heat transfer.\nPony wall.\nPony wall (or dwarf wall) is a general term for short walls, such as:\nDemountable wall.\nDemountable walls fall into 3 different main types:\nSolar energy.\nA trombe wall in passive solar building design acts as a heat sink.\nShipbuilding.\nOn a ship, a wall that separates major compartments is called a \"bulkhead\". A thinner wall between cabins is called a \"partition\".\nBoundary wall.\nBoundary walls include privacy walls, boundary-marking walls on property, and town walls. These intergrade into fences. The conventional differentiation is that a fence is of minimal thickness and often open in nature, while a wall is usually more than a nominal thickness and is completely closed, or opaque. More to the point, an exterior structure of wood or wire is generally called a fence\u2014but one of masonry is a wall. A common term for both is barrier, which is convenient for structures that are partly wall and partly fence\u2014for example the Berlin Wall. Another kind of wall-fence ambiguity is the ha-ha\u2014which is set below ground level to protect a view, yet acts as a barrier (to cattle, for example).\nBefore the invention of artillery, many of the world's cities and towns, particularly in Europe and Asia, had defensive or protective walls (also called town walls or city walls). In fact, the English word \"wall\" derives from Latin \"vallum\"\u2014a type of fortification wall. These walls are no longer relevant for defense, so such cities have grown beyond their walls, and many fortification walls, or portions of them, have been torn down\u2014for example in Rome, Italy and Beijing, China. Examples of protective walls on a much larger scale include the Great Wall of China and Hadrian's Wall.\nBorder wall.\nSome walls formally mark the border between one population and another. A border wall is constructed to limit the movement of people across a certain line or border. These structures vary in placement with regard to international borders and topography. The most famous example of border barrier in history is probably the Great Wall of China, a series of walls that separated the Empire of China from nomadic powers to the north. The most prominent recent example is the Berlin Wall, which surrounded the enclave of West Berlin and separated it from East Germany for most of the Cold War era. The US-Mexico border wall, separating the United States and Mexico, is another recent example.\nRetaining wall.\nIn areas of rocky soils around the world, farmers have often pulled large quantities of stone out of their fields to make farming easier and have stacked those stones to make walls that either mark the field boundary, or the property boundary, or both.\nRetaining walls resist movement of earth, stone, or water. They may be part of a building or external. The ground surface or water on one side of a retaining wall is typically higher than on the other side. A dike is a retaining wall, as is a levee, a load-bearing foundation wall, and a sea wall.\nShared wall.\nSpecial laws often govern walls that neighbouring properties share. Typically, one neighbour cannot alter the common wall if it is likely to affect the building or property on the other side. A wall may also separate apartment or hotel rooms from each other. Each wall has two sides and breaking a wall on one side will break the wall on the other side.\nPortable wall.\nPortable walls, such as room dividers or portable partitions divide a larger open space into smaller rooms. Portable walls can be static, such as cubicle walls, or can be wall panels mounted on casters to provide an easy way to reconfigure assembly space. They are often found inside schools, churches, convention centers, hotels, and corporate facilities.\nTemporary wall.\nA temporary wall is constructed for easy removal or demolition. A typical temporary wall can be constructed with to sheet rock (plasterboard), metal 2 \u00d7 3 s () or 2 \u00d7 4 s (), or taped, plastered and compounded. Most installation companies use lattice (strips of wood) to cover the joints of the temporary wall with the ceiling. These are sometimes known as pressurized walls or temporary pressurized walls.\nWalls in popular culture.\nWalls are often seen in popular culture, oftentimes representing barriers preventing progress or entry. For example:\nThe progressive/psychedelic rock band Pink Floyd used a metaphorical wall to represent the isolation felt by the protagonist of their 1979 concept album \"The Wall\".\nThe American poet laureate Robert Frost describes a pointless rock wall as a metaphor for the myopia of the culture-bound in his poem \"Mending Wall\", published in 1914.\nWalls are a recurring symbol in Ursula K. Le Guin's 1974 novel \"The Dispossessed\".\nIn some cases, a wall may refer to an individual's debilitating mental or physical condition, seen as an impassable barrier.\nIn George R. R. Martin's \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series and its television adaptation, \"Game of Thrones\", The Wall plays multiple important roles: as a colossal fortification, made of ice and fortified with magic spells; as a cultural barrier; and as a codification of assumptions. Breaches of the wall, who is allowed to cross it and who is not, and its destruction have important symbolic, logistical, and socio-political implications in the storyline. Reportedly over high and wide, it divides the northern border of the Seven Kingdoms realm from the domain of the wildlings and several categories of undead who live beyond it.\nIn a real-life example, the Berlin Wall, constructed by the Soviet Union to divide Berlin into NATO and Warsaw Pact zones of occupation, became a worldwide symbol of oppression and isolation.\nAnother common usage is as a communal surface to write upon. For instance the social networking site Facebook previously used an electronic \"wall\" to log the scrawls of friends until it was replaced by the \"timeline\" feature.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39009", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39009", "title": "British Petroleum", "text": ""}
{"id": "39010", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39010", "title": "Robbie Williams", "text": "English pop singer (born 1974)\nRobert Peter Williams (born 13 February 1974) is an English singer and songwriter. He found fame as a member of the pop group Take That from 1990 to 1995, launching a solo career in 1996. His debut studio album, \"Life thru a Lens\", was released in 1997, and included his best-selling single \"Angels\". His second album, \"I've Been Expecting You\", featured the songs \"Millennium\" and \"She's the One\", his first and second number one singles. His discography includes seven UK No. 1 singles, and all but one of his 14 studio albums have reached No. 1 in the UK. Six of his albums are among the top 100 biggest-selling albums in the UK, with two of them in the top 60, and he gained a Guinness World Record in 2006 for selling 1.6 million tickets in a single day during his Close Encounters Tour.\nWilliams has received a record 18 Brit Awards, winning Best British Male Artist four times, Outstanding Contribution to Music twice, an Icon Award for his lasting impact on British culture, eight German ECHO Awards, and three MTV European Music Awards. In 2004, he was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame after being voted the Greatest Artist of the 1990s. According to the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), he has been certified for 20.36 million albums and 10.4 million singles in the UK as a solo artist. Five of his albums have also topped the Australian albums chart, and he has sold an estimated 75 million to 80 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists of all time. He also topped the 2000\u20132010 UK airplay chart. His three concerts at Knebworth in 2003 drew over 375,000 people, the UK's biggest music event to that point. In 2014, he was awarded the freedom of his hometown of Stoke-on-Trent and had a tourist trail created and streets named in his honour. Williams' latest compilation album, \"XXV\", was released on 9 September 2022.\nAfter 15 years, Williams rejoined Take That in 2010 to co-write and perform lead vocals on their album \"Progress\", which became the second-fastest-selling album in UK chart history and the fastest-selling record of the century at the time. The subsequent stadium tour, which featured seven songs from Williams' solo career, became the biggest-selling concert in UK history when it sold 1.34 million tickets in less than 24 hours. In 2011, Take That frontman Gary Barlow confirmed that Williams had left the band for a second time to focus on his solo career, although he stated that the departure was amicable and that Williams was welcome to rejoin Take That in the future. Williams has since performed with Take That on three separate television appearances, and collaborated with Barlow on a number of projects such as the West End musical \"The Band\". A film based on Williams' life, \"Better Man\", was released in 2024.\nEarly life.\nRobert Peter Williams was born on 13 February 1974 in Stoke-on-Trent, the son of Janet (n\u00e9e Farrell) and Peter Williams (also known as Pete Conway), who ran a pub called the Red Lion in Burslem before becoming the licensee at the Port Vale Social Club. His maternal grandfather was an Irishman from Kilkenny. He attended St Margaret Ward Catholic School in Tunstall and participated in several school plays, most notably in the role of the Artful Dodger in a production of \"Oliver!\"\nTake That.\n1990\u20131995: First stint.\nIn 1990, the sixteen-year-old Williams was the youngest member to join Take That. According to the documentary \"\", his mother read an advertisement seeking members for a new boy band and suggested that he try out for the group. He met fellow member Mark Owen on the day of his audition/interview with Nigel Martin-Smith. Although the majority of the group's material was written and performed by Gary Barlow, Williams performed lead vocals on three hits \"Could It Be Magic\", \"I Found Heaven\", and \"Everything Changes\". Williams' use of alcohol and cocaine brought him into conflict with Martin-Smith over the behaviour rules for Take That members.\nIn November 1994, Williams's drug use had escalated; he nearly had a drug overdose the night before the group was scheduled to perform at the MTV Europe Music Awards. According to the documentary \"For the Record\", he was unhappy with his musical ideas not being taken seriously by Martin-Smith and lead singer Barlow; his desire to explore hip hop and rap conflicted with Take That's usual ballads. Barlow stated in interviews that Williams had given up trying to offer creative input.\nNoting Williams's increasingly belligerent behaviour and poor attendance at rehearsals, and worried that he might leave the group during their upcoming tour, Barlow and Jason Orange took their concerns to Martin-Smith. During one of the last rehearsals before the tour commenced, the three confronted Williams about his attitude and stated they wanted to do the tour without him. He agreed to quit and left the group in July 1995; it would be the last time for twelve years that they were all together. Despite the departure of Williams, Take That completed their Nobody Else Tour as a four-piece. They later disbanded on 13 February 1996, Williams's 22nd birthday.\nShortly afterwards, Williams was photographed by the press partying with the members of Oasis at Glastonbury Festival. Following his departure, he became the subject of talk shows and newspapers as he acknowledged his plans to become a solo singer, and he was spotted partying with George Michael in France. A clause in his Take That contract prohibited him from releasing any material until after the group was officially dissolved, and he was later sued by Martin-Smith and forced to pay $200,000 in commission. After various legal battles over his right to a solo career, Williams succeeded in getting released from his contract with BMG. On 27 June 1996, he signed with Chrysalis Records.\n2006\u20132011: Second stint.\nBy March 2009, Williams had shown interest in rejoining Take That; the band completed their tour, The Circus Live, without him. In spite of rumours that Williams was working in New York with Take That in September that year, by the day of the \"Children in Need\" charity concert at the Royal Albert Hall in November they were still performing separately. Both did join with the other acts in the final song of the evening, with Williams putting his arm around Gary Barlow and singing \"Hey Jude\".\nOn 15 July 2010, Williams reconciled with his former colleagues and rejoined Take That. In November 2010 the Take That album \"Progress\" was released, becoming the fastest selling album since 2000 and the second fastest selling album in UK history. The group travelled across the UK on their Progress Live tour, which included eight nights at Wembley Stadium in London, then continued across Europe. The tour was the fastest selling in UK history with ticket hotlines and websites crashing under the demand.\nIn August 2012, Take That performed at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics. Williams was due to perform with Take That but missed the performance because his wife gave birth at around the same time; the group performed as a four-piece.\nAlthough still officially part of Take That, Williams chose not to return for group's seventh and eighth studio albums and their accompanying tours, focusing instead on his solo commitments. He continued to write music with his colleagues and has performed with the group on several occasions since 2011's Progress tour and planned to return for a full tour to celebrate Take That's 30th anniversary in 2019.\nSolo career.\n1996\u20131998: \"Life thru a Lens\" and \"I've Been Expecting You\".\nWilliams launched his solo career in 1996 with a cover of George Michael's \"Freedom\", which reached number two in the UK Singles Chart. Recordings for Williams's first album began at London's Maison Rouge studios in March 1997. Shortly after his introduction to songwriter and producer Guy Chambers, Williams released \"Old Before I Die\", the first single from his debut album. The single reached number two on the UK Charts; it was largely ignored on international charts. His debut album, \"Life thru a Lens\", was released in September 1997. The album launched with his first live solo gig at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Montmartre theatre in Paris, France. The album debuted at number eleven on the UK Albums Chart.\n\"Angels\", the fourth single, is Williams' best-seller in the United Kingdom. The song, apart from becoming a hit around Europe and Latin America, caused sales of his album to skyrocket. The album remained in the British top ten for forty weeks and spent 218 weeks there altogether, making it the 58th best selling album in UK history with sales of over 2.4\u00a0million. The album eventually managed to sell over three million copies in Europe.\nWilliams and Chambers started writing the second album, \"I've Been Expecting You\", in Jamaica in early 1998. The first single, \"Millennium\", accompanied with a music video featuring Williams parodying James Bond, complete with tuxedo and references to Bond films like \"Thunderball\" and \"From Russia with Love\", became Williams' first solo number one single in the United Kingdom. It also became a top twenty hit in many European countries, Latin America and Australia.\n\"I've Been Expecting You\" was released in late October 1998 and debuted at number one in the UK Albums Chart. The album received more attention outside the United Kingdom, leaving its mark in the European and Latin American markets with hits such as \"No Regrets\", a collaboration with the Pet Shop Boys' singer Neil Tennant and the Divine Comedy's Neil Hannon. \"She's the One\", a cover of a World Party track written by Karl Wallinger, became Williams' second UK number-one single. Williams finished the year with a European Tour late in 1999. \"I've Been Expecting You\" sold almost 3\u00a0million copies in the UK and was certified 10\u00d7 Platinum by the BPI. In Europe, the album sold over 4\u00a0million copies.\n1999\u20132001: \"Sing When You're Winning\" and \"Swing When You're Winning\".\nIn 1999, Williams was signed to Capitol Records in the United States, a part of EMI. He embarked on a United States promotional tour and released his first United States and Canadian single, \"Millennium\". The compilation album \"The Ego Has Landed\" was released in July 1999 in the United States and Canada. In the middle of promotion and the tours in 1999, Williams began work on his third studio album.\nThe first single taken from the album was \"Rock DJ\", a song inspired by Williams's UNICEF mentor, the late Ian Dury. The video created by Fred &amp; Farid showed Williams in an attempt to get noticed by a group of women, first stripping and then tearing chunks of skin and muscle from his body, and caused controversy in the United Kingdom and many other countries. The video was edited by \"Top of the Pops\" for its graphic content and many other channels followed suit. The song became an instant hit, reaching number one in the UK (becoming his third number one single as a solo artist) and New Zealand. The song went on to win \"Best Song of 2000\" at the MTV Europe Music Awards, \"Best Single of the Year\" at the Brit Awards and an MTV Video Music Award for Best Special Effects.\nWhen the album, \"Sing When You're Winning\" was released in August 2000, it topped the charts in many different countries. In the UK the album was certified 2\u00d7 Platinum on its first week of release. After the success of his third album, Williams wanted to take another musical direction. He took two weeks off from his tour to record \"Swing When You're Winning\", his fourth studio album. Born from his lifelong love for Frank Sinatra\u00a0\u2013 combined with the success of the track \"Have You Met Miss Jones?\" that he recorded for the film \"Bridget Jones' Diary\" in 2001\u00a0\u2013 the album was recorded at Capitol Studios in Los Angeles.\nWilliams took the chance to duet with his long-time friend Jonathan Wilkes, \"Little Voice\" star Jane Horrocks, \"Saturday Night Live\" star Jon Lovitz, Rupert Everett and actress Nicole Kidman. The first single released from the album was a duet with Kidman, on \"Somethin' Stupid\". Originally a hit for Frank and Nancy Sinatra, the song became Williams' fifth number one hit in the UK. It eventually went on to become one of the biggest hits of 2001. \"Beyond the Sea\" was featured over the credits of the film \"Finding Nemo\" in 2003 and was also released on the film's soundtrack CD. A DVD, \"Robbie Williams Live at the Albert Hall\", was released in December of that year and has become one of the best selling music DVDs in Europe, being certified 6\u00d7 Platinum in the United Kingdom and 2\u00d7 Platinum in Germany.\n2002\u20132005: \"Escapology\" and \"Intensive Care\".\nIn 2002, Williams signed a record-breaking \u00a380\u00a0million contract with EMI. The contract included a number of provisos, including the label ceding greater creative control to the artist and a commitment to breaking Williams into the US market. It remains the biggest music deal in British history. The deal was brokered by Ingenious Media, a UK corporate finance advisory business. Williams began working on what would be his fifth studio album, spending a year in the recording studio. The album heralded a new era for Williams. He had taken a more active role in the making of this album. \"One Fine Day\", \"Nan's Song\", and \"Come Undone\" were the first songs that Williams wrote without the input of Guy Chambers. Most of the songs were recorded in Los Angeles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"For the first time in my life, I'm speechless.\"\n\u2014Williams addresses the crowd during his three record-breaking concerts at Knebworth playing to 375,000 people, the biggest event in UK music history.\nThe album's first single, \"Feel\", written by Williams and Chambers, was recorded as a demo. When they started working on the album and were trying to re-record the vocals, Williams felt dissatisfied with it, so he decided to include the demo version and then release it as the first single. When the single was released in late 2002, it became Williams' biggest international hit, going number one in The Netherlands and Italy and reaching the top ten in many European countries. When Williams' fifth studio album, \"Escapology\", was released in late 2002, it hit number one in at least 10 countries around the world. In the United States, it failed to make such an impact. \"Escapology\" sold almost 2\u00a0million copies by the end of 2003 in the United Kingdom. On 1\u20133 August 2003, Williams played three consecutive concerts at Knebworth to 125,000 people each night, making it the biggest event in UK music history. Memorable performances included \"Come Undone\" where he interjected with \"Britain, I'm Your Son\", and further interacted with the audience when he brought a girl up on stage. In October 2003, Williams released a live album of the concerts, \"Live at Knebworth\".\nIn October 2004, Williams released \"Greatest Hits\", a retrospective of his career, which also contained new tracks he had been working on with then-new collaborator Stephen Duffy. \"Radio\", the compilation's first single, debuted at number one in the UK Singles Chart, becoming Williams' sixth number-one hit. When the compilation was released, it debuted at number one in the UK and was the best selling album of the year in the UK and Europe. Eight years after the release of \"Angels\", the British public voted it as the \"Best Single of the Past Twenty-Five Years\" at the 2005 Brit Awards.\nAfter touring Latin America in late 2004 for the promotion \"Greatest Hits\", Williams started working on his sixth studio album. Recorded at his house in the Hollywood Hills, the album was co-written by Stephen Duffy over the course of 24 months. The album \"Intensive Care\" was launched in Berlin on 9 October. It became an international hit. In November 2005, Williams took home the MTV Europe Music Award for 'Best Male', but also, entered in \"The Guinness Book of World Records\" when he announced his World Tour for 2006, selling 1.6\u00a0million tickets in one single day. Williams kicked off his \"Close Encounters World Tour\" in South Africa in April 2006; when he finished his European leg of the tour, 2.5\u00a0million people had seen the show and, after touring Latin America and Australia, the numbers went up to 3\u00a0million.\n2006\u20132009: \"Rudebox\" and \"Reality Killed the Video Star\".\nWilliams released his much anticipated dance/electro album, \"Rudebox\", on 23 October 2006. It featured collaborations with the Pet Shop Boys, William Orbit, Soul Mekanik, Joey Negro, Mark Ronson, Chris Grierson, and The Orr Boys. It received mixed reviews: Allmusic gave it a four star rating, the \"NME\" 8 out of 10, and Music Week and MOJO were equally positive, but it received much weaker reviews from some of the British press. The album sold 2\u00d7 Platinum in Europe with sales of over 2\u00a0million making it the fastest platinum-selling album of 2006. To promote his album, Williams commissioned a series of short films. \"Goodbye to the Normals\" was directed by Jim Field Smith and features \"Burslem Normals\" by Williams.\nIn February 2009, it was confirmed that Williams had written material with Guy Chambers and Mark Ronson. A spokesman said that Williams was planning to begin the recording sessions in March and that the new album would be released in late 2009. This will probably be the last Williams album released by EMI. On his official website, Williams confirmed that he was working with producer Trevor Horn on his new album, which would eventually be titled \"Reality Killed the Video Star\", a reference to the song \"Video Killed the Radio Star\" by Horn's former band the Buggles. The album was released on 9 November 2009 in the United Kingdom.\nOn 11 October 2009 Williams published a 12-track compilation album, titled \"Songbook\", as a free CD for the newspaper \"The Mail on Sunday\". That same evening, Williams made his \"comeback\" on \"The X Factor\" results show, performing his new single \"Bodies\" for the first time live. On 20 October 2009 Williams opened the BBC Electric Proms at the London RoundHouse. It was his first live concert for 3 years and was broadcast across 200 cinemas worldwide. Accompanied by a string section, horn section, full band and producer Trevor Horn, Williams performed several new tracks from \"Reality Killed the Video Star\" and older tracks.\n\"Reality Killed the Video Star\" was previewed in the UK on the Spotify music streaming service on 6 November 2009, and official released on 9 November. In a high-profile chart battle, Williams' album was pitted against \"X Factor\" 2008 runners-up JLS who released their debut album the same day. JLS beat Williams to the number one spot by 1500 sales. The album was also released in the United States (Williams' first album to be released there since 2002's \"Escapology\"). In late November 2009, Williams travelled to Australia to perform at the ARIA Music Awards of 2009.\n2010\u20132012: \"In and Out of Consciousness\" and \"Take the Crown\".\nIn October 2010, Williams released his second greatest hits album, \"\", to celebrate 20 years as a performing artist. A single, \"Shame\", was also released, which was written and sung by Williams and Barlow.\nOn 21 October 2011 Williams signed with Island Records (Universal Music), following his departure from his previous record label EMI in 2010.\nWilliams was the opening act at the Diamond Jubilee Concert, which was co-organised by Gary Barlow, held outside Buckingham Palace on 4 June 2012. During the end of August his official website began a countdown to the release of information regarding his latest solo material, with an image of his face and his mind unveiled daily as the countdown expired. Titled \"Take the Crown\", the album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart making it Williams' tenth number one album. It also marked the second time that Williams had a number one single (\"Candy\") and album at the same time on the chart. The first time was in 2001 when \"Somethin' Stupid\" and \"Swing When You're Winning\" were number one on the singles and albums chart respectively.\nThe album's lead single, \"Candy\", premiered on 10 September 2012 and was released on 11 September in most countries and 29 October in the UK. In the UK, \"Candy\" became Williams' first number one single since \"Radio\" (2004) and his seventh solo number one single. In its first week the song had sold 137,000 copies becoming the fastest-selling male artist single of the year. On 26 November 2012 Williams announced a 17 date stadium tour of Europe. Williams also confirmed that the support act for the tour would be Olly Murs who also duets with him on \"Kids\". Universal and EMI merged in 2012, bringing Williams' Chrysalis/Virgin recordings full circle to Universal.\n2013\u20132014: \"Swings Both Ways\" and \"Under the Radar Volume 1\".\nIn September 2013, Williams announced a follow-up to his 2001 swing album, titled \"Swings Both Ways\" for release in November. The album features covers and original songs, whilst also including duet recordings with Michael Bubl\u00e9, Olly Murs, Rufus Wainwright, Lily Allen and Kelly Clarkson. In November 2013, Williams made a cameo appearance in the video to Murs's song \"Hand on Heart\".\nWilliams released a compilation album entitled \"Under the Radar Volume 1\" on 1 December 2014 through his website, featuring leftovers and unreleased songs. \"[These are] loads and loads of songs that I have written that I am incredibly passionate about, I want you to hear them, otherwise they are just going to remain in my computer!\" Williams said that Guy Chambers was \"not happy\" about these songs being released online: \"He thinks I am a lunatic for not putting them on an album that we have promoted with TV performances and at radio stations and a big tour,\" Williams said. \"But I am an impetuous bugger, and I want them out now, now, now!\"\n2016\u20132018: \"The Heavy Entertainment Show\", and \"The X Factor\".\nIn May 2016, it was announced that Williams had signed a recording contract with Sony Music. In a statement, Williams said: \"They're [Sony Music] inspired, I'm inspired. I'm more ready than I ever have been and I'm totally convinced I'm in the right place. I look forward to working on this album, which is an album I'm immensely proud of, in this exciting new partnership with Sony Music.\" \"The Heavy Entertainment Show\" became his 12th UK number-one album, putting him level with Madonna. In July 2017, Williams announced a new album, \"Under the Radar Volume 2\", which was released in November 2017. A third edition in the Under the Radar series was released on Valentine's Day of 2019.\nOn 14 June 2018, Williams performed at the 2018 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony held at the Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow, Russia. Williams sang \n\"Let Me Entertain You\" and \"Feel\" before he performed a duet of \"Angels\" with Russian soprano Aida Garifullina. Williams then performed an encore with \"Rock DJ\", during which he gave the finger. Fox in the U.S. apologised for the incident which they had broadcast live. The incident was not shown on ITV in the UK who had cut away prior to the encore. Williams appeared on \"This Morning\" on 19 June and explained what happened, \"It was one minute to kick off, I was under a lot of pressure, because there was one minute left and I didn't know how I was going to do half a minute, so I just did a one-minute countdown [using his middle finger].\" Asked by presenter Phillip Schofield whether he regrets it, he said: \"Yeah, of course, yeah. I cannot trust me. I don't know what I'm going to do at any time. There's no, sort of, plan. The plan was, sing in key, don't fall over. That was the plan and 99% of the plan, I pulled off.\" When asked did the idea just enter his head he responded, \"Nothing actually pops into my head. There's a block between me and sense... then something happens and then five minutes later, I'm like, 'Did I? Yeah, I did, didn't I?\".\nOn 17 July 2018, Williams along with his wife, and One Direction star Louis Tomlinson, were announced as the new judges on the fifteenth series of \"The X Factor\" in the UK, joining Simon Cowell and replacing Louis Walsh, Sharon Osbourne and Nicole Scherzinger.\n2019\u20132023: \"The Christmas Present\" and \"XXV\".\nOn 22 November, Williams released his first Christmas album, \"The Christmas Present\", with guest appearances from boxer Tyson Fury, Rod Stewart, Jamie Cullum, Helene Fischer and Bryan Adams. It debuted at number two on the UK Charts behind Coldplay's \"Everyday Life\". The album sold over 67,000 copies, matching \"The Heavy Entertainment Show.\" Williams also sold over 10,000 cassettes in seven days, the most in two decades. The following week saw Williams' album go to number one in the UK, outselling the nearest competitor, Rod Stewart, by 5,000 copies. This was Williams' 13th UK number-one album, tying Elvis Presley for the most UK number-one albums. Williams released the promotional single \"Hey Tiger\" in December 2019, for the new version of \"The Tiger Who Came to Tea\".\nOn 25 February 2022, it was revealed that Williams had teamed up with his regular collaborators Tim Metcalfe and Flynn Francis to record the trance track \"Sway\" under the new alias 'Lufthaus'. In April 2022, \"The Guardian\" wrote that while Williams \"remains a big draw\", he was no longer guaranteed hits and was \"now more likely to be playlisted on Smooth Radio than BBC Radio 1\". Williams said he was working on more experimental music, which he likened to David Bowie and Lou Reed, but said: \"Do I unashamedly want to still be one of the biggest artists in the world? Yeah, I do ... I've had an interesting first half of my life. I'd like an interesting second half, too.\" In May 2022, Williams performed at the Rod Laver Arena in Melbourne, Australia, during the filming of his \"Better Man\" biopic which was produced at Docklands Studios Melbourne. \nOn 7 June 2022, Williams announced that his tenth compilation album, \"XXV\", would be released on 9 September 2022. It will feature new, reimagined versions of his hit songs, plus new material. On the same day as this announcement, Williams released \"Angels XXV\", a reworked version of \"Angels\". On 10 June 2022, \"Angels (XXV)\" reached number 92 on the UK Official Singles Sales Chart, rising to 74 a week later. On 5 August 2022, Williams released the single \"Lost\", also taken from \"XXV\".\n\"XXV\" was released on 9 September 2022 and debuted a week later at number 1 on the UK Official Albums Chart. In doing so, Williams broke all previous \"Official Chart\" records with his fourteenth solo number one album. On 24 September 2022, Williams performed at the 2022 AFL Grand Final held at the Melbourne Cricket Ground in Melbourne, Australia. Williams sang \"Let Me Entertain You\", \"Rock DJ\", \"Lost\" and \"Feel\" before he performed \"Angels\" which Williams dedicated to Australian cricketer Shane Warne, who had died in March 2022. Williams then covered John Farnham's \"You're the Voice\" stating \"The next song is the unofficial national anthem of Australia! Let's all send our love to John and his family\". Just two days prior on 22 September 2022, John Farnham had released a statement outlining that he was to undergo immediate surgery after being diagnosed with cancer. Williams then performed \"Kids\" with Australian singer Delta Goodrem.\nOn 7 October 2022, Lufthaus released the single \"Soul Seekers\". Williams' XXV tour started on 9 October 2022 in The O2 Arena, supported by Lufthaus. In November 2022, Williams performed in Qatar as part of the country's FIFA World Cup 2022 celebrations. His appearance attracted criticism due to Qatar's human rights abuses and strict LGBT laws. After the criticism, Williams stated, \"I don't condone any abuses of human rights anywhere [...] if we're not condoning human rights abuses anywhere, then it would be the shortest tour the world has ever known: I wouldn't even be able to perform in my own kitchen [...] Anybody leaving messages saying 'no to Qatar' are doing so on Chinese technology [...] the hypocrisy there is that if we take that case in this place, we need to apply that unilaterally to the world. Then if we apply that unilaterally to the world, nobody can go anywhere.\"\nOn 5 May 2023, Williams was featured on the bilingual single \"Une Tahitienne \u00e1 Paris\" by the French singer Mareva Galanter. On 21 August 2023, Williams was featured with a cameo performance on the single \"Punk's Dead\", by the English duo Soft Play. Lufthaus' debut album, \"Visions, Volume 1\" was released on 6 October 2023. The single \"Immortal\", featuring Sophie Ellis-Bextor, was released the day before.\n2024\u2013present: \"Better Man\" and \"Britpop\".\nOn 2 May 2024, Williams was featured on the duet version of Lucy Spraggan's 2020 single \"Sober\". In September 2024, he featured on the track \"Danny\" with the Israeli singer Noga Erez on her album, \"The Vandalist\". The pair previously performed together at his June 2023 concert in Tel Aviv. \nIn August 2024, \"Better Man\", a musical biopic about Williams' life, opened to acclaim at the Telluride Film Festival. It was screened at the Toronto International Film Festival on 10 September 2024, and made its theatrical premiere on 26 December 2024 in Australia by Roadshow Films and in the United Kingdom by Entertainment Film Distributors. It had a limited theatrical release by Paramount Pictures in the United States on 25 December, before a wider release set for 10 January 2025. \"Better Man\" received a record-breaking 16 nominations at the 2025 AACTA Awards, winning in nine categories, including Best Film. It was a box-office failure, and performed particularly poorly in the US, where Williams is less known.\nOn 29 November 2024, Williams released the first single from the \"Better Man\" soundtrack, \"Forbidden Road\"; it reached number 20 on the UK Singles Downloads Chart one week later. It was nominated for Best Original Song at the 82nd Golden Globe Awards and the 14th AACTA Awards. It was initially shortlisted for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 97th Academy Awards but was disqualified a few days later after it was found it incorporated material from another song, \"I Got A Name\", as performed by Jim Croce. Williams was a headline performer for Australia's nationally broadcast New Year's Eve concert, screened annually on the ABC from in front of the Sydney Opera House. A portion of his performance from Sydney also appeared in \"Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve\" in the United States broadcast, hosted by Ryan Seacrest. On 3 January 2025, the soundtrack album to \"Better Man\" debuted at number 1 on the UK Albums Downloads Chart, and at number 4 on the UK Soundtrack Albums Chart; on 24 January 2025, after the album was released on CD, it debuted at number 1 on the main UK Albums Chart.\nIn May 2025, an exhibition of Williams' artwork opened in London. The \"Guardian\" gave it one out of five, saying it comprised \"line drawings filled with therapy speak, greeting-card banter and meaningless affirmations\". On 21 May 2025, he announced the release of his upcoming thirteenth studio album, \"Britpop\"; on the same day, he released the album's lead single, \"Rocket\", which features Tony Iommi. On August 21, 2025, Williams released the single \"Human\", which features Mexican sibling pop-duo Jesse &amp; Joy.\nIn October 2025, Williams' Istanbul concert was cancelled over his alleged support for Israel, after social media users accused him of being a Zionist. Williams has not publicly commented on the Gaza war.\nOther projects.\nCollaborations.\nRobbie Williams collaborated with Australian pop star Kylie Minogue on the song \"Kids\". The single peaked at number 2 on the UK Singles Chart in 2000. Williams also collaborated with Australian film star Nicole Kidman on a cover of Frank and Nancy Sinatra's \"Somethin' Stupid\". The single reached number 1 on the UK Singles Chart in 2001. His single \"No Regrets\" featured Neil Tennant, and Neil Hannon on backing vocals. In 2001, Williams recorded \"We Are the Champions\" with Queen for the 2001 medieval adventure film \"A Knight's Tale\".\nIn 2002, Williams appeared on the track \"My Culture\" on the \"1 Giant Leap\" album, alongside rapper Maxi Jazz (which features lyrics from the hidden track \"Hello Sir\" from \"Life thru a Lens\"). Williams also features on a double CD titled \"Concrete\" which was released on the same day as \"Rudebox\". The CD features a concert recorded for the BBC featuring the Pet Shop Boys and Williams singing their classic hit \"Jealousy\". Their joint effort, \"She's Madonna\", was released as a single in March 2007. On 13 August 2007, a Dean Martin duets album was released, on which Williams sings \"Please Don't Talk About Me When I'm Gone\".\nIn 2010, he announced the release of \"Shame\", a duet with Take That lead singer songwriter Gary Barlow, as the first single from his greatest hits collection, \"\", which was certified silver in the UK and charted in 19 countries worldwide. In 2010, Williams and comedian/actor Russell Brand along with Frank Skinner, David Baddiel and singer-songwriter Ian Broudie (of the Lightning Seeds), under the name \"the Squad\", recorded a new version of \"Three Lions\", the England football team's song, for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. In 2012, Williams recorded a duet with Mexican recording artist Thal\u00eda for the Spanish song \"Te quiero dijiste (Mu\u00f1equita linda)\", included on her album \"Hab\u00edtame Siempre\". In 2014, he collaborated with Swedish DJ and record producer Avicii, lending his vocals to \"The Days\".\nIn 2019, he collaborated with British comedian Jimmy Carr, co-writing the lyrics for \"Live in Las Vegas\" \u2013 the opening song of Williams's residency at the Wynn Las Vegas. A studio version of the song has been recorded excerpts of which have been used in promotional material for the show, but the song is not yet available for download.\nOther work.\nIn 2005 Williams provided the voice of Dougal in the film adaption of \"The Magic Roundabout\". On 26 August 2010, it was announced Williams would become a guest vocal coach on the ninth series of German reality television show \"\" to teach candidates for a girl group.\nOn 20 September 2010, Williams released his second book called \"You Know Me\" in collaboration with Chris Heath. The book features a collection of photographs of Williams from the past 20 years of his career and discussion of them by Williams as transcribed by Heath. Williams launched a radio show titled \"Radio Rudebox\" on 6 October 2011 where he played music and interviewed Gary Barlow.\nIn 2011, Williams announced he was working with entrepreneur Peter Jones in developing a clothing line called Farrell in honour of his grandfather Jack Farrell. Although the business had filed for bankruptcy, it was relaunched in 2014 with support of clothing company Primark.\nVideo games.\nWilliams recorded the song \"It's Only Us\" as the theme for the \"FIFA\" video game \"FIFA 2000\". As part of the agreement to license the track EA Sports included Port Vale, the football club Williams supports, in the game, despite only being in the third tier of the English football league system.\nWilliams features in his own karaoke video game, \"We Sing Robbie Williams\", which was released on 12 November 2010 by Nordic Games Publishing AB.\nFootball.\nIn 2005, Williams founded a football team called Los Angeles Vale F.C. Williams formed the club with other celebrity friends after building his own soccer pitch at his home in Los Angeles. The club was named after Williams' hometown club, Port Vale, and its logo was very similar. The club was disbanded in 2007, reportedly after Williams discovered two players had swindled him out of \u00a3200,000.\nIn January 2024, Williams was named president of Port Vale Football Club in Stoke-on-Trent.\nMusical theatre.\nIn 2018, it was announced that Williams and Guy Chambers would write the music and lyrics, with a book by Mark Ravenhill for the stage musical adaptation of David Walliams' children's book \"The Boy in the Dress\" for the Royal Shakespeare Company, directed by Gregory Doran. The musical opened in November 2019 at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon where it ran for an 18-week season, earning rave reviews from the critics and audiences. The musical had been planned to transfer to London's West End in autumn 2020, however due to the COVID-19 pandemic plans were postponed.\nSongwriting partnerships.\nRobbie Williams\u2019s solo career has been shaped by a succession of major songwriting and production collaborators whose input defined his evolving sound from the late 1990s onward. From his debut \"Life thru a Lens\" (1997) through \"Escapology\" (2002), Williams worked primarily with Guy Chambers. According to interviews and retrospective articles, Chambers served as Williams\u2019s \u201cmusical director\u201d during this era and the two produced a string of hits including \u201cAngels\u201d, \u201cFeel\u201d and \u201cLet Me Entertain You\u201d. \nFor the 2005 album \"Intensive Care\", Williams partnered with Stephen Duffy, which marked a move toward more mature, guitar-driven songwriting and adult-contemporary pop rock. The following year, with \"Rudebox\" (2006), Williams embraced a diverse set of collaborators from across dance, hip-hop and electronic pop \u2014 including Mark Ronson, William Orbit and Pet Shop Boys \u2014 and the resulting album stands as his most experimental. In 2009, Williams worked with producer Trevor Horn for \"Reality Killed the Video Star\", combining classic pop songwriting with rich electronic production. \nBeginning in 2012, Williams entered into a sustained writing and production relationship with Tim Metcalfe and Flynn Francis; the team shaped the anthemic pop-rock sound of \"Take the Crown\" (2012). \"The Heavy Entertainment Show,\" which introduced elements of theatrical pop, and \"The Christmas Present\" (2019) saw a reunion with Guy Chambers \nParallel to his solo work, Williams launched the electronic project Lufthaus with Tim Metcalfe and Flynn Francis, culminating in \"Visions, Vol. 1\" (2023) and described as \u201cthe pulse of electronic music fused with classic songwriting\u201d. In his forthcoming album \"Britpop,\" Williams worked with Guy Chambers while retaining Metcalfe and Francis, in what he described as a return to his guitar-based British pop/rock roots. \nCollectively, these partnerships trace Williams\u2019s journey from Britpop-inspired pop rock, through adult-contemporary and electronic experimentation, and back to the melodic, guitar-based sound that originally defined his solo identity.\nInfluences.\nDuring his childhood, Williams was influenced by swing musicians such as Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, and Sammy Davis Jr. The first records he listened to were released by Nat King Cole, Sarah Vaughan, Ella Fitzgerald and Cole Porter, which belonged to his mother. At the age of 10, he got into hip hop and started collecting electro and when he started his solo career in the '90s, he was influenced by Britpop bands such as Oasis, Blur and Pulp.\nAs a singer, his influences include George Michael, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley and Bono. He worked with Jones several times throughout his career: They performed together at the Brit Awards in 1998; the following year, they recorded a cover of the song \"Are You Gonna Go My Way\" for Jones' album Reload; and in 2012, Williams and Jones worked together again on the song \"On My Own\", b-side of his single \"Different\".\nWilliams also feels great admiration for Freddie Mercury and Queen. In 2001, Williams, Brian May and Roger Taylor released a new version of \"We Are the Champions\" for the movie \"A Knight's Tale\". He also revealed that he was once asked to be the new frontman of Queen, but that he turned down the offer because of his \"very low self-esteem\". He said: \"I just thought I'd save them the audacity of me even trying to step on a stage and be in the same echelon as Freddie Mercury. Because he, to me, is angelic. He's godlike. It was just too scary.\"\nWilliams has revealed that he does the \"Elvis Prayer\" before going on stage at every concert. In 2000, he got a tattoo of the phrase \"Elvis Grant Me Serenity\" and he also played as an Elvis impersonator in the music video for his song \"Advertising Space\" (2005).\nSpeaking to BBC Radio 2 in February 2021, Williams cited Ian Dury as his biggest inspiration as a lyricist. He sings on \"You're the Why\", the final track of the posthumously released album \"Ten More Turnips from the Tip\" (2002).\nLegacy.\nBy 2008, Williams had sold more albums in the UK than any other British solo artist in history. His record sales stand at between 75 million and 80 million worldwide, making him one of the best-selling artists of all time. Williams was entered in \"The Guinness Book of World Records\" when, after he announced his World Tour for 2006, 1.6\u00a0million tickets were sold in one day.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"It's his self-deprecating sense of humour \u2014 in person and in his lyrics \u2014 that helps explain his wide appeal in Australia. Perhaps only Pink and Ed Sheeran have such a wide mix of demographics at their concerts; that's why Williams will play to nearly 60,000 people in Victoria alone.\"\n\u2014Cameron Adams on the appeal of Williams.\nCaroline Sullivan of \"The Guardian\" wrote that Williams is \"a perfect meeting of ego, self-deprecation and hits\", adding \"there really is nobody else, in pop music anyway, who combines monumental hamminess and bone-deep vulnerability quite so effectively.\"\nWilliams has won significantly more Brit Awards than any other artist, a record eighteen\u2014Best British Male Artist four times, two awards for Outstanding Contribution to Music and the 2017 Brits Icon for his \"lasting impact on British culture\", and eight German ECHO awards. In 2004, he was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame, after being voted as the Greatest artist of the 1990s. He appeared in the 2009 edition of the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" when his sell-out show at the BBC Electric Proms at London's Roundhouse was screened by more than 250 cinemas across 23 countries to set a new record for the most simultaneous cinematic screenings of a live concert. Williams appears in the list of the all-time Top 100 biggest selling albums in the UK six times\u2013with four albums in the top 60.\nIn 2005, the British public voted \"Angels\" the song they would most like played at their funeral. In October 2009, it was announced that he would receive the Outstanding Contribution to British Music award at the 2010 Brit Awards. In September 2010, Williams switched on the Blackpool illuminations, stating that it was one of the greatest honours he had achieved. In October, Media Control named Williams the most successful album-artist of the millennium due to the fact that he had spent No. 1 on the German Albums Chart for 38 weeks since 2000. He also reached that chart's Top Ten 135 times. He was ranked at No. 11 the greatest frontman of all time in a reader poll by \"Q\".\nInfluence on other artists.\nContemporary artists have expressed their admiration for Williams and cited him as one of their influences. The English rapper Example admitted his obsession with Williams and how he had been inspired by Williams' performances when he was younger. He described his own performance on stage as \"a combination of rap, rock and Robbie Williams\".\nEd Sheeran, in an interview with El Hormiguero, revealed that the first album he ever bought was \"Life Thru a Lens\". Olly Murs paid tribute to Williams' \"Angels\" music video in the music video for his single \"Hand on Heart\". One of Louis Tomlinson's earliest influences was Williams, of whom he declared he is a big fan.\nPersonal life.\nResidence.\nIn 2006, Williams emigrated to Los Angeles. He briefly moved back to the UK in 2009 when he bought an \u00a38.5\u00a0million mansion in Compton Bassett, but sold the property a year later to move back to Los Angeles.\nIn 2016, he moved into Woodland House, a \u00a317 million mansion in the Kensington area of London. His next-door neighbour there is Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page, who has lived in The Tower House since 1972. In 2018, Page delayed Williams' plans for an underground swimming pool, stating that construction work would damage The Tower House. In 2017, he sold his mansion in Beverly Hills to DJ Khaled for $9.9 million.\nHealth issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Two of his biggest hits, 'Come Undone' and 'Feel,' were both exercises in melodic self loathing. It felt like a public airing of very private pain.\"\n \u2014\"Robbie Williams, O2 London, review\", \"The Telegraph\".\nWilliams has suffered from mental illness, obesity, self-esteem issues, alcoholism, and substance abuse. He has discussed how his friend Elton John booked him into a clinic to cope with his drug use that emerged from the depression he was experiencing while still in Take That.\nWilliams revealed in 2011 he had been experiencing lethargy caused by a type of hormone imbalance called andropause for a number of years, and thought at first it was a return of his depression. In a June 2020 interview with \"Weight Watchers Magazine\", he revealed that he had developed an addiction to online golf games. Williams also has dyslexia, dyscalculia, and ADHD.\nInterests.\nWilliams has a keen interest in UFOs and related paranormal phenomena, and researched the subject during his 2007\u20132008 sabbatical. He participated in a documentary for BBC Radio 4 with Jon Ronson about the paranormal. The documentary followed them to a UFO convention in Nevada, during which Williams linked his obsession in the paranormal with the desire to understand his childhood fears of his mother's belief in \"the world's mysteries, elves, demons, [and] witchcraft\".\nWilliams featured in a 2018 TV documentary \"Hunt for the Skinwalker\" by Jeremy Corbell, and revealed that his partner Ayda Field dissuaded him from buying the Skinwalker Ranch when it became for sale.\nWilliams became an ordained minister with the Universal Ministries to officiate the wedding of friends.\nWilliams has a number of tattoos, including:\nWilliams became a fan of his hometown football team Port Vale FC as a child after his father became the licensee of the team's social club. He has played in a testimonial match for club legend Neil Aspin and helped to design the playing strip for the 2020\u201321 season. He is also a supporter of the Carlton Football Club in the Australian Football League.\nIn 2020, Williams received backlash for defending the widely debunked Pizzagate conspiracy theory.\nAt a February 2025 auction of memorabilia and personal items, belonging to Eric Morecambe, long-time fan Williams bought his distinctive imitation tortoiseshell Metzler spectacles and pipe for \u00a320,000, much more than their \u00a32,000 to \u00a34,000 estimate.\nRelationships and fatherhood.\nIn 1997, Williams was in a month-long relationship with Spice Girls singer Melanie Chisholm; also in 2000, Williams was in a short-term relationship with Geri Halliwell, another member of Spice Girls.\nIn December 1997, he met All Saints singer Nicole Appleton while filming \"Top of the Pops\". The following year, they started a on-and-off relationship, and at one point got engaged. In an autobiography she co-authored with her sister Natalie titled \"Together\", Appleton revealed that she terminated the pregnancy of her and Williams' baby after pressure from her record company, causing an immense emotional strain on their relationship. They broke up by 1999. Williams would state in later interviews that he was ashamed of his actions during their relationship, citing himself as a \"fucking awful boyfriend\" [to Appleton]. Their relationship was portrayed heavily in the 2024 biopic \"Better Man\".\nIn May 2006, Williams started dating American actress Ayda Field. She was featured in the UFO documentary that Williams did for BBC Radio 4 and took part in a field investigation he did in Trout Lake, Washington, in 2008. Williams and Field wed at his home in Mulholland Estates in Beverly Hills on 7 August 2010. They have four children: daughters Theodora and Colette, and sons Charlton and Beau. Williams's wife is Ashkenazi Jewish. Williams said in June 2023 that he and his wife are raising their children in accordance with Jewish customs.\nWilliams has spoken of confusion regarding past comments he has made about his sexuality. He also said he is \"sad\" about the related tabloid conjecture, yet does not fear being perceived as homosexual: \"You want to be an ally while at the same time protecting your own authenticity.\"\nWealth.\nIn the 2011 \"Sunday Times Rich List\" of wealthiest people in the British music industry, his wealth was estimated at \u00a390\u00a0million. Williams is a lifelong supporter of football club Port Vale, based in his home town of Stoke-on-Trent, and in February 2006 he bought \u00a3240,000 worth of shares in the club, making him the largest shareholder. However, the club entered administration on 9 March 2012, and as a result Williams lost all of his shares in the club and received only a fraction of his original investment back.\nCharity.\nWilliams has set up a charity in his home town of Stoke-on-Trent entitled \"Give It Sum\", its goal being to \"improve local conditions and strengthen community life by giving money to those who are disadvantaged.\"\nWilliams, with the help of friend Jonathan Wilkes, has organised charity football matches called Soccer Aid to raise money for UNICEF UK. A mixture of non-football celebrities and professional football players have played Soccer Aid matches in 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 at Old Trafford, and Etihad Stadium in Manchester and Wembley Stadium, Stamford Bridge, and the London Stadium in London.\nWilliams has been the Patron of the children's charity the Donna Louise Trust, based in Stoke-on-Trent, since 2002. The charity offers respite and palliative care to terminally ill and life-limited children who are not expected to live past the age of 16.\nAwards and nominations.\nWilliams has won various awards, with some of his more recognised accolades being the Brit Awards. He has won a record eighteen Brit Awards, which also include the Brits he won with Take That, making him the most successful artist in the history of the awards. He has also won 8 Echo Awards from the German music industry.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums as a solo artist\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRobbie Williams band.\nAlong the tours, Robbie Williams had various members in his band.\nCurrent members\nBrass (Atlantic Horns)\nFormer members\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39011", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39011", "title": "Labial consonant", "text": "Consonants in which one or both lips are the active articulators\nLabial consonants are consonants in which one or both lips are the active articulator. The two common labial articulations are bilabials, articulated using both lips, and labiodentals, articulated with the lower lip against the upper teeth, both of which are present in English. A third labial articulation is dentolabials, articulated with the upper lip against the lower teeth (the reverse of labiodental), normally only found in pathological speech. Generally precluded are linguolabials, in which the tip of the tongue contacts the posterior side of the upper lip, making them coronals, though sometimes, they behave as labial consonants.\nThe most common distribution between bilabials and labiodentals is the English one, in which the nasal and the stops, , , and , are bilabial and the fricatives, , and , are labiodental. The voiceless bilabial fricative, voiced bilabial fricative, and the bilabial approximant do not exist as the primary realizations of any sounds in English, but they occur in many languages. For example, the Spanish consonant written \"b\" or \"v\" is pronounced, between vowels, as a voiced bilabial approximant.\nLip rounding, or labialization, is a common approximant-like co-articulatory feature. English is a voiced labialized velar approximant, which is far more common than the purely labial approximant [\u03b2\u031e]. In the languages of the Caucasus, labialized dorsals like /k\u02b7/ and /q\u02b7/ are very common.\nVery few languages, however, make a distinction purely between bilabials and labiodentals, making \"labial\" usually a sufficient specification of a language's phonemes. One exception is Ewe, which has both kinds of fricatives, but the labiodentals are produced with greater articulatory force.\nLack of labials.\nWhile most languages make use of purely labial phonemes, a few generally lack them. Examples are Tlingit, Eyak (both Na-Den\u00e9), Wichita (Caddoan), and the Iroquoian languages except Cherokee.\nMany of these languages are transcribed with and with labialized consonants. However, it is not always clear to what extent the lips are involved in such sounds. In the Iroquoian languages, for example, involved little apparent rounding of the lips. See the Tillamook language for an example of a language with \"rounded\" consonants and vowels that do not have any actual labialization. All of these languages have seen labials introduced under the influence of English.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39012", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39012", "title": "Coronal consonant", "text": "Type of consonant sound involving tongue placement\nCoronals are consonants articulated with the flexible front part of the tongue. Among places of articulation, only the coronal consonants can be divided into as many articulation types: apical (using the tip of the tongue), laminal (using the blade of the tongue), domed (with the tongue bunched up), or subapical (using the underside of the tongue) as well as different postalveolar articulations (some of which also involve the back of the tongue as an articulator): palato-alveolar, alveolo-palatal and retroflex. Only the front of the tongue (coronal) has such dexterity among the major places of articulation, allowing such variety of distinctions. Coronals have another dimension, grooved, to make sibilants in combination with the orientations above.\nPlaces of articulation.\nCoronal places of articulation include the dental consonants at the upper teeth, the alveolar consonants at the upper gum (the alveolar ridge), the various postalveolar consonants (including domed palato-alveolar, laminal alveolo-palatal, and apical retroflex) just behind that, the subapical retroflex consonants curled back against the hard palate, and linguolabial consonants with the tongue against the upper lip. Alveolo-palatal and linguolabial consonants sometimes behave as dorsal and labial consonants, respectively, rather than as coronals.\nExamples.\nArabic.\nIn Arabic and Maltese philology, the sun letters represent coronal consonants.\nAustralian Aboriginal.\nIn Australian Aboriginal languages, coronals contrast with peripheral consonants.\nLack of coronals.\nThe Northwest Mekeo language lacks coronal consonants entirely.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39014", "revid": "1316508139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39014", "title": "Harry R. Truman", "text": "American businessman and airman (1896\u20131980)\nHarry R. Truman (October 30, 1896\u00a0\u2013 May 18, 1980) was an American businessman, bootlegger, and prospector. He\nlived near Mount St. Helens, an active volcano in the Cascade Range in the state of Washington, and was the owner and caretaker of Mount St. Helens Lodge at Spirit Lake near the base of the mountain. Truman came to fame as a folk hero in the weeks leading up to the volcano's 1980 eruption after refusing to leave his home despite repeated orders to evacuate. On May 18, 1980, Truman was killed in the cataclysmic eruption of Mount St. Helens by a pyroclastic flow that overtook his lodge and buried the site under of volcanic debris.\nAfter Truman's death, his family and friends reflected on his love for the mountain. Actor Art Carney portrayed Truman in the docudrama film \"St. Helens\" (1981). Truman was commemorated in a book by his niece, and also in various pieces of music, including songs by Headgear, Billy Jonas, Penny Lew, and Shawn Wright and the Brothers Band.\nEarly life.\nTruman was born to foresters in Ivydale, West Virginia, in October 1896. He claimed not to know the exact day of his birth, but he eventually chose to celebrate his birthday on October 30. This date appears on his World War I draft registration card. Truman also stated that he did not know his middle name, only the initial, R; some non-contemporaneous sources have given his middle name as Randall. His draft card lists his middle name as Rainel.\nIn 1907, Truman's family moved west to the state of Washington, drawn to the promise of cheap land and the successful timber industry in the Pacific Northwest; they at first settled in Napavine, before moving to the town of Nesika in eastern Lewis County, where the family purchased of farmland.\nCareer.\nTruman attended high school in the city of Mossyrock, Washington, then enlisted in the U.S. Army as a private in August 1917. He was assigned to the 100th Aero Squadron, 7th Squad, and trained as an aeromechanic. He served in France during the final months of World War I. While en route to Europe, his troopship, \"Tuscania\", was sunk by a German U-boat in a torpedo attack off the coast of Ireland.\nDuring his service, he reportedly sustained injuries due to his audacious and independent nature. However, according to Washington State Archives, Truman served overseas from January 24, 1918, until February 1, 1919, but this record states he was not \nwounded or injured in action and did not participate in any engagements. The record also states that he had a disability rating of zero at the time of his discharge.\nTruman was honorably discharged on June 12, 1919, and he began prospecting, but failed to achieve his goal of becoming rich. He later became a bootlegger, smuggling alcohol from San Francisco to Washington during the Prohibition era.\nTruman returned to Chehalis, Washington, later that year, where he worked as an automobile mechanic and opened a service station, naming it \"Harry's Sudden Service.\" He married Helen Hughes, the daughter of a sawmill owner; they had one daughter, born in 1922.\nIn the mid-1920s, Truman leased from the Northern Pacific Railway overlooking Spirit Lake in the wilderness near Mount St. Helens, a stratovolcano of the Cascade Range located in Skamania County, Washington. He settled near the base of the mountain and opened a gas station and a small grocery store; he eventually opened the Mount St. Helens Lodge, close to the outlet of Spirit Lake , operating it for 52 years.\nDuring the 1930s, Truman divorced his first wife; he remarried in 1935. The second marriage was short, as he reportedly attempted to win arguments by throwing his wife into Spirit Lake, despite her inability to swim. He began dating a local woman, though he eventually married her sister, Edna, whom he called Edie. This third marriage held, and he and Edna operated the Mount St. Helens Lodge together until her death from a heart attack in 1975.\nIn the Mount St. Helens area, Truman became notorious for his antics; on one instance, he had caused a forest ranger to become drunk so that he was able to burn a pile of brush. He poached, stole gravel from the U.S. Forest Service, and fished on Native American land with a fake game warden badge. Despite their knowledge of these criminal activities, local rangers failed to catch him in the act. When the Washington state government changed the state sales tax, Truman kept charging the old rate at his lodge. A tax agency employee rented a boat from him, but refused to pay his tax rate, so Truman pushed him into Spirit Lake.\nTruman was a fan of the cocktail drink Whiskey and Coke, made with Schenley whiskey and Coca-Cola. He owned a pink 1957 Cadillac, and he swore frequently. He loved discussing politics and reportedly disliked Republicans, hippies, young children, and the elderly. In 1953, Truman refused to allow Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas to stay at his lodge, dismissing him as an \"old coot\" despite being two years older than Douglas. When he learned who Douglas was, he realized his mistake and chased the Justice for to a neighboring lodge and convinced him to return; Truman and Douglas became friends for the rest of their lives, often drinking together. After his wife Edna died in September 1975, Truman lost interest in running his lodge and it gradually fell into disrepair. He rented only a limited number of cabins and boats during the summer months, with his temper worsening and his drinking becoming more frequent.\nCelebrity.\nAlthough Truman was already well-known by local residents for his various antics, he became an even bigger celebrity during the two months of volcanic activity preceding the deadly eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980. Truman gave several interviews to local and national reporters and expressed his opinion that the danger of a volcanic eruption was exaggerated. \"I don't have any idea whether it will blow,\" he said, \"but I don't believe it to the point that I'm going to pack up.\" Truman displayed little concern about the volcano and his situation: \"If the mountain goes, I'm going with it. This area is heavily timbered, Spirit Lake is in between me and the mountain, and the mountain is a mile away, the mountain ain't gonna hurt me.\" Law enforcement and Forest Service officials were frustrated by his refusal to evacuate because the media continued to enter the volcano's restricted zone to interview him, endangering themselves in the process. Still, Truman remained steadfast. \"You couldn't pull me out with a mule team. That mountain's part of Truman and Truman's part of that mountain.\"\nTruman told reporters that he was knocked from his bed by precursor earthquakes, so he responded by moving his bed to the basement. He claimed to wear spurs to bed to cope with the earthquakes while he slept. He scoffed at the public's concern for his safety, responding to scientists' claims about the threat of the volcano that \"the mountain has shot its wad and it hasn't hurt my place a bit, but those goddamn geologists with their hair down to their butts wouldn't pay no attention to ol' Truman.\"\nAs a result of his defiant commentary, Truman became an impromptu folk hero, and was the subject of many songs and poems by children. One group of school children from Salem, Oregon, sent him banners inscribed \"Harry \u2013 We Love You\", which moved him so much that he took a helicopter trip (arranged and paid for by \"National Geographic\") to visit them on May 14. He also received many fan letters, including several marriage proposals. A group of fifth grade students from Grand Blanc, Michigan, wrote letters that brought him to tears. In return, he sent them a letter and volcanic ash, which the children later sold to send flowers to his family after the eruption.\nTruman caused a media frenzy, appearing on the front pages of \"The New York Times\" and \"The San Francisco Examiner\" and attracting the attention of \"National Geographic\", United Press International, and \"The Today Show\". Many major magazines composed profiles, including \"Time\", \"Life\", \"Newsweek\", \"Field &amp; Stream\", and \"Reader's Digest\". Historian Richard W. Slatta wrote that \"his fiery attitude, brash speech, love of the outdoors, and fierce independence\u2026 made him a folk hero the media could adore.\" Slatta pointed to Truman's \"unbendable character and response to the forces of nature\" as a source of his rise to fame, and the interviews with him added \"color\" to reports about the events at Mount St. Helens. Truman was immortalized, according to Slatta, \"with many of the embellished qualities of the western hero,\" and the media spotlight created a persona that was \"in some ways quite different from his true character.\"\nDeath.\nAs the likelihood of a major eruption increased, state officials ordered an evacuation of the area with the exception of a few scientists and security officials. On Saturday, May 17, local law enforcement made one final attempt to persuade Truman to leave his home, to no avail. On Sunday, May 18, at 8:32 a.m., Mount St. Helens erupted, collapsing the entire northern flank of the mountain. Truman and his 16 cats were all presumed to have died in the eruption. All likely died of heat shock in less than a second, too quickly to register pain. \nThe largest landslide in recorded history and a pyroclastic flow traveling atop the landslide engulfed the Spirit Lake area almost simultaneously, destroying the lake and burying the site of Truman's lodge under of volcanic landslide debris. Authorities never searched for Truman's remains. Truman considered his cats family and mentioned them in almost all public statements.\nInitially, Truman's friends hoped that he possibly survived, as he had claimed to have provisioned a nearby abandoned mine shaft with food and liquor in case of an eruption, but the lack of any immediate warning of the eruption would almost certainly have prevented him from escaping to the shaft before the pyroclastic flow reached his lodge, less than a minute after the eruption began. Even if Truman had made it there, the landslide would have made any rescue impossible. Truman's sister, Geraldine, said that she found it hard to accept the reality of his death. \"I don't think he made it, but I thought if they would let me fly over and see for myself that Harry's lodge is gone, then maybe I'd believe it for sure.\" \nTruman's niece, Shirley Rosen, added that her uncle thought he could escape the volcano, but was not expecting the lateral eruption. She stated that her sister took him a bottle of bourbon whiskey to persuade him to evacuate, but he was too afraid to drink alcohol at the time because he was unsure whether the shaking was coming from his body or the earthquakes. Truman owned a second home located between Washougal and Stevenson, Washington, and his possessions were auctioned off there as keepsakes to admirers in September, 1980.\nLegacy.\nTruman emerged as a folk hero for his resistance to the evacuation efforts. \"The Columbian\" wrote: \"With his 10-dollar name and hell-no-I-won't-go attitude, Truman was a made-for-prime-time folk hero.\" His friends and family commented: \"He was a very opinionated person.\" Truman's friend John Garrity added, \"The mountain and the lake were his life. If he'd left and then saw what the mountain did to his lake, it would have killed him anyway. He always said he wanted to die at Spirit Lake. He went the way he wanted to go.\" \nTruman's niece Shirley stated, \"He used to say 'that's my mountain and my lake and he would say those are my arms and my legs.' If he would have seen it the way it is now, I don't think he would have survived.\" Truman's cousin Richard Ice commented that Truman's short period as a celebrity was \"the peak of his life.\"\nTruman was the subject of the books \"Truman of St. Helens: The Man and His Mountain\", written by his niece Shirley Rosen, and \"The Legend of Harry Truman\", written by his sister, Geri Whiting. He was portrayed by Art Carney, his favorite actor, in the 1981 docudrama \"St. Helens\". Memorabilia were sold in the area surrounding Mount St. Helens, including Harry R. Truman hats, pictures, posters, and postcards. A restaurant named after him was opened in Anchorage, Alaska, serving themed dishes such as Harry's Hot Molten Chili. \nAccording to \"The Washington Star\", more than 100 songs had been composed in Truman's honor by 1981, in addition to a commemorative album entitled \"The Musical Legend Of Harry Truman \u2014 A Very Special Collection Of Mount St. Helens\u2019 Volcano Songs\". Lula Belle Garland wrote \"The Legend of Harry And The Mountain,\" which was recorded in 1980 by Ron Shaw &amp; The Desert Wind Band. Musicians Ron Allen and Steve Asplund wrote a country rock song in 1980 called \"Harry Truman, Your Spirit Still Lives On\". One of the major characters from the first two seasons of TV show \"Twin Peaks\" (1990-91) was named Sheriff Harry S. Truman in his honor. Billy Jonas included Truman's narrative in his song \"Old St. Helen\" in 1993. He is the subject of the 2007 song \"Harry Truman\" written and recorded by Irish band Headgear.\nTruman Trail and Harry's Ridge in the Mount St. Helens region are named after him. The Harry R. Truman Memorial Park was named in his honor in Castle Rock, Washington, though it later was renamed Castle Rock Lions Club Volunteer Park.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39016", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39016", "title": "Beach Boys", "text": ""}
{"id": "39017", "revid": "44318890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39017", "title": "Henry Probus", "text": "Henry Probus (Latin for the Righteous; or \"Prawy\"; ; c.\u20091258\u00a0\u2013 23 June 1290) was a member of the Silesian branch of the royal Polish Piast dynasty. He was Duke of Silesia at Wroc\u0142aw from 1266 as well as the ruler of the Seniorate Province of Krak\u00f3w and High Duke of Poland from 1288 until his death in 1290.\nLife.\nHenry IV was the only son of Duke Henry III the White of Silesia-Wroc\u0142aw by his first wife Judith, daughter of Duke Konrad I of Masovia.\nEarly life and tutelage.\nA minor upon the early death of his father in 1266, Henry IV was placed under the guardianship of his paternal uncle, Archbishop W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Salzburg. The Archbishop decided that the constant travels between Wroc\u0142aw and Salzburg were inappropriate for a child, and, in 1267, sent Henry to Prague to be raised at the court of King Ottokar II of Bohemia. Ottokar after W\u0142adys\u0142aw's death in 1270 also took over Wroc\u0142aw.\nShortly after the death of his uncle (who left him as his universal heir), Henry IV returned to Wroc\u0142aw, where he found himself under the direct care of one of the closest advisers of his late father, Simon Gallicusa. Henry IV received a careful education, which may explain his subsequent interest in culture and poetry (there are reasonable suspicions that the Duke had asperger syndrome). The cooperation between Henry IV and King Ottokar II was exemplary. In 1271 Henry IV participated in an armed expedition against Hungary, which brought an attack on Wroc\u0142aw by the \u00c1rp\u00e1d princes and their allies, the Dukes of Greater and Lesser Poland.\nIn 1273 Henry IV was formally proclaimed an adult and by himself assumed the government of his Silesian Duchy of Wroc\u0142aw, which, however, after the split between Opole, Legnica and G\u0142og\u00f3w only comprised the eastern part of the Lower Silesian lands. He began to follow a policy which was more independent from Bohemia, including in respect to friendly relations with his Upper Silesian cousin Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Opole and also with duke Przemys\u0142 II of Greater Poland.\nKidnapping of Henry IV by Boles\u0142aw II the Bald.\nHenry supported King Ottokar II in his fierce conflict with King Rudolph I of Germany in 1276, giving food and refuge to the Bohemian troops. When Ottokar was placed under the Imperial ban, Duke Boles\u0142aw II the Bald of Legnica took the occasion, had his nephew Henry seized at Jelcz and imprisoned him in 1277.\nFortunately for Henry IV, the reaction to his imprisonment was indignation. Ottokar's Polish allies, Duke Henry III of G\u0142og\u00f3w and Duke Przemys\u0142 II of Greater Poland attempted to enforce Henry IV's liberation. The Bohemian king however only sent febrile appeals and request for release. Henry IV's allies were defeated by Duke Boles\u0142aw II 's son Henry V the Fat in the bloody Battle of Stolec (24 April 1277), where both Dukes Przemys\u0142 II and Henry III were captured.\nHenry IV could obtain his freedom only at the end of the year, when he finally decided to capitulate after hearing the defeat of his main ally King Ottokar II against the Imperial and Hungarian troops at the 1278 Battle on the Marchfeld. Henry IV was forced to give Boles\u0142aw II one-third of his duchy including the towns of \u015aroda \u015al\u0105ska and Strzegom and forced to pledge Krosno Odrza\u0144skie, which he had obtained from the Dukes of G\u0142og\u00f3w in 1273\u20131274, in order to obtain the money for his ransom.\nOttokar II's death and Regency of Bohemia.\nWhile Henry himself did not take part in the Battle on the Marchfeld, he had sent reinforcements to King Ottokar II, whose death was a serious blow to the Wroc\u0142aw duke. After hearing the news of Ottokar's death, Henry IV went to Prague and attempted to gain the guardianship of the king's son Wenceslaus II, as one of his closest relatives (Henry IV's paternal grandmother was Anna of Bohemia, a daughter of late King Ottokar I) and ally.\nHe was however not successful due to the actions of King Rudolph I of Germany, who in his capacity as King of the Romans had given the regency over Bohemia to the Ascanian margrave Otto V, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel. As compensation, the German king gave Henry IV the Bohemian County of Kladsko as a fief.\nHomage to King Rudolph I in 1280.\nUpon the death of his Bohemian ally, Henry IV reconciled with King Rudolph I and in 1280 went to his Austrian court in Vienna, where Henry tried to obtain for himself the Polish royal crown.\nSome historians believed that the Duke of Wroc\u0142aw took the opportunity from his homage to King Rudolph I to expose him the possibility of becoming King of Poland. At that time, he also made an alliance with Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Opole, who promised to help Henry IV with the condition that his daughter (perhaps called Constance), who had recently married Henry IV, was crowned with him as Polish queen if he would obtain the royal investiture.\nAttempts at authority over Silesia and Poland.\nThe relation of Henry IV with his Silesian relatives, in general, was not good. In 1280 he again suffered the invasion of the Duke Henry V the Fat of Legnica, who was supported by the Margrave of Brandenburg, who could resist with unusual difficulty.\nIn order to normalize the situation in February of the next year Henry IV organized a meeting in S\u0105dowel, a village located in the Duchy of Wroc\u0142aw, for the purpose to find ways of mutual cooperation between the Silesian dukes. Henry IV, however, had other plans: immediately he captured his long-time enemy, Duke Henry V the Fat of Legnica, as well as his own allies, Dukes Henry III of G\u0142og\u00f3w and Przemys\u0142 II of Greater Poland, in order to obtain political concessions from them.\nPrzemys\u0142 II was forced to give the strategic Lesser Polish land of Wielu\u0144 (also known as Ruda) and to acknowledge Henry IV's overlordship, paying homage to him. In subsequent years, the good politics of Henry IV were reflected in the voluntary submission of the Silesian dukes Przemko of \u015acinawa and Bolko I of Opole; the re-unification of Silesia seemed within reach.\nHowever, not all the Silesian dukes accepted his authority: Dukes Bolko I the Strict, Konrad II the Hunchback and three of the four sons of W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Opole: Casimir of Bytom, Mieszko I of Cieszyn and Przemys\u0142aw of Racib\u00f3rz were completely against Henry's politics. With the Opole Dukes, the situation was more delicate: in 1287, Henry IV obtained the annulment of his marriage with their sister, who was sent back to her homeland. The fourth of W\u0142adys\u0142aw's sons, Bolko I, remained faithful to Henry IV's politics.\nThe first attempt of Henry IV to take the Seniorate Province at Krak\u00f3w was during 1280\u20131281, as a response to the invasion which the Polish High Duke Leszek II the Black had made against Wroc\u0142aw before. However, this trip ended unsuccessfully.\nConflict with Bishop Thomas II of Wroc\u0142aw.\nIn the years 1282\u20131287 Henry IV was involved in a long-lasting dispute with the Bishop of Wroc\u0142aw Tomas II Zaremba. The first phase of the conflict was already noted in the years 1274\u20131276, concluded with arbitration which was not satisfied any of the parts. The disputes erupted again in 1282; this time, the conflict was for the lands and properties seized by the church in a difficult period that followed after the Battle of Legnica, and for the violation of the immunity of the Church hierarchy in trials.\nAt the beginning of 1282, the Bishop sent their complaint to the Papal Legate Philip of Ferno, which was to address the settlement of the dispute. His ruling was favorable to the Church hierarchy, and Henry IV appealed. In 1283 Henry IV organized a big Episcopal convention in Nysa, whose main attraction was a knight's tournament. However, the tensions continued and Thomas II, using the support of the Papal Legate, and wanting to break the rebelliousness of Henry IV he excommunicated him and the whole Duchy in March 1284. However, the Duke of Wroc\u0142aw refused to subject to the Bishop's will and in the same year appealed to Pope Martin IV. It soon became clear, of course, that he could not expect a positive message from Rome. Despite Thomas II's efforts to subordinate the local clergy under his rule, several religious Orders remained faithful to Henry IV, among others, the Franciscans. The conflict continued, even after the unsuccessful attempts for mediation by the Archbishop of Gniezno, Jakub \u015awinka.\nIn 1285 Henry IV took advantage of his power over the clergy and confiscated some lands which belonged to the bishopric Duchy of Nysa\u2013Otmuch\u00f3w. The humiliated Bishop Thomas II was forced to emigrate to the Duchy of Racib\u00f3rz. The last act of the dispute took place in 1287 when Henry IV entered Racib\u00f3rz. Thomas II was no longer able to escape and finally decided to subordinate to the Duke of Wroc\u0142aw. But Henry IV was generous in his triumph: he restored the rich lands obtained earlier from the Bishopric and also founded a Kolegiata consecrated to the Holy Cross.\nMeanwhile, in foreign politics, Henry IV continued to try to obtain the subordination of the other Silesian Dukes, which indirectly could bring him the Royal Crown. In 1284 he used the betrayal of the Greater Poland noble family of Zaremba (Thomas II's family) as a pretext to capture the town of Kalisz. It soon became clear that the Dukes of Greater Poland never accepted this loss, so after some discussions, Kalisz was exchanged with the town of O\u0142obok by Duke Przemys\u0142 II.\nHenry IV, High Duke of Poland.\nOn 30 September 1288, Leszek II the Black, Duke of Sieradz and High Duke of Poland, died without issue. This event opened an opportunity for Henry IV to realize his ambitious plans to gain Krak\u00f3w and the title of High Duke. With this purpose, he began to find suitable allies from 1287, when he reconciled with Przemys\u0142 II, returning him Wielu\u0144. According to the Professor and Historian Oswald Balzer, shortly before began the preparations to the First Coalition of Piast Dukes formed by Leszek II the Black, Henry IV, Przemys\u0142 II and Henry III of G\u0142ogow, which had the intention to make the unification of Poland. Notwithstanding the veracity of this theory, after hearing the news of Leszek II's death, Henry IV was ready for action.\nHenry IV's major contenders for the Krak\u00f3w throne were Leszek II's half-brother W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high and Duke Boles\u0142aw II of P\u0142ock, who counted on the support of the Lesser Poland nobility. However, the Duke of P\u0142ock failed to obtain the decisive support of the Castellan Sulk the Bear (\"Su\u0142k z Nied\u017awiedzia\"), who was the Governor of the city. On 26 February 1289, the bloody Battle of Siewierz took place between the troops of the Dukes of P\u0142ock and Kuyavia, and Henry IV's troops, supported by King Rudolph I and the Dukes of Opole, G\u0142og\u00f3w and \u015acinawa (Steinau). The battle ended with a victory for the Masovia-Kuyavia coalition; from two of Henry IV's allies, Duke Przemko of \u015acinawa was killed in the battle, and Duke Bolko I of Opole was seriously injured and captured by W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high.\nDespite this success, Duke Boles\u0142aw II of P\u0142ock unexpectedly resigned his pretensions, leaving all the Krak\u00f3w inheritance to Wladyslaw I the Elbow-high. As the war turned favorable to him, Wladyslaw I, with the assistance of the Bishop of Krak\u00f3w, Paul of P\u00f3\u0142kozic (who was later imprisoned after rebelled against him), managed to besiege and capture Wawel castle and forced the Silesian troops to retreat to Ska\u0142a.\nHowever, Henry IV regrouped his forces and marched against Krak\u00f3w in person at the head of his army in August 1289. Thanks to the betrayal of the Krak\u00f3w townspeople and the help of the Franciscans (who even hid him in their monastery), Henry IV took the city and was recognized as High Duke. Despite his victory, Henry IV decided to remain in Sandomierz.\nInternal politics.\nDuring his reign, Henry succeeded in strengthening central power across his duchy, as well as improving its economy. He supported progress of mining and cities, many of which received German city law and various privileges. He was also an educated man, fluently spoke several languages and actively supported Western court culture and chivalric ethos. Henry himself was a talented poet; two of his poems were recorded in Codex Manesse.\nDeath.\nHenry IV died suddenly in 1290, aged no more than thirty-two years. The details of his death, given by the chronicler Ottokar of Styria, are seen by some historians as very reliable and by others as doubtful.\nThe year of his death is widely accepted, and confirmation for this can be found in numerous sources. However, the exact day was variously given by the sources.\nOne, the most supported by far of the largest number of sources, and given by the Church of St. John the Baptist, was 23 June. There are, however, other proposals: 24 June, 22 July, and even in April.\nPoisoning.\nAbout the real cause of Henry IV's death, there are several independent sources: these are the tombs of the Silesian Dukes, the Chronicle of Jan D\u0142ugosz, and later chroniclers, like the Bohemian Chronicle of Pulkawy and the Chronicle of Ottokar of Styria.\nAccording to Ottokar of Styria, who seems to be the most accurate in details, Henry IV aspired to the title of the King of Poland, asking the Pope for permission for a coronation. The negotiations were successful, and he sent to Rome 12,000 \"grzywnas\" as a present to the Pope. But when the envoy reached Italy it was noted that 400 \"grzywnas\" were stolen during the trip, and the Pope, infuriated, cancelled all negotiations with Henry IV. Although the embezzler was able to escape from the papal fury and the justice of the Doge of Venice, it is known that Henry IV wanted to punish him. In order to prevent the imminent revenge of the Duke it was decided to get rid of him: a false lawyer (brother of one of the Duke's doctors) was employed at the court of Wroc\u0142aw, and slowly poisoned Henry IV. While another doctor, called Guncelin, recognizing the symptoms of poisoning, was able to rescue the Duke from an imminent death, causing severe vomiting and cleansing the body; but the assassin was not discovered, and this time put the poison in the knife used by Henry IV to cut his bread. The poison was finally detected, but it was too late to save the Duke. Henry IV died in the Catholic faith, deciding not to prosecute or punish his killers.\nThis is a very long story of the Duke's death and only some elements are confirmed by other sources. Ottokar of Styria told the story in many details in agreement with that provided by the \"Kronika Zbras\u0142awska\". Other sources related that a chaplain named Aleksy, as a deputy of King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia had betrayed Henry IV's interests and tried to give the crown to the \"King of Kalisz\" Przemys\u0142 II. In this story the theft of the envoy to Rome was also mentioned, only the epilogue was a little different: here, the thief was killed by his own servants in the streets of Rome.\nKillers.\nFollowing the version of Ottokar of Styria, should be sought among the Wroc\u0142aw townspeople (just like Henry IV's father) two brothers, one of them was lawyer and the other doctor. The only two persons who could be identified as the brothers were John (who was an adviser of the Duchy and a lawyer) and Jakob (known as \"Magister\", so probably a doctor), sons of one Go\u0107wina, who was a doctor in the court of Henry III the White. They still in their posts at the time of Henry IV's death. It's assumed that they acted on behalf of Henry V the Fat, who wanted to obtain Krak\u00f3w and with this the title of High Duke, but was not any evidence to support this. There is no other person who will take advantage of the Duke's death, and could be linked to the circumstances of the death of Henry IV.\nHenry IV's testament.\nAccording to the chroniclers, the dying Henry IV made two documents. One to the Wroc\u0142aw church (which give the desired permissions to the Bishop to obtain the full sovereignty over the Duchy of Nysa\u2013Otmuch\u00f3w) and other politic (who regulated the issue of his inheritance). Under this will, he bequeathed the Duchy of Wroc\u0142aw to Duke Henry III of G\u0142og\u00f3w, and Krak\u00f3w -with the title of High Duke- to Przemys\u0142 II. In case of the death of one of the princes, the other could take possession over his districts, which further arrangements according to custom. Many historians, however, believed the existence of a third document. If it was true, this would be a step towards the reunification of Poland, and Henry IV, who was denigrated particularly in the earlier literature, was really a conscious promoter of Poland interests and a true patriot (apart from the merits of raising the awareness of the problems of ethnic and linguistic diversity in the Middle Ages). Only the testament to the Church (who was not count with the return of K\u0142odzko to King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia as an excuse for mixing in the Silesian affairs) was fully implemented. Henry IV was buried in the Kolegiata of the Holy Cross and St. Bartholomeus in Wroc\u0142aw, which he founded.\nHenry V the Fat could take Wroc\u0142aw with support of King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia, after the local nobility refused to accept the rule of Henry III of G\u0142og\u00f3w. Wenceslaus II himself gained the Seniorate Province, but Duke Przemys\u0142 II could retain the title of High Duke.\nDuring World War II German anthropologists wanted to prove the \"Germanic look\" of Henry IV. To this end, his remains were removed and were to be tested. Unfortunately, they were lost during the war. The sarcophagus is now in the National Museum in Wroc\u0142aw.\nMarriages.\nAround March 1280, Henry IV married firstly with the daughter of Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Opole (b. ca. 1256/65? \u2013 d. 1287/88?), perhaps called Constance. After almost seven years of childless union, the Duke of Wroc\u0142aw obtain the annulment of his marriage under the grounds of sterility, although this fact is disputed by modern historians.\nBy 1288, Henry IV married secondly with Matilda (b. ca. 1270 \u2013 d. bef. 1 June 1298), daughter of Margrave Otto V \"the Tall\" of Brandenburg\u2013Salzwedel. The Professor and historian Ewa Maleczy\u0144ska alleged that the real reason of the divorce of Henry IV was that he maintain an affair with Matilda and wanted to marry her. They had no children.\nReferences.\n\"Piastowie. Leksykon biograficzny\", Cracow, 1999."}
{"id": "39019", "revid": "10512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39019", "title": "Archduke Ferdinand", "text": ""}
{"id": "39020", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39020", "title": "Archduke Franz Ferdinand", "text": ""}
{"id": "39021", "revid": "43070559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39021", "title": "Daytona 500", "text": "Auto race held in Daytona, Florida, United States\nThe Daytona 500 is a NASCAR Cup Series motor race held annually at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, Florida. It is the first of two Cup races held every year at Daytona, the second being the Coke Zero Sugar 400, and one of three held in Florida, with the annual spring showdown Straight Talk Wireless 400 being held at Homestead south of Miami. From 1988 to 2019, it was one of the four restrictor plate races on the Cup schedule. The inaugural Daytona 500 was held in 1959 coinciding with the opening of the speedway and since 1982, it has been the season-opening race of the Cup series.\nThe Daytona 500 is regarded as the most important and prestigious race on the NASCAR calendar, carrying by far the largest purse. Championship points awarded are equal to that of any other NASCAR Cup Series race. It is also the series' first race of the year; this phenomenon is unique in sports, which tend to have championships or other major events at the end of the season rather than the start. From 1995\u20132020, U.S. television ratings for the Daytona 500 were the highest for any auto race of the year, surpassing the traditional leader, the Indianapolis 500 which in turn greatly surpasses the Daytona 500 in gate attendance and international viewing. In 2021 the Indianapolis 500 surpassed the Daytona 500 in TV ratings and viewership. The 2006 Daytona 500 attracted the sixth largest average live global TV audience of any sporting event that year with 20 million viewers.\nThe race serves as the final event of Speedweeks and is also known as \"The Great American Race\" or the \"Super Bowl of Stock Car Racing\". Since its inception, the race has been held in mid-to-late February. From 1971 to 2011, and again since 2018, the event has been as associated with Presidents Day weekend, taking place on the third Sunday of February (except for when the event lands on Valentine\u2019s Day) and since 2022, it was held on the same day that the NBA All-Star Game was held and one week after the Super Bowl. On eight occasions, the race has been run on Valentine's Day.\nSince 1997, the winner of the Daytona 500 has been presented with the Harley J. Earl Trophy in Victory Lane, and the winning car is displayed in race-winning condition for one year at Daytona 500 Experience, a museum and gallery adjacent to Daytona International Speedway.\nOrigins.\nThe race is the direct successor of shorter races held on the Daytona Beach Road Course. This long square was partially on the sand and also on the highway near the beach. Earlier events featured races with stock cars. A stock car race was held at Daytona International Speedway in 1959. It was the second 500-mile NASCAR race, following the annual Southern 500, and has been held every year since. By 1961, it began to be referred to as the Daytona 500, by which it is still commonly known.\nDaytona International Speedway is long and a 500-mile race requires 200 laps to complete. However, the race was considered official after halfway (100 laps/250 miles) had been completed from 1959 to 2016. From 2017 to 2019, the race was considered official after the conclusion of Stage 2 (120 laps/300 miles) when stage-racing was introduced. In 2020, they revised the rule in which a race is considered official at either halfway or the conclusion of Stage 2 (whichever comes first, in this case halfway). The race has been shortened four times due to rain (in 1965, 1966, 2003, and 2009) and once in response to the energy crisis of 1974. Since the adaptation of the green\u2013white\u2013checkered finish rule in 2004, the race has gone past 500 miles on ten occasions (2005, 2006, 2007, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2015, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2023). It took two attempts to finish the race in 2010, 2011, and 2020. The 2023 running is the longest Daytona 500 contested, lasting 212 laps/530 miles.\nWilliam Byron is the two-time defending winner.\nQualifying procedure.\nThe qualifying procedure is unique for the Daytona 500. Some teams must race their way into the Daytona 500 field. The first row is set by a timed round of qualifying. Prior to 2021, the session was held one week before the race (prior to 2003, this was two rounds; prior to 2001, it was three) but the session is now held on the Wednesday evening leading up to the race. The remainder of the field is set on the Thursday before the race by two separate qualifying races (these were from 1959 to 1967; from 1969 to 2004; and with a two-lap overtime, if necessary, beginning in 2005 (these races were not held in 1968 due to rain)). The top two drivers from the qualifying races who were not in the top 35 in owner points were given spots on the field, and the rest of the field was set by the finishing order of the duels, with guaranteed spots to those in the top 35. The remaining spots, 40 to 43, were filled by top qualifying times of those not already in the field from the qualifying race. If there was a previous NASCAR champion without a spot, he would get one of those four spots, otherwise, the fourth-fastest car was added to the field.\nPrior to 2005 \u2013 and beginning again in 2013 \u2013 after the top two cars were set, the top fourteen cars in the qualifying races advance to the field, and then between six (1998\u20132003), eight (1995\u201397, 2004) or 10 (until 1994) fastest cars which do not advance from the qualifying race are added, then cars in the top 35 in owner points not locked into the race, and then the driver with the championship provisional, except for 1985 when no such car was eligible for a provisional starting spot, the only time that happened in the Daytona 500 from when the provisional was added in 1976 through 2004.\nTelevision.\nThe Daytona 500 was the first auto race to be televised live flag-to-flag on network television when CBS aired it in 1979, continuing to air until 2000.\nFrom 2001 to 2006, the race alternated between Fox and NBC under the terms of a six\u2013year, $2.48 billion NASCAR television contract, with Fox broadcasting the Daytona 500 in odd-numbered years (2001, 2003, 2005) and the Pepsi 400 in even-numbered years (2002, 2004, 2006) and NBC broadcasting the opposite race in that year.\nIn 2005, a new television contract was signed, which made Fox the sole broadcaster of the Daytona 500 for eight years, from 2007 to 2014. In 2013, 10 more years were added to the contract, giving Fox every Daytona 500 from 2015 to 2024 as well, for a total of at least 20 Daytona 500s in a row. The installation of the lighting system at Daytona International Speedway in 1998, as well as the implementations of the television packages in 2001 and 2007 respectively, have resulted in the race starting and ending much later than it did in the race's early years. The race started at 12:15\u00a0p.m. EST from 1979 until 2000. The start time was moved to 1:00\u00a0p.m EST from 2001 to 2004, 2:30\u00a0p.m. in 2005 and 2006, and 3:30\u00a0p.m. from 2007 to 2009, all for the convenience of west coast viewers. The 2005 race ended at sunset for the first time in its history, and the 2006 race ended well after sunset.\nEvery Daytona 500 between 2006 and 2010, as well as the 2012 and 2014 races, ended under the lights. The changing track conditions caused by the onset of darkness in the closing laps in these years forced the crew chiefs to predict the critical car setup adjustments needed for their final two pit stops. The 2007 race was the first Daytona 500 to go into prime-time, ending at 7:07\u00a0p.m. Eastern time. In 2010, the race moved back to a 1:00\u00a0p.m. start time, which should have resulted in it ending in daylight; however, two red flags caused by track surface issues led to long delays that pushed the race to 7:34\u00a0p.m. EST, pushing the race into prime-time for the second time. The 2012 race was also scheduled to start at 1:00\u00a0p.m. EST on Sunday, February 26, but heavy rain in the area caused the race to be postponed to 7:00\u00a0p.m. EST on Monday, February 27, making it the first Daytona 500 to be postponed to a Monday, as well as the first (and only) Daytona 500 to be run as a night race. Due to a two\u2013hour red flag period after a jet dryer fire on the track with 40 laps remaining, the race did not end until about 12:40\u00a0a.m. on Tuesday, February 28. The 2013 race marked a return to the race's past tradition of ending in the late afternoon, as it ended at about 4:40\u00a0p.m., the race's earliest ending time since 2004. Although the 2014 race started around 1:30\u00a0p.m. EST, heavy rain and a tornado warning red\u2013flagged the race after 38 laps and it was delayed for a record six hours and 22 minutes; the race finished the entire 500\u2013mile distance around after 11:00\u00a0p.m. the same day, which effectively competed with the time-delayed East Coast broadcast of NBC's coverage of the 2014 Winter Olympics closing ceremony, scheduled between 7:00 and 10:30\u00a0p.m. The 2015 race started on time around 1:00 \u00a0p.m., and ended after 203 laps due to a Green\u2013white\u2013checkered finish.\nThe television ratings for the Daytona 500 have surpassed those of the larger Indianapolis 500 (which has much larger physical attendance and international attendance) since 1995, even though the 1995 race was available in far fewer homes than the year before. Then-broadcaster CBS had lost well-established VHF (channels 2\u201313) affiliates in major markets as a result of the Fox affiliate switches of 1994. As an example, new affiliates WDJT in Milwaukee and WGNX in Atlanta\u00a0\u2014 both cities that are home to NASCAR races\u00a0\u2014 and WWJ in Detroit, close to Michigan International Speedway, were on the UHF band (channels 14\u201369), meaning that they had a significantly reduced broadcast area compared to former affiliates WITI, WAGA-TV, and WJBK, respectively. WDJT was not available in many Wisconsin markets by the time the Daytona 500 took place.\nRain delays forced the 2025 Daytona 500 race to go on longer, with television coverage cutting into numerous Fox Animation Domination shows.\nList of Daytona 500 winners.\n\"For NASCAR Grand National winners at Daytona from 1949 to 1958, see Daytona Beach and Road Course.\"\n\u2021\u00a0\u2013 Record for fastest Daytona 500 before the stages era at set by Buddy Baker in 1980.\n\u2020\u00a0- Record for fastest Daytona 500 during the stages era at set by William Byron in 2024.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39023", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39023", "title": "Hare system", "text": ""}
{"id": "39024", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39024", "title": "Hare-Clark", "text": ""}
{"id": "39026", "revid": "21715336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39026", "title": "Netiquette", "text": ""}
{"id": "39027", "revid": "50236799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39027", "title": "Mike Tyson", "text": "American boxer and media personality (born 1966)\nMichael Gerard Tyson (born June 30, 1966) is an American former professional boxer who competed between 1985 and 2024. Nicknamed \"Iron Mike\" and \"Kid Dynamite\" in his early career, and later known as \"the Baddest Man on the Planet\", Tyson is regarded as one of the greatest heavyweight boxers of all time. He reigned as the undisputed world heavyweight champion from 1987 to 1990.\nTyson won his first 19 professional fights by knockout, 12 of them in the first round. Claiming his first belt at the age of 20, Tyson holds the record as the youngest boxer ever to win a heavyweight title. He was the first heavyweight boxer to simultaneously hold the World Boxing Association (WBA), World Boxing Council (WBC), and International Boxing Federation (IBF) titles, as well as the only heavyweight to unify them in succession. The following year, Tyson became the lineal champion when he knocked out Michael Spinks in 91 seconds of the first round. In 1990, Tyson lost the undisputed heavyweight championship when he was knocked out by underdog Buster Douglas, making it one of the biggest upsets in boxing history.\nIn 1992, he was convicted of rape and sentenced to six years in prison. He was released on parole after three years. After his release in 1995, he engaged in a series of comeback fights, regaining the WBA and WBC titles in 1996 to join Floyd Patterson, Muhammad Ali, Tim Witherspoon, Evander Holyfield and George Foreman as the only men in boxing history to have regained a heavyweight championship after losing it. After being stripped of the WBC title in the same year, Tyson lost the WBA title to Evander Holyfield by an eleventh round stoppage. Their 1997 rematch ended when Tyson was disqualified for biting Holyfield's ears. In 2002, Tyson fought for the world heavyweight title, losing by knockout to Lennox Lewis. In November 2024, his bout against Jake Paul, which he lost via unanimous decision, became the biggest boxing gate in US history outside of Las Vegas.\nTyson was known for his ferocious and intimidating boxing style as well as his controversial behavior inside and outside the ring, which he explained was inspired by Sonny Liston, a boxer who is widely regarded as the most intimidating man in the history of boxing. With a knockout-to-win percentage of 88%, he was ranked 16th on \"The Ring\" magazine's list of 100 greatest punchers of all time, and first on ESPN's list of \"The Hardest Hitters in Heavyweight History\". Sky Sports described him as \"perhaps the most ferocious fighter to step into a professional ring\". He has been inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame and the World Boxing Hall of Fame.\nOutside his boxing career, Tyson has appeared in various popular media. He appeared in the well-received movies \"Rocky Balboa \" (2006) and \"The Hangover\" (2009).\nEarly life.\nMichael Gerard Tyson was born at Cumberland Hospital in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, New York City, on June 30, 1966. He has an older brother named Rodney (born c.\u20091961) and had an older sister named Denise, who died of a heart attack at age 24 in February 1990. Tyson's mother, born in Charlottesville, Virginia, was described as a promiscuous woman who might have been a prostitute. Tyson's biological father is listed as \"Purcell Tyson\", a \"humble cab driver\" (who was from Jamaica) on his birth certificate, but the man Tyson had known as his father was a pimp named Jimmy Kirkpatrick. Kirkpatrick was from Grier Town, North Carolina (a predominantly black neighborhood that was annexed by the city of Charlotte), where he was one of the neighborhood's top baseball players. Kirkpatrick married and had a son, Tyson's half-brother Jimmie Lee Kirkpatrick, who would help to integrate Charlotte high school football in 1965. In 1959, Jimmy Kirkpatrick left his family and moved to Brooklyn, where he met Tyson's mother, Lorna Mae (Smith) Tyson. Kirkpatrick frequented pool halls, gambled and hung out on the streets. \"My father was just a regular street guy caught up in the street world,\" Tyson said. Kirkpatrick abandoned the Tyson family around the time Mike was born, leaving Tyson's mother to care for the children on her own. Kirkpatrick died in 1992.\nThe family lived in Bedford-Stuyvesant until their financial burdens necessitated a move to Brownsville when Tyson was 10 years old. Throughout his childhood, Tyson lived in and around neighborhoods with a high rate of crime. According to an interview in \"Details\", his first fight was with a bigger youth who had pulled the head off one of Tyson's pigeons. Tyson was repeatedly caught committing petty crimes and fighting those who ridiculed his high-pitched voice and lisp. By the age of 13, he had been arrested 38 times. He ended up at the Tryon School for Boys in Johnstown, New York. Tyson's emerging boxing ability was discovered there by Bobby Stewart, a juvenile detention center counselor and former boxer. Stewart noted that Tyson could bench press more than his weight, and through Stewart, Tyson met boxing manager and trainer Cus D'Amato. Tyson dropped out of high school as a junior. He was later awarded an honorary Doctorate in Humane Letters from Central State University in 1989. Kevin Rooney also trained Tyson, and he was occasionally assisted by Teddy Atlas, although Atlas was dismissed by D'Amato when Tyson was 15. Rooney eventually took over all training duties for the young fighter.\nTyson's mother died when he was 16, leaving him in the care of D'Amato, who would become his legal guardian. Tyson later said, \"I never saw my mother happy with me and proud of me for doing something: she only knew me as being a wild kid running the streets, coming home with new clothes that she knew I didn't pay for. I never got a chance to talk to her or know about her. Professionally, it has no effect, but it's crushing emotionally and personally.\"\nAmateur career.\nAs an amateur, Tyson won gold medals at the 1981 and 1982 Junior Olympic Games, defeating Joe Cortez in 1981 and beating Kelton Brown in 1982. Brown's corner threw in the towel in the first round. In 1984 Tyson won the gold medal at the Nation Golden Gloves held in New York, beating Jonathan Littles. He fought Henry Tillman twice as an amateur, losing both bouts by decision. Tillman went on to win heavyweight gold at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.\nProfessional career.\nEarly career.\nTyson made his professional debut as an 18-year-old on March 6, 1985, in Albany, New York. He defeated Hector Mercedes via first-round TKO. He had 15 bouts in his first year as a professional. Fighting frequently, Tyson won 26 of his first 28 fights by KO or TKO; 16 of those came in the first round. The quality of his opponents gradually increased to journeyman fighters and borderline contenders, like James Tillis, David Jaco, Jesse Ferguson, Mitch Green, and Marvis Frazier. His win streak attracted media attention and Tyson was billed as the next great heavyweight champion. D'Amato died in November 1985, relatively early into Tyson's professional career, and some speculate that his death was the catalyst to many of the troubles Tyson was to experience as his life and career progressed.\nRise up the ranks.\nTyson's first nationally televised bout took place on February 16, 1986, at Houston Field House in Troy, New York, against journeyman heavyweight Jesse Ferguson, and was carried by ABC Sports. Tyson knocked down Ferguson with an uppercut in the fifth round that broke Ferguson's nose. During the sixth round, Ferguson began to hold and clinch Tyson in an apparent attempt to avoid further punishment. After admonishing Ferguson several times to obey his commands to box, the referee finally stopped the fight near the middle of the sixth round. The fight was initially ruled a win for Tyson by disqualification (DQ) of his opponent. The ruling was \"adjusted\" to a win by technical knockout (TKO) after Tyson's corner protested that a DQ win would end Tyson's string of knockout victories, and that a knockout would have been the inevitable result.\nIn July, after recording six more knockout victories, Tyson fought former world title challenger Marvis Frazier in Glens Falls, New York, on another ABC Sports broadcast. Tyson won easily, charging at Frazier at the opening bell and hitting him with two consecutive uppercuts, the second of which knocked Frazier unconscious thirty seconds into the fight.\nAfter his win over Frazier, Tyson was booked to fight Jos\u00e9 Ribalta at the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey in 1986. Ribalta hit Tyson in the body throughout the fight. Tyson knocked down Ribalta three times, in the 2nd, 8th, and 10th round, and then the referee called the fight off. Tyson said Ribalta was his toughest fight: \"I hit Jose Ribalta with everything, and he took everything and kept coming back for more. Jose Ribalta stood toe to toe with me. He was very strong in the clinches,\" and \"Ribalta was a game fighter who actually engaged me. I felt nauseous from all Ribalta\u2019s body blows, even hours after the fight. I never felt that much general pain again.\"\nWBC heavyweight champion.\nTyson vs. Berbick.\nOn November 22, 1986, Tyson was given his first title fight against Trevor Berbick for the World Boxing Council (WBC) heavyweight championship. Tyson won the title by TKO in the second round, and at the age of 20 years and 4 months became the youngest heavyweight champion in history. He added the WBA and IBF titles after defeating James Smith and Tony Tucker in 1987. Tyson's dominant performances brought many accolades. Donald Saunders wrote: \"The noble and manly art of boxing can at least cease worrying about its immediate future, now [that] it has discovered a heavyweight champion fit to stand alongside Dempsey, Tunney, Louis, Marciano, and Ali.\"\nTyson intimidated fighters with his strength, combined with outstanding hand speed, accuracy, coordination and timing. Tyson also possessed notable defensive abilities, holding his hands high in the peek-a-boo style taught by his mentor Cus D'Amato to slip under and weave around his opponent's punches while timing his own. Tyson's explosive punching technique was due in large part to crouching immediately prior to throwing a hook or an uppercut: this allowed the \"spring\" of his legs to add power to the punch. Among his signature moves was a right hook to his opponent's body followed by a right uppercut to his opponent's chin. Lorenzo Boyd, Jesse Ferguson and Jos\u00e9 Ribalta were each knocked down by this combination.\nUnified heavyweight champion.\nTyson vs. Smith, Thomas.\nExpectations for Tyson were extremely high, and he was the favorite to win the heavyweight unification series, a tournament designed to establish an undisputed heavyweight champion. Tyson defended his title against James Smith on March 7, 1987, in Las Vegas, Nevada. He won by unanimous decision and added Smith's World Boxing Association (WBA) title to his existing belt. \"Tyson-mania\" in the media was becoming rampant.\nHe beat Pinklon Thomas in May by TKO in the sixth round.\nUndisputed heavyweight champion.\nTyson vs. Tucker.\nOn August 1 he took the International Boxing Federation (IBF) title from Tony Tucker in a twelve-round unanimous decision 119\u2013111, 118\u2013113, and 116\u2013112. He became the first heavyweight to own all three major belts\u00a0\u2013 WBA, WBC, and IBF\u00a0\u2013 at the same time.\nTyson vs. Biggs, Holmes, Tubbs.\nAnother fight, in October of that year, ended with a victory for Tyson over 1984 Olympic super heavyweight gold medalist Tyrell Biggs by TKO in the seventh round.\nDuring this time, Tyson came to the attention of gaming company Nintendo. After witnessing one of Tyson's fights, Nintendo of America president Minoru Arakawa was impressed by the fighter's \"power and skill\", prompting him to suggest Tyson be included in the upcoming Nintendo Entertainment System port of the \"Punch-Out!!\" arcade game. In 1987, Nintendo released \"Mike Tyson's Punch-Out!!\", which was well received and sold more than a million copies. It has retrospectively been considered one of the greatest games of all-time.\nTyson had three fights in 1988. He faced Larry Holmes on January 22, 1988, and defeated the legendary former champion by TKO in the fourth round. This was the only knockout loss Holmes had in 75 professional bouts.\nIn March, Tyson then fought contender Tony Tubbs in Tokyo, Japan, fitting in an easy second-round TKO victory amid promotional and marketing work.\nTyson vs. Spinks.\nOn June 27, 1988, Tyson faced Michael Spinks. Spinks, who had taken the heavyweight championship from Larry Holmes via fifteen-round decision in 1985, had not lost his title in the ring but was not recognized as champion by the major boxing organizations. Holmes had previously given up all but the IBF title, and that was eventually stripped from Spinks after he elected to fight Gerry Cooney (winning by TKO in the fifth round) rather than IBF Number 1 Contender Tony Tucker, as the Cooney fight provided him a larger purse. However, Spinks did become the lineal champion by beating Holmes and many (including \"Ring\" magazine) considered him to have a legitimate claim to being the true heavyweight champion. The bout was, at the time, the richest fight in history and expectations were very high. Boxing pundits were predicting a titanic battle of styles, with Tyson's aggressive infighting conflicting with Spinks's skillful out-boxing and footwork. The fight ended after 91 seconds when Tyson knocked Spinks out in the first round; many consider this to be the pinnacle of Tyson's fame and boxing ability.\nDuring this period, Tyson's problems outside the ring were also beginning to emerge. His marriage to Robin Givens was heading for divorce, and his future contract was being fought over by Don King and Bill Cayton. In late 1988, Tyson parted with manager Bill Cayton and fired longtime trainer Kevin Rooney, the man many credit for honing Tyson's craft after the death of D'Amato. Following Rooney's departure, critics alleged that Tyson began to show less head movement and combination punching.\nTyson vs. Bruno, Carl Williams.\nIn 1989, Tyson had only two fights amid personal turmoil. He faced the British boxer Frank Bruno in February. Bruno managed to stun Tyson at the end of the first round, although Tyson went on to knock Bruno out in the fifth round. Tyson then knocked out Carl \"The Truth\" Williams in the first round in July.\nTyson vs. Douglas.\nBy 1990, Tyson seemed to have lost direction, and his personal life was in disarray amidst reports of less vigorous training prior to the Buster Douglas match. In a fight on February 11, 1990, he lost the undisputed championship to Douglas in Tokyo. Tyson was a huge betting favorite; indeed, the Mirage, the only casino to put out odds for the fight, made Tyson a 42/1 favorite. Tyson failed to find a way past Douglas's quick jab that had a reach advantage over his own. Tyson did catch Douglas with an uppercut in the eighth round and knocked him to the floor, but Douglas recovered sufficiently to hand Tyson a heavy beating in the subsequent two rounds. After the fight, the Tyson camp would complain that the count was slow and that Douglas had taken longer than ten seconds to get back on his feet. Just 35 seconds into the tenth round, Douglas unleashed a brutal uppercut, followed by a four-punch combination of hooks that knocked Tyson down for the first time in his career. He was counted out by referee Octavio Meyran.\nThe knockout victory by Douglas over Tyson, the previously undefeated \"baddest man on the planet\" and arguably the most feared boxer in professional boxing at that time, has been described as one of the most shocking upsets in modern sports history.\nReturn to the ring.\nDespite the shocking loss, Tyson has said that losing to Douglas was the greatest moment of his career: \"I needed that fight to make me a better person and fighter. I have a broader perspective of myself and boxing.\"\nAfter the loss, Tyson recovered with first-round knockouts of Henry Tillman and Alex Stewart in his next two fights. Tyson's victory over Tillman, the 1984 Olympic heavyweight gold medalist, enabled Tyson to avenge his amateur losses at Tillman's hands. These bouts set up an elimination match for another shot at the undisputed world heavyweight championship, which Evander Holyfield had taken from Douglas in his first defense of the title.\nTyson vs. Ruddock.\nTyson, who was the number one contender, faced number two contender Donovan \"Razor\" Ruddock on March 18, 1991, in Las Vegas. Ruddock was seen as the most dangerous heavyweight around and was thought of as one of the hardest punching heavyweights. Tyson and Ruddock went back and forth for most of the fight, until referee Richard Steele controversially stopped the fight during the seventh round in favor of Tyson. This decision infuriated the fans in attendance, sparking a post-fight melee in the audience. The referee had to be escorted from the ring.\nTyson vs. Ruddock II.\nTyson and Ruddock met again on June 28 that year, with Tyson knocking down Ruddock twice and winning a twelve-round unanimous decision 113\u2013109, 114\u2013108, and 114\u2013108. A fight between Tyson and Holyfield for the undisputed championship was scheduled for November 8, 1991, at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, but Tyson pulled out after sustaining a rib cartilage injury during training.\nComeback.\nTyson was convicted of the rape charge on February 10, 1992, and was released in 1995. After being paroled from prison, Tyson easily won his comeback bouts against Peter McNeeley and Buster Mathis Jr. Tyson's first comeback fight was marketed as \"He's back!\" and grossed more than US$96\u00a0million worldwide, including a United States record $63\u00a0million for PPV television. The viewing of the fight was purchased by 1.52\u00a0million homes, setting both PPV viewership and revenue records. The 89-second fight elicited criticism that Tyson's management lined up \"tomato cans\" to ensure easy victories for his return. \"TV Guide\" included the Tyson\u2013McNeeley fight in their list of the 50 Greatest TV Sports Moments of All Time in 1998.\nSecond reign as unified heavyweight champion.\nTyson vs. Bruno II, Seldon.\nTyson regained one belt by easily winning the WBC title against Frank Bruno in March 1996. It was the second fight between the two, and Tyson knocked out Bruno in the third round. In 1996, Lennox Lewis turned down a $13.5\u00a0million guarantee to fight Tyson. This would've been Lewis's highest fight purse to date. Lewis then accepted $4\u00a0million from Don King to step aside and allow Tyson to fight Bruce Seldon for an expected $30\u00a0million instead with the intention that if Tyson defeated Seldon, he would fight Lewis next. Tyson added the WBA belt by defeating champion Seldon in the first round in September that year. Seldon was severely criticized and mocked in the popular press for seemingly collapsing to innocuous punches from Tyson.\nTyson vs. Holyfield.\nTyson attempted to defend the WBA title against Evander Holyfield, who was in the fourth fight of his own comeback. Holyfield had retired in 1994 following the loss of his championship to Michael Moorer. It was said that Don King and others saw former champion Holyfield, who was 34 at the time of the fight and a huge underdog, as a washed-up fighter.\nOn November 9, 1996, in Las Vegas, Nevada, Tyson faced Holyfield in a title bout dubbed \"Finally\". In a surprising turn of events, Holyfield, who was given virtually no chance to win by numerous commentators, defeated Tyson by TKO when referee Mitch Halpern stopped the bout in round eleven. Holyfield became the second boxer to win a heavyweight championship belt three times. Holyfield's victory was marred by allegations from Tyson's camp of Holyfield's frequent headbutts during the bout. Although the headbutts were ruled accidental by the referee, they would become a point of contention in the rematch.\nPost-title career.\nTyson vs. Holyfield II.\nTyson and Holyfield fought again on June 28, 1997. Originally, Halpern was supposed to be the referee, but after Tyson's camp protested, Halpern stepped aside in favor of Mills Lane. The highly anticipated rematch was dubbed \"The Sound and the Fury\", and it was held at the Las Vegas MGM Grand Garden Arena, site of the first bout. It was a lucrative event, drawing even more attention than the first bout and grossing $100\u00a0million. Tyson received $30\u00a0million and Holyfield $35\u00a0million, the highest paid professional boxing purses until 2007. The fight was purchased by 1.99\u00a0million households, setting a pay-per-view buy rate record that stood until May 5, 2007, being surpassed by Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather Jr.\nSoon to become one of the most controversial events in modern sports, the fight was stopped at the end of the third round, with Tyson disqualified for biting Holyfield on both ears. The first time Tyson bit him, the match was temporarily stopped. Referee Mills Lane deducted two points from Tyson and the fight resumed. However, after the match resumed, Tyson bit him again, resulting in his disqualification, and Holyfield won the match. The first bite was severe enough to remove a piece of Holyfield's right ear, which was found on the ring floor after the fight. Tyson later stated that his actions were retaliation for Holyfield repeatedly headbutting him without penalty. In the confusion that followed the ending of the bout and announcement of the decision, a near riot occurred in the arena and several people were injured. Tyson Holyfield II was the first heavyweight title fight in over 50 years to end in a disqualification.\nAs a fallout from the incident, US$3\u00a0million was immediately withheld from Tyson's $30-million purse by the Nevada state boxing commission (the most it could legally hold back at the time). Two days after the fight, Tyson issued a statement, apologizing to Holyfield for his actions and asked not to be banned for life over the incident. Tyson was roundly condemned in the news media but was not without defenders. Novelist and commentator Katherine Dunn wrote a column that criticized Holyfield's sportsmanship in the controversial bout and charged the news media with being biased against Tyson.\nOn July 9, 1997, Tyson's boxing license was rescinded by the Nevada Athletic Commission in a unanimous voice vote; he was also fined US$3\u00a0million and ordered to pay the legal costs of the hearing. As most state athletic commissions honor sanctions imposed by other states, this effectively made Tyson unable to box in the United States. The revocation was not permanent, as the commission voted 4\u20131 to restore Tyson's boxing license on October 18, 1998.\nDuring his time away from boxing in 1998, Tyson made a guest appearance at WrestleMania XIV as an enforcer for the main event match between Shawn Michaels and Steve Austin. During this time, Tyson was also an unofficial member of Michaels's stable, D-Generation X. Tyson was paid $3\u00a0million for being guest enforcer of the match at WrestleMania XIV.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"I'm the best ever. I'm the most brutal and vicious, the most ruthless champion there has ever been. There's no one can stop me. Lennox is a conqueror? No! I'm Alexander! He's no Alexander! I'm the best ever. There's never been anyone as ruthless. I'm Sonny Liston. I'm Jack Dempsey. There's no one like me. I'm from their cloth. There is no one who can match me. My style is impetuous, my defense is impregnable, and I'm just ferocious. I want your heart! I want to eat his children! Praise be to Allah!\"\n\u00a0\u2014Tyson's post-fight interview after knocking out Lou Savarese 38 seconds into the bout in June 2000.\nIn January 1999, Tyson returned to the ring for a match against the South African Francois Botha. This match also ended in controversy. While Botha initially controlled the fight, Tyson allegedly attempted to break Botha's arms during a tie-up and both boxers were cautioned by the referee in the ill-tempered bout. Botha was ahead on points on all scorecards and was confident enough to mock Tyson as the fight continued. Nonetheless, Tyson landed a straight right hand in the fifth round that knocked out Botha. Critics noticed Tyson stopped using the bob and weave defense altogether following this return. Promoting the fight on Secaucus, New Jersey television station WWOR-TV, Tyson launched into an expletive-laden tirade that forced sports anchor Russ Salzberg to cut the interview short.\nLegal problems arose with Tyson once again. On February 5, 1999, Tyson was sentenced to a year's imprisonment, fined $5,000, and ordered to serve two years probation along with undergoing 200 hours of community service for assaulting two motorists after a traffic accident on August 31, 1998. He served nine months of that sentence. After his release, he fought Orlin Norris on October 23, 1999. Tyson knocked down Norris with a left hook thrown after the bell sounded to end the first round. Norris injured his knee when he went down and said that he was unable to continue. Consequently, the bout was ruled a no contest.\nIn 2000, Tyson had three fights. The first match in January was staged at the MEN Arena in Manchester, England against Julius Francis. Following controversy as to whether Tyson was allowed into the country, he took four minutes to knock out Francis, ending the bout in the second round. He also fought Lou Savarese in June 2000 in Glasgow, winning in the first round; the fight lasted only 38 seconds. Tyson continued punching after the referee had stopped the fight, knocking the referee to the floor as he tried to separate the boxers. It was after this fight that Tyson called out Lennox Lewis with his post fight speech proclaiming to be the \"best ever\" and declaring, \"I\u2019m Sonny Liston. I\u2019m Jack Dempsey \u2026 I\u2019m cut from their cloth.\" In October, Tyson fought the similarly controversial Andrew Golota, winning in round three after Go\u0142ota was unable to continue due to a broken cheekbone, concussion, and neck injury. The result was later changed to no contest after Tyson refused to take a pre-fight drug test and then tested positive for marijuana in a post-fight urine test. Tyson fought only once in 2001, beating Brian Nielsen in Copenhagen by TKO in the seventh round.\nTyson vs. Lewis.\nTyson once again had the opportunity to fight for a heavyweight championship in 2002. Lennox Lewis held the WBC, IBF, IBO and Lineal titles at the time. As promising fighters, Tyson and Lewis had sparred at a training camp in a meeting arranged by Cus D'Amato in 1984. Tyson sought to fight Lewis in Nevada for a more lucrative box-office venue, but the Nevada Boxing Commission refused him a license to box as he was facing possible sexual assault charges at the time.\nTwo years prior to the bout, Tyson had made several inflammatory remarks to Lewis in an interview following the Savarese fight. The remarks included the statement \"I want your heart, I want to eat your children.\" On January 22, 2002, the two boxers and their entourages were involved in a brawl at a New York press conference to publicize the planned event. A few weeks later, the Nevada Athletic Commission refused to grant Tyson a license for the fight, and the promoters had to make alternative arrangements. After multiple states balked at granting Tyson a license, the fight eventually occurred on June 8 at the Pyramid Arena in Memphis, Tennessee. Lewis dominated the fight and knocked out Tyson with a right hand in the eighth round. Tyson was respectful after the fight and praised Lewis on his victory. This fight was the highest-grossing event in pay-per-view history at that time, generating $106.9\u00a0million from 1.95\u00a0million buys in the US.\nIn another Memphis fight on February 22, 2003, Tyson beat fringe contender Clifford Etienne 49 seconds into round one. The pre-fight was marred by rumors of Tyson's lack of fitness. Some said that he took time out from training to party in Las Vegas and get a new facial tattoo. This eventually proved to be Tyson's final professional victory in the ring.\nIn August 2003, after years of financial struggles, Tyson finally filed for bankruptcy. Tyson earned over $30\u00a0million for several of his fights and $300\u00a0million during his career. At the time, the media reported that he had approximately $23\u00a0million in debt.\nOn August 13, 2003, Tyson entered the ring for a face-to-face confrontation against K-1 fighter Bob Sapp immediately after Sapp's win against Kimo Leopoldo in Las Vegas. K-1 signed Tyson to a contract with the hopes of making a fight happen between the two, but Tyson's felony history made it impossible for him to obtain a visa to enter Japan, where the fight would have been most profitable. Alternative locations were discussed, but the fight ultimately did not take place.\nOn July 30, 2004, Tyson had a match against British boxer Danny Williams in another comeback fight, and this time, staged in Louisville, Kentucky. Tyson dominated the opening two rounds. The third round was even, with Williams getting in some clean blows and also a few illegal ones, for which he was penalized. In the fourth round, Williams took control of the fight landing a succession of accurate and powerful punches that knocked Tyson down. He failed to beat the count and was thus defeated by KO. After the fight, Tyson's manager claimed that Tyson had torn a ligament in his knee in the first round. This was Tyson's fifth career defeat. He underwent surgery for the ligament four days after the fight. His manager, Shelly Finkel, claimed that Tyson was unable to throw significant right-hand punches since he had a knee injury.\nRetirement.\nTyson vs. McBride.\nOn June 11, 2005, Tyson quit before the start of the seventh round in a close bout against journeyman Kevin McBride. In the 2008 documentary \"Tyson\", he stated that he fought McBride for a payday, that he did not anticipate winning, that he was in poor physical condition and fed up with taking boxing seriously. After losing three of his last four fights, Tyson said he would quit boxing because he felt he had lost his passion for the sport.\nIn 2000 Tyson dismissed everyone who was working for him and enlisted new accountants, who prepared a statement showing he started the year $3.3\u00a0million in debt but earned $65.7\u00a0million. In August 2007, Tyson pleaded guilty to drug possession and driving under the influence in an Arizona court, which stemmed from an arrest in December where authorities said Tyson, who has a long history of legal contentions, admitted to using cocaine that day and to being addicted to the drug.\nIn his 2013 autobiography \"Undisputed Truth\", Tyson admitted to using the urine of his then wife Monica Turner to pass doping tests. He was married to Turner from 1997 to 2003. He also used his infant's urine for the same purpose.\nReturn and second retirement.\nTyson vs. Paul.\nIn March 2024, it was announced that Tyson would be making his ring return against Jake Paul in a heavyweight bout on July 20, 2024, at AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington, Texas. On April 29, 2024, it was announced that the fight would be sanctioned as a professional boxing match by Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations (TDLR). On May 26, 2024, Tyson suffered an ulcer flare-up aboard a plane. On May 31, 2024, it was announced that the fight was postponed per medical advice from Tyson's doctor, allowing him to recover from his ulcer flare-up. On June 7, 2024, it was announced that the fight would take place at the same stadium on November 15, 2024.\nPaul defeated Tyson via unanimous decision with the judges scoring the bout 80\u201372, 79\u201373 and 79\u201373 in favor of Paul.\nExhibition bouts.\nMike Tyson's World Tour.\nTo help pay off his debts, Tyson announced he would be doing a series of exhibition bouts, calling it Tyson's World Tour. For his first bout, Tyson returned to the ring in 2006 for a four-round exhibition against journeyman heavyweight Corey Sanders in Youngstown, Ohio. Tyson, without headgear at 5\u00a0ft 10 in and 216 pounds, was in quality shape, but far from his prime against Sanders, at 6\u00a0ft 6\u00a0in who wore headgear. Tyson appeared to be \"holding back\" in the exhibition to prevent an early end to the \"show\". \"If I don't get out of this financial quagmire there's a possibility I may have to be a punching bag for somebody. The money I make isn't going to help my bills from a tremendous standpoint, but I'm going to feel better about myself. I'm not going to be depressed\", explained Tyson about the reasons for his \"comeback\". After the bout was poorly received by fans, the remainder of the tour was canceled.\nTyson vs. Jones.\nIt was announced in July 2020 that Tyson had signed a contract to face former four-division world champion, Roy Jones Jr., in an eight-round exhibition fight. Mixed martial arts coach Rafael Cordeiro was selected to be Tyson's trainer and cornerman. The bout\u2014officially sanctioned by the California State Athletic Commission (CSAC)\u2014was initially scheduled to take place on September 12 at the Dignity Health Sports Park in Carson, California, however, the date was pushed back to November 28 in order to maximize revenue for the event. The fight went the full eight rounds and was declared a draw. The fight was a split draw and the three judges scored the fight as follows: Chad Dawson (76\u201376 draw), Christy Martin (79\u201373 for Tyson), and Vinny Pazienza (76\u201380 for Jones).\nTyson vs. Mayweather.\nOn September 4, 2025, it was announced that Tyson and Floyd Mayweather Jr. have agreed to fight each other in an exhibition bout some time in Spring 2026.\nMike Tyson's Legends Only League.\nIn July 2020, Mike Tyson announced the creation of Mike Tyson's Legends Only League. Tyson formed the league in partnership with Sophie Watts and her company, Eros Innovations. The league provides retired professional athletes the opportunity to compete in their respective sport. On November 28, 2020, Mike Tyson fought Roy Jones Jr. at the Staples Center in the first event produced under Legends Only League. The event received largely positive reviews and was the highest selling PPV event of 2020, which ranks in the Top-10 for PPV purchased events all-time.\nLegacy.\nTyson was \"The Ring\" magazine's Fighter of the Year in 1986 and 1988. A 1998 ranking of \"The Greatest Heavyweights of All-Time\" by \"The Ring\" magazine placed Tyson at number 14 on the list. Despite criticism of facing underwhelming competition during his run as champion, Tyson's knockout power and intimidation factor made him the sport's most dynamic box-office draw. According to Douglas Quenqua of \"The New York Times\", \"The [1990s] began with Mike Tyson, considered by many to be the last great heavyweight champion, losing his title to the little-known Buster Douglas. Seven years later, Mr. Tyson bit Evander Holyfield's ear in a heavyweight champion bout\u2014hardly a proud moment for the sport.\"\nHe is remembered for his attire of black trunks, black shoes with no socks, and a plain white towel fit around his neck in place of a traditional robe, as well as his habit of rapidly pacing the ring before the start of a fight. In his prime, Tyson rarely took a step back and had never been knocked down or seriously challenged. According to \"Martial Arts World Report\", it gave Tyson an Honorable Mention in its Ten Greatest Heavyweights of All Time rather than a ranking because longevity is a factor and the peak period of Tyson's career lasted only about 5 years.\nAs of April 2025, BoxRec ranks Tyson at No. 24 among the greatest boxers that had their last fight at heavyweight. In \"The Ring\" magazine's list of the 80 Best Fighters of the Last 80 Years, released in 2002, Tyson was ranked at number 72. He is ranked number 16 on \"The Ring\" magazine's 2003 list of 100 greatest punchers of all time. Tyson has defeated 11 boxers for the world heavyweight title, the seventh-most in history.\nOn June 12, 2011, Tyson was inducted to the International Boxing Hall of Fame alongside legendary Mexican champion Julio C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez, light welterweight champion Kostya Tszyu, and actor/screenwriter Sylvester Stallone. In 2013, Tyson was inducted into the Nevada Boxing Hall of Fame and headlined the induction ceremony. Tyson was inducted into the Southern Nevada Hall of Fame in 2015 along with four other inductees with ties to Southern Nevada.\nTyson reflected on his strongest opponents in ten categories for a 2014 interview with \"The Ring\" magazine, including best jab, best defense, fastest hands, fastest feet, best chin, smartest, strongest, best puncher, best boxer, and best overall.\nIn 2017, \"The Ring\" magazine ranked Tyson as number 9 of 20 heavyweight champions based on a poll of panelists that included trainers, matchmakers, media, historians, and boxers, including:\nIn 2020, Bill Caplan of \"The Ring\" magazine listed Tyson as number 17 of the 20 greatest heavyweights of all time. Tyson spoke with \"The Ring\" magazine in 2020 about his six greatest victories, those over Trevor Berbick, Pinklon Thomas, Tony Tucker, Tyrell Biggs, Larry Holmes, and Michael Spinks. In 2020, CBS Sports boxing experts Brian Campbell and Brent Brookhouse ranked the top 10 heavyweights of the last 50 years and Tyson was ranked number 7.\nTrial and incarceration.\nTyson was arrested in July 1991 for the rape of 18-year-old Desiree Washington at the Canterbury Hotel in Indianapolis. Washington, who had previously been crowned \"Miss Black Rhode Island\", was a contestant in the Miss Black America pageant, rehearsals for which were being held in the city. Tyson was charged with \"one count of rape, two counts of criminal deviate conduct, and one count of criminal confinement\u2014charges that carried a maximum sentence of 63 years.\" Tyson's rape trial at the Marion County superior court lasted from January 26 to February 10, 1992.\nWashington herself testified that Tyson had \"called her around 1:45 a.m. to tour the city, then picked her up in his limo, took her back to his room, and made small talk as they both sat on the bed.\" After propositioning her for sex, Washington stated that she firmly refused and went to use the bathroom before leaving. \"After using the bathroom, she said, she noticed some discharge on her panty shield. Washington said she removed the liner and threw it away.\" When she came out, \"Tyson then pulled her to the bed, pinned her down and raped her, she testified. 'He was mean, evil,' she said. 'I got on top and started to try to get away, but he slammed me down again.'\" \"Three days after the assault, Washington went to the police and accused Tyson of rape.\" Partial corroboration of Washington's story came via testimony from Tyson's chauffeur, Virginia Foster, who confirmed Desiree Washington's \"state of shock\" after the incident. Foster also testified that Tyson had previously attempted to sexually assault her, too, having \"lured her to his hotel room, tried to touch her, and then exposed himself\". Further testimony came from the emergency room physician, Dr. Thomas Richardson, who examined Washington after the incident and confirmed that Washington's physical condition was consistent with rape. Richardson testified that Washington had suffered \"two small vaginal abrasions, consistent with 20 to 30 percent of the injuries seen in sexual assault cases\", and that in approximately 20,000 cases over a period of 20 years, \"only twice [...] had he ever seen such abrasions following consensual sex.\"\nUnder lead defense lawyer Vincent J. Fuller's direct examination, Tyson claimed that everything had taken place with Washington's full consent and he claimed not to have forced himself upon her. When he was cross-examined by lead prosecutor Gregory Garrison, Tyson denied claims that he had misled Washington and insisted that she wanted to have sex with him. \"In a misguided attempt to show that Washington must have known that Tyson wanted sex, the defense called witness after witness to testify about their client's lewd remarks and crude behavior during his encounters with the Miss Black America contestants, and even with Washington herself.\" Former attorney Mark Shaw argued that Tyson's \"case was mishandled, citing a jury-selection process that allowed a conservative ex-Marine to become foreman, a defense \"strategy\" of making Tyson look as bad as possible, and a disastrous decision to allow the defendant to testify at the grand jury hearing, the trial, and his sentencing.\"\nDespite Fuller's reputation as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;one of the most skillful and respected defense attorneys not only in Washington, but in the country [...] the defense team embarked on a game plan filled with ill-fated decisions and questionable strategies. [...] While the famous Fuller seemed to give Tyson an imposing advantage, his background made him an illogical choice. [...] Though he'd represented such notables as John Hinckley Jr. and junk-bond king Michael Milken, his reputation came mostly from federal court white-collar cases such as tax fraud and bribery. He simply wasn't familiar with the rough-and-tumble county criminal courts, and lacked recent experience in sex-crime cases. He couldn't locate exhibits, fumbled his delivery, exhibited a lack of knowledge of Indiana law, and generally handled Tyson's defense more like a first-year law student than a seasoned pro.\nFuller had also successfully defended Tyson's manager, Don King, \"against federal tax-evasion charges\" in 1985, which may have been one of the reasons King chose him to represent Tyson. Tyson himself would later describe Fuller as \"a horrible lawyer\". According to Shaw, Fuller \"never challenged obvious problems in Washington\u2019s story. Exactly why did she remove her panty shield? How did Tyson perform oral sex on her and still keep her pinned to the bed? If Tyson is one of the strongest men in the world, where were the bruises on the 108-pound woman?\"\nTyson was convicted of the rape charge on February 10, 1992, after the jury deliberated for nearly 10 hours.\nAlan Dershowitz, acting as Tyson's counsel, filed an appeal urging error of law in the Court's exclusion of evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct (known as the Rape Shield Law; Dershowitz alleged that Washington had \"falsely accused one of her high school classmates of rape\"), the exclusion of three potential defense witnesses, and the lack of jury instructions on honest and reasonable mistake of fact. The Indiana Court of Appeals ruled against Tyson in a 2\u20131 vote. The Indiana Supreme Court let the lower court opinion stand due to a 2\u20132 split in its review. The tie vote was due to the fact that the Chief Justice, Randall T. Shepard, recused himself from the case. The Chief Justice later revealed he did so because of a heated argument between his wife and Dershowitz at a Yale Law School reunion concerning the case. On March 26, 1992, Tyson was sentenced to six years in prison along with four years of probation. He was assigned to the Indiana Youth Center (now the Plainfield Correctional Facility) in April 1992, and he was released in March 1995 after serving less than three years of the sentence. He left with prison tattoos of tennis player Arthur Ashe and Chinese communist leader Mao Zedong; Tyson also dates his tattoo of Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara to this time.\nDue to his conviction, Tyson was required to register as a Tier II sex offender under federal law. Tyson has continued to maintain his innocence. In 1992, Erinn Cosby, the daughter of comedian and actor Bill Cosby, publicly accused Tyson of sexually assaulting her in 1989, although no criminal charges were ever sought.\nLife outside of boxing.\nIn an interview with \"USA Today\" published on June 3, 2005, Tyson said, \"My whole life has been a waste\u00a0\u2013 I've been a failure.\" He continued: \"I just want to escape. I'm really embarrassed with myself and my life. I want to be a missionary. I think I could do that while keeping my dignity without letting people know they chased me out of the country. I want to get this part of my life over as soon as possible. In this country nothing good is going to come of me. People put me so high; I wanted to tear that image down.\" Tyson began to spend much of his time tending to his 350 pigeons in Paradise Valley, an upscale enclave near Phoenix, Arizona.\nTyson has stayed in the limelight by promoting various websites and companies. In the past Tyson had shunned endorsements, accusing other athletes of putting on a false front to obtain them. Tyson has held entertainment boxing shows at a casino in Las Vegas and started a tour of exhibition bouts to pay off his numerous debts.\nIn October 2012, Tyson launched the Mike Tyson Cares Foundation. The mission of the Mike Tyson Cares Foundation is to \"give kids a fighting chance\" with innovative centers that provide for the comprehensive needs of kids from broken homes.\nIn August 2013, Tyson teamed up with Acquinity Sports to form Iron Mike Productions, a boxing promotions company.\nIn September 2013, Tyson was featured on a six-episode television series on Fox Sports 1 that documented his personal and private life entitled \"Being: Mike Tyson\".\nIn November 2013, Tyson's \"Undisputed Truth\" was published, which appeared on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list. At the Golden Podium Awards Ceremony, Tyson received the Sportel Special Prize for the best autobiography.\nIn May 2017, Tyson published his second memoir, \"Iron Ambition\", which details his time with trainer and surrogate father Cus D'Amato. Both were written with Larry Sloman.\nIn February 2018, Tyson attended the international mixed martial arts (MMA) tournament in the Russian city of Chelyabinsk. Tyson said: \"As I have travelled all over the country of Russia I have realised that the people are very sensitive and kind. But most Americans do not have any experience of that.\"\nOn May 12, 2020, Tyson posted a video on his Instagram of him training again. At the end of the video, Tyson hinted at a return to boxing by saying, \"I'm back\".\nOn May 23, 2020, at All Elite Wrestling's Double or Nothing, Tyson helped Cody defeat Lance Archer alongside Jake Roberts and presented him the inaugural AEW TNT Championship. Tyson alongside Henry Cejudo, Rashad Evans, and Vitor Belfort appeared on the May 27 episode of \"AEW Dynamite\" facing off against Chris Jericho and his stable The Inner Circle. Tyson returned to AEW on the April 7, 2021, episode of \"Dynamite\" and helped Jericho from being attacked by The Pinnacle, beating down Shawn Spears in the process. He was the special guest enforcer on the April 14 episode of \"Dynamite\" for a match between Jericho and Dax Harwood of The Pinnacle, a preview of the upcoming Inner Circle vs. Pinnacle match at Blood and Guts.\nTyson made an extended cameo appearance in the Telugu-Hindi movie \"Liger\", which released on August 25, 2022.\nTyson has also taken up the hobby of pigeon racing, stating that the birds \"got him out of trouble.\" Tyson claims to own hundreds of the birds and possibly a thousand.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nTyson resides in Seven Hills, Nevada. He has been married three times, and has seven children, one deceased, with three women; in addition to his biological children, Tyson includes his second wife's oldest daughter as one of his own.\nTyson married actress Robin Givens on February 7, 1988, at Holy Angels Catholic Church during a traditional ceremony in Chicago. Givens was known at the time for her role on the sitcom \"Head of the Class.\" Tyson's marriage to Givens was especially tumultuous, with allegations of violence, spousal abuse, and mental instability on Tyson's part.\nMatters came to a head when Tyson and Givens gave a joint interview with Barbara Walters on the ABC TV news magazine show \"20/20\" in September 1988, in which Givens described life with Tyson as \"torture, pure hell, worse than anything I could possibly imagine.\" Givens also described Tyson as \"manic depressive\" \u2013 which was later confirmed by doctors \u2013 on national television while Tyson looked on with an intent and calm expression. A month later, Givens announced that she was seeking a divorce from the allegedly abusive Tyson, with the two officially separating on February 14, 1989.\nAccording to the book \"Fire and Fear: The Inside Story of Mike Tyson\", Tyson admitted that he punched Givens and stated, \"that was the best punch I've ever thrown in my entire life.\" Tyson claimed that the book was \"filled with inaccuracies.\" Tyson and Givens had no children, but she reported having had a miscarriage; Tyson claimed that she was never pregnant and only used that to get him to marry her. During their marriage, the couple lived in a mansion in Bernardsville, New Jersey.\nTyson's second marriage was to Monica Turner from April 19, 1997, to January 14, 2003. At the time of the divorce filing, Turner worked as a pediatric resident at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington, D.C. She is the sister of Michael Steele, the former Lieutenant Governor of Maryland and former Republican National Committee chairman. Turner filed for divorce from Tyson in January 2002, claiming that he committed adultery during their five-year marriage, an act that \"has neither been forgiven nor condoned.\" The couple had two children.\nOn May 25, 2009, Tyson's four-year-old daughter, Exodus, was found by her seven-year-old brother, unconscious and tangled in a cord, dangling from an exercise treadmill. The child's mother untangled her, administered CPR and called for medical attention. Tyson, who was in Las Vegas at the time of the incident, traveled back to Phoenix to be with her. She died of her injuries on May 26, 2009.\nEleven days after his daughter's death, Tyson wed for the third time, to longtime girlfriend Lakiha \"Kiki\" Spicer, age 32, exchanging vows on June 6, 2009, in a short, private ceremony at the La Bella Wedding Chapel at the Las Vegas Hilton. They have two children.\nReligious beliefs.\nRaised as a Catholic, Tyson has stated that he converted to Islam before entering prison and that he made no efforts to correct what was reported in the media, although it was falsely reported that he converted to Islam during his time in prison and adopted the Muslim name Malik Abdul Aziz; some sources report it as Malik Shabazz. Tyson never changed his given name to an Islamic one, despite the rumors.\nIn November 2013, Tyson stated \"the more I look into the churches and mosques for god, the more I start seeing the devil\". But, just a month later, in a December 2013 interview with Fox News, Tyson said that he is very grateful to be a Muslim and that he needs Allah in his life. In the same interview Tyson talked about his progress with sobriety and how being in the company of good people has made him want to be a better and more humble person.\nHe first completed the Islamic pilgrimage Umrah in July 2010. He did so again in December 2022 while accompanied by DJ Khaled, a Palestinian American Muslim.\nDiet.\nIn March 2011, Tyson appeared on \"The Ellen DeGeneres Show\" to discuss his new Animal Planet reality series \"Taking On Tyson\". In the interview with DeGeneres, Tyson discussed some of the ways he had improved his life in the past two years, including sober living and a vegan diet. However, in August 2013 he admitted publicly that he had lied about his sobriety and was on the verge of death from alcoholism.\nTyson also revealed that he is no longer vegan, stating, \"I was a vegan for four years but not anymore. I eat chicken every now and then. I should be a vegan. [No red meat] at all, no way! I would be very sick if I ate red meat. That's probably why I was so crazy before.\"\nPolitical views.\nIn 2015, Tyson announced that he was supporting Donald Trump's presidential candidacy.\nControversies and legal challenges.\nOn December 29, 2006, Tyson was arrested in Scottsdale, Arizona, on suspicion of DUI and felony drug possession; he nearly crashed into a police SUV shortly after leaving a nightclub. According to a police probable-cause statement, filed in Maricopa County Superior Court, \"[Tyson] admitted to using [drugs] today and stated he is an addict and has a problem.\" Tyson pleaded not guilty on January 22, 2007, in Maricopa County Superior Court to felony drug possession and paraphernalia possession counts and two misdemeanor counts of driving under the influence of drugs. On February 8 he checked himself into an inpatient treatment program for \"various addictions\" while awaiting trial on the drug charges.\nOn September 24, 2007, Tyson pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine and driving under the influence. He was convicted of these charges in November 2007 and sentenced to 24 hours in jail. After his release, he was ordered to serve three years' probation and complete 360 hours of community service. Prosecutors had requested a year-long jail sentence, but the judge praised Tyson for seeking help with his drug problems. On November 11, 2009, Tyson was arrested after getting into a scuffle at Los Angeles International airport with a photographer. No charges were filed.\nIn September 2011, Tyson gave an interview in which he made comments about former Alaska governor Sarah Palin including crude and violent descriptions of interracial sex. These comments were reprinted on \"The Daily Caller\" website. Journalist Greta van Susteren criticized Tyson and \"The Daily Caller\" over the comments, which she described as \"smut\" and \"violence against women\".\nOn April 20, 2022, on a JetBlue flight from San Francisco to Florida, Tyson repeatedly punched a male passenger who was harassing him, including throwing water on Tyson; he did not face criminal charges.\nIn November 2023, Tyson found himself amidst criticism and rumors regarding his alleged donation to the Israeli Defense Forces after he was photographed attending a November 13 event sponsored by Friends of the IDF (FIDF) to fundraise for the Gaza war, which seemed to clash with his previous statements about Palestinians. This led to a social media backlash, prompting Tyson to release the following statement on Instagram: \"I want to clarify the recent portrayal of an event I attended,\" he wrote on Thursday. \"Invited for a casual evening out by a friend, I was unaware of the arranged fundraiser and no donations were made by me or on my behalf. As a Muslim and human, I support peace. My prayers have been and continue to be with my brothers and sisters.\"\nIn popular culture.\nAt the height of his fame and career in the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s, Tyson was among the most recognized sports personalities in the world. In addition to his many sporting accomplishments, his outrageous and controversial behavior in the ring and in his private life has kept him in the public eye and in the courtroom. As such, Tyson has been the subject of myriad popular media including movies, television, books and music. He has also been featured in video games and as a subject of parody or satire. Tyson became involved in professional wrestling and has made many cameo appearances in film and television.\nIn 1987, he was featured as the final boss in the NES video game \"Mike Tyson's Punch-Out!!\".\nThe film \"Tyson\" was released in 1995 and was directed by Uli Edel. It explores the life of Mike Tyson, from the death of his guardian and trainer Cus D'Amato to his rape conviction. Tyson is played by Michael Jai White.\nIn 2006, Tyson appeared as himself in a cameo role in the film \"Rocky Balboa\".\nPublished in 2007, author Joe Layden's book \"The Last Great Fight: The Extraordinary Tale of Two Men and How One Fight Changed Their Lives Forever\", chronicled the lives of Tyson and Douglas before and after their heavyweight championship fight.\nIn 2008, the documentary \"Tyson\" premiered at the annual Cannes Film Festival in France.\nTyson played a fictionalized version of himself in the 2009 film \"The Hangover\".\nAfter debuting a one-man show in Las Vegas, Tyson collaborated with film director Spike Lee and brought the show to Broadway in August 2012. In February 2013, Tyson took his one-man show \"Mike Tyson: Undisputed Truth\" on a 36-city, three-month national tour. Tyson talks about his personal and professional life on stage. The one-man show was aired on HBO on November 16, 2013.\nIn 2013, he appeared in an episode of \"\" as a survivor of child-abuse awaiting execution for murder.\nHe is the titular character in \"Mike Tyson Mysteries\", which started airing on October 27, 2014, on Adult Swim. In the animated series, Tyson voices a fictionalized version of himself, solving mysteries in the style of Scooby-Doo.\nIn early March 2015, Tyson appeared on the track \"Iconic\" on Madonna's album \"Rebel Heart\". Tyson says some lines at the beginning of the song.\nIn late March 2015, \"Ip Man 3\" was announced. With Donnie Yen reprising his role as the titular character, Bruce Lee's martial arts master, Ip Man, while Mike Tyson joined the cast as Frank, an American property developer and proficient boxer. Principal photography began on March 25, 2015, and was premiered in Hong Kong on December 16, 2015.\nIn January 2017, Tyson launched his YouTube channel with Shots Studios, a comedy video and comedy music production company with young digital stars like Lele Pons and Rudy Mancuso. Tyson's channel includes parody music videos and comedy sketches.\nHe hosts the podcast \"Hotboxin' with Mike Tyson\".\nIn October 2017, Tyson was announced as the new face of Australian car servicing franchise Ultra Tune. He took over from Jean-Claude van Damme in fronting television commercials for the brand, and the first advert aired in January 2018 during the Australian Open. However, the ad was quickly attacked, even leading Tyson himself to describe it as \"a little sexist.\"\nA joint Mainland China-Hong Kong-directed film on female friendship titled \"Girls 2: Girls vs Gangsters\" () that was shot earlier from July\u2013August 2016 at several locations around Vietnam was released in March 2018, featuring Tyson as \"Dragon\".\nTiki Lau released a dance music single, \"Mike Tyson\", in October 2020, which includes vocals from Tyson.\nIn 2021, Mike's Hard Lemonade Seltzer featured ads with Tyson.\nIn March 2021, it was announced that Jamie Foxx will star in, and also executive produce the official scripted series \"Tyson\". The limited series will be directed by Antoine Fuqua and executive produced by Martin Scorsese.\nA two-part documentary series titled \"\" premiered on May 25, 2021, on ABC.\nTyson and his family appeared in the 300th episode of \"Hell's Kitchen\" as VIP guests in the Blue Team's kitchen during Season 20's opening dinner service that aired on June 7, 2021.\nOn August 25, 2022, Hulu released a biographical drama limited series about Tyson, entitled \"Mike\", depicting his life and career. On August 6, 2022, Tyson spoke out about the series, saying, \"Hulu stole my story\" and telling the service that \"I'm not a n****r you can sell on the auction block.\"\nExhibition boxing record.\n! style=\"text-align:left;\"|Non-scored\nPay-per-view bouts.\nBoxing.\nClosed-circuit theater TV.\nSelect pay-per-view boxing buy rates at American closed-circuit theater television venues:\nAwards and honors.\nHumane letters.\nThe Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, in 1989 awarded Tyson an honorary Doctorate in Humane Letters: \"Mike demonstrates that hard work, determination and perseverance can enable one to overcome any obstacles.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39028", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39028", "title": "Michael Tyson", "text": ""}
{"id": "39029", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39029", "title": "Bamboo", "text": "Subfamily of flowering plants in the grass family Poaceae\nBamboos are a diverse group of mostly evergreen perennial flowering plants making up the subfamily Bambusoideae of the grass family Poaceae. Giant bamboos are the largest members of the grass family, in the case of \"Dendrocalamus sinicus\" having individual stalks (culms) reaching a length of , up to in thickness and a weight of up to . The internodes of bamboos can also be of great length. \"Kinabaluchloa wrayi\" has internodes up to in length. and \"Arthrostylidium schomburgkii\" has internodes up to in length, exceeded in length only by papyrus. By contrast, the stalks of the tiny bamboo \"Raddiella vanessiae\" of the savannas of French Guiana measure only in length by about in width. The origin of the word \"bamboo\" is uncertain, but it most likely comes from the Dutch or Portuguese language, which originally borrowed it from Malay.\nIn bamboo, as in other grasses, the internodal regions of the stem are usually hollow and the vascular bundles in the cross-section are scattered throughout the walls of the stalk instead of in a cylindrical cambium layer between the bark (phloem) and the wood (xylem) as in dicots and conifers. The dicotyledonous woody xylem is also absent. The absence of secondary growth wood causes the stems of monocots, including the palms and large bamboos, to be columnar rather than tapering.\nBamboos include some of the fastest-growing plants in the world, due to a unique rhizome-dependent system. Certain species of bamboo can grow within a 24-hour period, at a rate of almost an hour (equivalent to every 90 seconds). Growth up to in 24 hours has been observed in the instance of Japanese giant timber bamboo (\"Phyllostachys bambusoides\"). This rapid growth and tolerance for marginal land, make bamboo a good candidate for afforestation, carbon sequestration and climate change mitigation.\nBamboo is versatile and has notable economic and cultural significance in South Asia, Southeast Asia, and East Asia, being used for building materials, as a food source, and as a raw product, and depicted often in arts, such as in bamboo paintings and bambooworking. Bamboo, like wood, is a natural composite material with a high strength-to-weight ratio useful for structures. Bamboo's strength-to-weight ratio is similar to timber, and its strength is generally similar to a strong softwood or hardwood timber. Some bamboo species have displayed remarkable strength under test conditions. \"Bambusa tulda\" of Bangladesh and adjoining India has tested as high as 60,000 psi (400 MPa) in tensile strength. Other bamboo species make extraordinarily hard material. \"Bambusa tabacaria\" of China contains so much silica that it will make sparks when struck by an axe.\nTaxonomy.\nBamboos have long been considered the most basal grass genera, mostly because of the presence of bracteate, indeterminate inflorescences, \"pseudospikelets\", and flowers with three lodicules, six stamens, and three stigmata. Following more recent molecular phylogenetic research, many tribes and genera of grasses formerly included in the Bambusoideae are now classified in other subfamilies, e.g. the Anomochlooideae, the Puelioideae, and the Ehrhartoideae. The subfamily in its current sense belongs to the BOP clade of grasses, where it is sister to the Pooideae (bluegrasses and relatives).\nThe bamboos comprise three clades classified as tribes, and these strongly correspond with geographic divisions representing the New World herbaceous species (Olyreae), tropical woody bamboos (Bambuseae), and temperate woody bamboos (Arundinarieae). The woody bamboos do not form a monophyletic group; instead, the tropical woody and herbaceous bamboos are sister to the temperate woody bamboos. Altogether, more than 1,400 species are placed in 115 genera.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Tribe Olyreae (herbaceous bamboos)\n22 genera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Tribe Bambuseae (tropical woody bamboos)\n73 genera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Tribe Arundinarieae (temperate woody bamboos)\n33 genera: \"Acidosasa\", \"Ampelocalamus\", \"Arundinaria\", \"Bashania\", \"Bergbambos\", \"Chimonobambusa\", \"Chimonocalamus\", \"Drepanostachyum\", \"Fargesia\", \"Ferrocalamus\", \"Gaoligongshania\", \"Gelidocalamus\", \"Himalayacalamus\", \"Indocalamus\", \"Indosasa\", \"Kuruna\", \"Oldeania\", \"Oligostachyum\", \"Phyllostachys\", \"Pleioblastus\", \"Pseudosasa\", \"Sarocalamus\", \"Sasa\", \"Sasaella\", \"Sasamorpha\", \"Semiarundinaria\", \"Shibataea\", \"Sinobambusa\", \"Sinosasa\", \"Thamnocalamus\", \"Tongpeia\", \"Vietnamocalamus\", \"Yushania\".\nDistribution.\nMost bamboo species are native to warm and moist tropical and to warm temperate climates. Their range also extends to cool mountainous regions and highland cloud forests.\nIn the Asia-Pacific region, they occur across East Asia, from north to 50 \u00b0N latitude in Sakhalin, to south to northern Australia, and west to India and the Himalayas. China, Japan, Korea, India and Australia, all have several endemic populations. They also occur in small numbers in sub-Saharan Africa, confined to tropical areas, from southern Senegal in the north to southern Mozambique and Madagascar in the south. In the Americas, bamboo has a native range from 47 \u00b0S in southern Argentina and the beech forests of central Chile, through the South American tropical rainforests, to the Andes in Ecuador near , with a noticeable gap through the Atacama Desert.\nThree species of bamboo, all in the genus \"Arundinaria\", are native to the Southeastern United States. Bamboo thickets called canebrakes once formed a dominant ecosystem in some parts of the Southeastern United States, but they are now considered critically endangered ecosystems. Canada and continental Europe are not known to have any native species of bamboo. Many species are also cultivated as garden plants outside of this range, including in Europe and areas of North America where no native wild bamboo exists.\nRecently, some attempts have been made to grow bamboo on a commercial basis in the Great Lakes region of east-central Africa, especially in Rwanda. In the United States, several companies are growing, harvesting, and distributing species such as \"Phyllostachys nigra\" (Henon) and \"Phyllostachys edulis\" (Moso).\nEcology.\nThe two general patterns for the growth of bamboo are \"clumping\", and \"running\", with short and long underground rhizomes, respectively. Clumping bamboo species tend to spread slowly, as the growth pattern of the rhizomes is to simply expand the root mass gradually, similar to ornamental grasses. Running bamboos need to be controlled during cultivation because of their potential for aggressive behavior. They spread mainly through their rhizomes, which can spread widely underground and send up new culms to break through the surface. Running bamboo species are highly variable in their tendency to spread; this is related to the species, soil and climate conditions. Some send out runners of several meters a year, while others stay in the same general area for long periods. If neglected, over time, they can cause problems by moving into adjacent areas.\nBamboos include some of the fastest-growing plants on Earth, with reported growth rates up to in 24 hours. These depend on local soil and climatic conditions, as well as species, and a more typical growth rate for many commonly cultivated bamboos in temperate climates is in the range of per day during the growing period. Some of the largest timber bamboo grow over tall, and be as large as in diameter. The size range for mature bamboo is species-dependent, with the smallest bamboos reaching only several inches high at maturity. A typical height range covering many of the common bamboos grown in the United States is , depending on species. Anji County of China, known as the \"Town of Bamboo\", provides the optimal climate and soil conditions to grow, harvest, and process some of the most valued bamboo poles available worldwide.\nUnlike all trees, individual bamboo culms emerge from the ground at their full diameter and grow to their full height in a single growing season of three to four months. During this time, each new shoot grows vertically into a culm with no branching out until the majority of the mature height is reached. Then, the branches extend from the nodes and leafing out occurs. In the next year, the pulpy wall of each culm slowly hardens. During the third year, the culm hardens further. The shoot is now a fully mature culm. Over the next 2\u20135 years (depending on species), fungus begins to form on the outside of the culm, which eventually penetrates and overcomes the culm. Around 5\u20138 years later (species- and climate-dependent), the fungal growths cause the culm to collapse and decay. This brief life means culms are ready for harvest and suitable for use in construction within about three to seven years. Individual bamboo culms do not get any taller or larger in diameter in subsequent years than they do in their first year, and they do not replace any growth lost from pruning or natural breakage. Bamboo has a wide range of hardiness depending on species and locale. Small or young specimens of an individual species produce small culms initially. As the clump and its rhizome system mature, taller and larger culms are produced each year until the plant approaches its particular species limits of height and diameter.\nMany tropical bamboo species die at or near freezing temperatures, while some of the hardier temperate bamboos survive temperatures as low as . Some of the hardiest bamboo species are grown in USDA plant hardiness zone 5, although they typically defoliate and may even lose all above-ground growth, yet the rhizomes survive and send up shoots again the next spring. In milder climates, such as USDA zone 7 and above, most bamboo remain fully leafed out and green year-round.\nMass flowering.\nBamboos seldom and unpredictably flower and the frequency of flowering varies greatly from species to species. Once flowering takes place, a plant declines and often dies entirely. In fact, many species only flower at intervals as long as 65 or 120 years. These taxa exhibit mass flowering (or gregarious flowering), with all plants in a particular 'cohort' flowering over a several-year period. Any plant derived through clonal propagation from this cohort will also flower regardless of whether it has been planted in a different location. The longest mass flowering interval known is 120 years, and it is for the species \"Phyllostachys bambusoides\" (Sieb. &amp; Zucc.). In this species, all plants of the same stock flower at the same time, regardless of differences in geographic locations or climatic conditions, and then the bamboo dies. The commercially important bamboo Guadua, or Cana brava (\"Guadua angustifolia\") bloomed for the first time in recorded history in 1971, suggesting a blooming interval well in excess of 130 years. The lack of environmental impact on the time of flowering indicates the presence of some sort of \"alarm clock\" in each cell of the plant which signals the diversion of all energy to flower production and the cessation of vegetative growth. This mechanism, as well as the evolutionary cause behind it, is still largely a mystery.\nInvasive species.\nBecause of their ability to rapidly populate and grow, some bamboo species are acknowledged as having high potential for becoming invasive species. A study commissioned by International Bamboo and Rattan Organisation, found that invasive species typically are varieties that spread via rhizomes rather than by clumping, as most commercially viable woody bamboos do. In the United States, the National Invasive Species Information Center agency of the Department of Agriculture has Golden Bamboo (\"Phyllostachys aurea\") listed as an invasive species. Other potentially invasive species include, but are not limited to, \"Actinocladum verticillatum, Bambusa tuldoides, Bambusa vulgaris, Guadua sarcocarpa, Guadua tagoara, Phyllostachys aurea,\" and \"Phyllostachys pubescens\", all of which spread primarily through rhizomes. The harmful effects of these species include raising the pH of the soil, cramping and shading out native plants, hindering the spread of native seeds, altering food chains, and siphoning nutrients from other plants. As bamboo farming and cultivation become more prominent in modern agriculture, it is important to closely monitor the spread of potentially invasive bamboo species.\nAnimal diet.\nBamboo contains large amounts of protein and very low amounts of carbohydrates allowing this plant to be the source of food for many animals. Soft bamboo shoots, stems and leaves are the major food source of the giant panda of China, the red panda of Nepal, and the bamboo lemurs of Madagascar. The red panda can eat up to a day which is also about the full body weight of the animal. With raw bamboo containing trace amounts of harmful cyanide with higher concentrations in bamboo shoots, the golden bamboo lemur ingests many times the quantity of the taxiphyllin-containing bamboo that would be lethal to a human.\nMountain gorillas of Central Africa also feed on bamboo, and have been documented consuming bamboo sap which was fermented and alcoholic; chimpanzees and elephants of the region also eat the stalks. The larvae of the bamboo borer (the moth \"Omphisa fuscidentalis\") of Laos, Myanmar, Thailand and Yunnan, China feed off the pulp of live bamboo. In turn, these caterpillars are considered a local delicacy. Bamboo is also used for livestock feed with research showing some bamboo varieties have higher protein content over other varieties of bamboo.\nCultivation.\nGeneral.\nIn Brazil, the http://, a non-profit organization, promotes the development of Brazil's bamboo production chain. Last year, it helped with the approval of law n~21,162 in the state of Paran\u00e1, which encourages Bamboo Culture aiming at the dissemination of its agricultural cultivation and the valorization of bamboo as an instrument for promoting the sustainable socioeconomic development of the State through its multiple functionalities. Bamboo cultivation neutralizes carbon emissions. Bamboo cultivation is cheap and in addition to adding value to its production chain, it is a sustainable crop that brings environmental, economic and social benefits. Its production can be used from construction to food. Recently, it was qualified and classified for the National Commission for Sustainable Development Objectives - CNDOS of the Presidency of the Republic of the federal government of Brazil.\nHarvesting.\nBamboo used for construction purposes must be harvested when the culms reach their greatest strength and when sugar levels in the sap are at their lowest, as high sugar content increases the ease and rate of pest infestation. As compared to forest trees, bamboo species grow fast. Bamboo plantations can be readily harvested for a shorter period than tree plantations.\nHarvesting of bamboo is typically undertaken according to these cycles:\nLeaching.\nLeaching is the removal of sap after harvest. In many areas of the world, the sap levels in harvested bamboo are reduced either through leaching or post-harvest photosynthesis.\nFor example:\nIn the process of water leaching, the bamboo is dried slowly and evenly in the shade to avoid cracking in the outer skin of the bamboo, thereby reducing opportunities for pest infestation.\nDurability of bamboo in construction is directly related to how well it is handled from the moment of planting through harvesting, transportation, storage, design, construction, and maintenance. Bamboo harvested at the correct time of year and then exposed to ground contact or rain will break down just as quickly as incorrectly harvested material.\nToxicity.\nGardeners working with bamboo plants have occasionally reported allergic reactions varying from no effects during previous exposures, to immediate itchiness and rash developing into red welts after several hours where the skin had been in contact with the plant (contact allergy), and in some cases into swollen eyelids and breathing difficulties (dyspnea). A skin prick test using bamboo extract was positive for the immunoglobulin E (IgE) in an available case study. The shoots (newly emerged culms) of bamboo contain the toxin taxiphyllin (a cyanogenic glycoside), which produces cyanide in the gut.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nThe shoots of most species are edible either raw or cooked, with the tough sheath removed. Cooking removes the slight bitterness. The shoots are used in numerous Asian dishes and broths, and are available in supermarkets in various sliced forms, in both fresh and canned versions.\nThe bamboo shoot in its fermented state forms an important ingredient in cuisines across the Himalayas. In Assam, India, for example, it is called \"khorisa\". In Nepal, a delicacy popular across ethnic boundaries consists of bamboo shoots fermented with turmeric and oil, and cooked with potatoes into a dish that usually accompanies rice ( () in Nepali).\nIn Indonesia, they are sliced thin and then boiled with \"santan\" (thick coconut milk) and spices to make a dish called \"gulai rebung\". Other recipes using bamboo shoots are \"sayur lodeh\" (mixed vegetables in coconut milk) and \"lun pia\" (sometimes written \"lumpia\": fried wrapped bamboo shoots with vegetables). The shoots of some species contain toxins that need to be leached or boiled out before they can be eaten safely.\nPickled bamboo, used as a condiment, may also be made from the pith of the young shoots.\nThe sap of young stalks tapped during the rainy season may be fermented to make \"ulanzi\" (a sweet wine) or made into a soft drink. Bamboo leaves are also used as wrappers for steamed dumplings which usually contains glutinous rice and other ingredients, such as the zongzi from China.\nPickled bamboo shoots ( ) are cooked with black-eyed beans as a delicacy in Nepal. Many Nepalese restaurants around the world serve this dish as \"aloo bodi tama\". Fresh bamboo shoots are sliced and pickled with mustard seeds and turmeric and kept in glass jar in direct sunlight for the best taste. It is used alongside many dried beans in cooking during winters. Baby shoots (Nepali: \"tusa\") of a very different variety of bamboo ( ) native to Nepal is cooked as a curry in hilly regions.\nIn Sambalpur, India, the tender shoots are grated into juliennes and fermented to prepare \"kardi\". The name is derived from the Sanskrit word for bamboo shoot, \"karira\". This fermented bamboo shoot is used in various culinary preparations, notably \"amil\", a sour vegetable soup. It is also made into pancakes using rice flour as a binding agent. The shoots that have turned a little fibrous are fermented, dried, and ground to sand-sized particles to prepare a garnish known as \"hendua\". It is also cooked with tender pumpkin leaves to make sag green leaves.\nIn Konkani cuisine, the tender shoots (\"kirlu\") are grated and cooked with crushed jackfruit seeds to prepare \"kirla sukke\".\nIn southern India and some regions of southwest China, the seeds of the dying bamboo plant are consumed as a grain known as \"bamboo rice\". The taste of cooked bamboo seeds is reported to be similar to wheat and the appearance similar to rice, but bamboo seeds have been found to have lower nutrient levels than both. The seeds can be pulverized into a flour with which to make cakes.\nThe Indian state of Sikkim has promoted bamboo water bottles to keep the state free from plastic bottles\nThe empty hollow in the stalks of larger bamboo is often used to cook food in many Asian cultures. Soups are boiled and rice is cooked in the hollows of fresh stalks of bamboo directly over a flame. Similarly, steamed tea is sometimes rammed into bamboo hollows to produce compressed forms of pu'er tea. Cooking food in bamboo is said to give the food a subtle but distinctive taste.\nWorking.\nWriting surface.\nBamboo was in widespread use in early China as a medium for written documents. The earliest surviving examples of such documents, written in ink on string-bound bundles of bamboo strips (or \"slips\"), date from the fifth century BC during the Warring States period. References in earlier texts surviving on other media indicate some precursor of these Warring States period bamboo slips was used as early as the late Shang period (from about 1250 BC).\nBamboo or wooden strips were used as the standard writing material during the early Han dynasty, and excavated examples have been found in abundance. Subsequently, paper began to displace bamboo and wooden strips from mainstream uses, and by the fourth century AD, bamboo slips had been largely abandoned as a medium for writing in China.\nBamboo fiber has been used to make paper in China since early times. A high-quality, handmade bamboo paper is still produced in small quantities. Coarse bamboo paper is still used to make spirit money in many Chinese communities.\nBamboo pulps are mainly produced in China, Myanmar, Thailand, and India, and are used in printing and writing papers. Several paper industries are surviving on bamboo forests. Ballarpur (Chandrapur, Maharstra) paper mills use bamboo for paper production. The most common bamboo species used for paper are \"Dendrocalamus asper\" and \"Bambusa blumeana\". It is also possible to make dissolving pulp from bamboo. The average fiber length is similar to hardwoods, but the properties of bamboo pulp are closer to softwood pulps due to it having a very broad fiber length distribution. With the help of molecular tools, it is now possible to distinguish the superior fiber-yielding species/varieties even at juvenile stages of their growth, which can help in unadulterated merchandise production.\nIn Central India, there are regular bamboo working circles in forest areas of Maharashtra, Madhyapradesh, Odisha and Chhattisgarh. Most of the bamboo is harvested for papermaking. Bamboo is cut after three years of its germination. No cutting is done during the rainy season (July\u2013September); broken and malformed culms are harvested first.\nWriting pen.\nIn olden times, people in India used hand-made pens (known as Kalam or boru (\u092c\u094b\u0930\u0942)) made from thin bamboo sticks (with diameters of 5\u201310\u00a0mm and lengths of 100\u2013150\u00a0mm) by simply peeling them on one side and making a nib-like pattern at the end. The pen would then be dipped in ink for writing.\nTextiles.\nSince the fibers of bamboo are very short (less than ), they are not usually transformed into yarn by a natural process. The usual process by which textiles labeled as being made of bamboo are produced uses only rayon made from the fibers with heavy employment of chemicals. To accomplish this, the fibers are broken down with chemicals and extruded through mechanical spinnerets; the chemicals include lye, carbon disulfide, and strong acids. Retailers have sold both end products as \"bamboo fabric\" to cash in on bamboo's current ecofriendly cachet. The Canadian Competition Bureau and the US Federal Trade Commission, as of mid-2009, are cracking down on the practice of labeling bamboo rayon as natural bamboo fabric. Under the guidelines of both agencies, these products must be labeled as rayon with the optional qualifier \"from bamboo\".\nConstruction.\nBamboo, like true wood, is a natural building material with a high strength-to-weight ratio useful for structures. In its natural form, bamboo as a construction material is traditionally associated with the cultures of South Asia, East Asia, and the South Pacific, to some extent in Central and South America, particularly in Colombia and Ecuador, and by extension in the aesthetic of Tiki culture.\nIn China and India, bamboo was used to hold up simple suspension bridges, either by making cables of split bamboo or twisting whole culms of sufficiently pliable bamboo together. One such bridge in the area of Qian-Xian is referenced in writings dating back to 960 AD and may have stood since as far back as the third century BC, due largely to continuous maintenance.\nBamboo has also long been used as scaffolding; the practice has been banned in China for buildings over six stories, but is still in continuous use for skyscrapers in Hong Kong.\nIn the Philippines, the nipa hut is a fairly typical example of the most basic sort of housing where bamboo is used; the walls are split and woven bamboo, and bamboo slats and poles may be used as its support.\nIn Japanese architecture, bamboo is used primarily as a supplemental or decorative element in buildings such as fencing, fountains, grates, and gutters, largely due to the ready abundance of quality timber.\nMany ethnic groups in remote areas that have water access in Asia use bamboo that is 3\u20135 years old to make rafts. They use 8 to 12 poles, long, laid together side by side to a width of about . Once the poles are lined up together, they cut a hole crosswise through the poles at each end and use a small bamboo pole pushed through that hole like a screw to hold all the long bamboo poles together. Floating houses use whole bamboo stalks tied together in a big bunch to support the house floating in the water.\nFishing and aquaculture.\nDue to its flexibility, bamboo is also used to make fishing rods. The split cane rod is especially prized for fly fishing.\nFirecrackers.\nBamboo has been traditionally used in Malaysia and Indonesia as a firecracker called a \"meriam buluh\" or bamboo cannon. Four-foot-long sections of bamboo are cut, and a mixture of water and calcium carbide are introduced. The resulting acetylene gas is ignited with a stick, producing a loud bang.\nWeapons.\nBamboo has often been used to construct weapons and is still incorporated in several Asian martial arts.\nIndicator of climate change.\nThe Song dynasty (960\u20131279 AD) Chinese scientist and polymath Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095) used the evidence of underground petrified bamboo found in the dry northern climate of Yan'an, Shanbei region, Shaanxi province to support his geological theory of gradual climate change.\nKitchenware and other usage.\nBamboo is frequently used for cooking utensils within many cultures, and is used in the manufacture of chopsticks and bamboo steamers. In modern times, some see bamboo tools as an eco-friendly alternative to other manufactured utensils. Bamboo is also used to make eating utensils such as chopsticks, trays, and tea scoops. A 2025 study that researched their use in dishes concluded that safety concerns persist in the \"case of bio-based tableware marketed as 'natural.'\"\nSeveral manufacturers offer bamboo bicycles, surfboards, snowboards, and skateboards. \nBamboo has traditionally been used to make a wide range of everyday utensils and cutting boards, particularly in Japan, where archaeological excavations have uncovered bamboo baskets dating to the Late J\u014dmon period (2000\u20131000 BC). Bamboo also has a long history of use in Asian furniture. Chinese bamboo furniture is a distinct style based on a millennia-long tradition, and bamboo is also used for floors due to its high hardness.\nAdditionally, bamboo is used to create bracelets, earrings, necklaces, and other jewelry.\nIn culture.\nSeveral Asian cultures, including that of the Andaman Islands, believe humanity emerged from a bamboo stem.\nChina.\nBamboo's long life makes it a Chinese symbol of uprightness and an Indian symbol of friendship. The rarity of its blossoming has led to the flowers' being regarded as a sign of impending famine. This may be due to rats feeding upon the profusion of flowers, then multiplying and destroying a large part of the local food supply. The most recent flowering began in May 2006 (see Mautam). Various bamboo species bloom in this manner about every 28\u201360 years.\nIn Chinese culture, the bamboo, plum blossom, orchid, and chrysanthemum (often known as \"m\u00e9il\u00e1nzh\u00faj\u00fa\" in Chinese) are collectively referred to as the Four Gentlemen. These four plants also represent the four seasons and, in Confucian ideology, four aspects of the \"junzi\" (\"prince\" or \"noble one\"). The pine (\"s\u014dng\" ), the bamboo (\"zh\u00fa\" ), and the plum blossom (\"m\u00e9i\" ) are also admired for their perseverance under harsh conditions, and are together known as the \"Three Friends of Winter\" (\"su\u00ech\u00e1n s\u0101ny\u01d2u\" ) in Chinese culture.\nAttributions of character.\nBamboo, one of the \"Four Gentlemen\" (bamboo, orchid, plum blossom and chrysanthemum), plays such an important role in traditional Chinese culture that it is even regarded as a behavior model of the gentleman. As bamboo has features such as uprightness, tenacity, and modesty, people endow bamboo with integrity, elegance, and plainness, though it is not physically strong. Countless poems praising bamboo written by ancient Chinese poets are actually metaphorically about people who exhibited these characteristics. An ancient poet, Bai Juyi (772\u2013846), thought that to be a gentleman, a man does not need to be physically strong, but he must be mentally strong, upright, and perseverant. Just as a bamboo is hollow-hearted, he should open his heart to accept anything of benefit and never have arrogance or prejudice.\nBamboo is not only a symbol of a gentleman, but also plays an important role in Buddhism, which was introduced into China in the first century. As canons of Buddhism forbids cruelty to animals, flesh and egg were not allowed in the diet. The tender bamboo shoot (\"s\u01d4n\" in Chinese) thus became a nutritious alternative. Preparation methods developed over thousands of years have come to be incorporated into Asian cuisines, especially for monks. A Buddhist monk, Zan Ning, wrote a manual of the bamboo shoot called \"S\u01d4n P\u01d4\" () offering descriptions and recipes for many kinds of bamboo shoots. Bamboo shoot has always been a traditional dish on the Chinese dinner table, especially in southern China.\nIn ancient times, those who could afford a big house with a yard would plant bamboo in their garden.\nMythology.\nIn a Chinese legend, the Emperor Yao gave two of his daughters to the future Emperor Shun as a test for his potential to rule. Shun passed the test of being able to run his household with the two emperor's daughters as wives, and thus Yao made Shun his successor, bypassing his unworthy son. After Shun's death, the tears of his two bereaved wives fell upon the bamboos growing there explains the origin of spotted bamboo. The two women later became goddesses Xiangshuishen after drowning themselves in the Xiang River.\nJapan.\nBamboo is a symbol of prosperity in Japan, and are used to make New Year's decorations called \"kadomatsu\". Bamboo forests sometimes surround Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples as part of a sacred barrier against evil. In the folktale \"Tale of the Bamboo Cutter\" (\"Taketori Monogatari\"), princess Kaguya emerges from a shining bamboo section.\nIn Japan, the Chinese \"Three Friends of Winter\" (\"kansai sany\u016b\") concept is traditionally used as a ranking system, where pine ( \"matsu\") is the first rank, bamboo ( \"take\") is the second rank, and plum ( \"ume\") is the third rank. This system is used in many traditional arts like with sushi sets, embroidering kimono or tiers of accommodations at traditional \"ry\u014dkan\" taverns.\nBamboo is known to be a strong material and able to withstand extreme heat. It is the only plant known to have survived the atomic bombings of Hiroshima in 1945.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, a similar story includes a man who dreams of a beautiful woman while sleeping under a bamboo plant; he wakes up and breaks the bamboo stem, discovering the woman inside.\nPhilippines.\nIn Philippine mythology, one of the more famous creation accounts tells of the first man \"Malak\u00e1s\" (\"Strong\") and the first woman \"Maganda\" (\"Beautiful\") each emerging from one half of a split bamboo stem on an island formed after the battle between Sky and Ocean.\nVietnam.\nAttributions of character.\nBamboo plays an important part of the culture of Vietnam. Bamboo symbolizes the spirit of Vovinam (a Vietnamese martial arts): \"c\u01b0\u01a1ng nhu ph\u1ed1i tri\u1ec3n\" (coordination between hard and soft (martial arts)). Bamboo also symbolizes the Vietnamese hometown and Vietnamese soul: the gentlemanlike, straightforwardness, hard working, optimism, unity, and adaptability. A Vietnamese proverb says, \"Tre gi\u00e0, m\u0103ng m\u1ecdc\" (When the bamboo is old, the bamboo sprouts appear), the meaning being Vietnam will never be annihilated; if the previous generation dies, the children take their place. Therefore, the Vietnamese nation and Vietnamese values will be maintained and developed eternally. Traditional Vietnamese villages are surrounded by thick bamboo hedges (\"l\u0169y tre\").\nDuring Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m's presidency, bamboo was the national symbol of South Vietnam, it was featured on the national coat of arms, presidential standard, and South Vietnamese \u0111\u1ed3ng coins at the time.\nMythology.\nA bamboo cane is also the weapon of Vietnamese legendary hero, Th\u00e1nh Gi\u00f3ng, who had grown up immediately and magically since the age of three because of his wish to liberate his land from \u00c2n invaders. The ancient Vietnamese legend \"C\u00e2y tre tr\u0103m \u0111\u1ed1t\" (The Hundred-knot Bamboo Tree) tells of a poor, young farmer who fell in love with his landlord's beautiful daughter. The farmer asked the landlord for his daughter's hand in marriage, but the proud landlord would not allow her to be bound in marriage to a poor farmer. The landlord decided to foil the marriage with an impossible deal; the farmer must bring him a \"bamboo tree of 100 nodes\". But Gautama Buddha (\"B\u1ee5t\") appeared to the farmer and told him that such a tree could be made from 100 nodes from several different trees. \"B\u1ee5t\" gave to him four magic words to attach the many nodes of bamboo: \"Kh\u1eafc nh\u1eadp, kh\u1eafc xu\u1ea5t\", which means \"joined together immediately, fell apart immediately\". The triumphant farmer returned to the landlord and demanded his daughter. Curious to see such a long bamboo, the landlord was magically joined to the bamboo when he touched it, as the young farmer said the first two magic words. The story ends with the happy marriage of the farmer and the landlord's daughter after the landlord agreed to the marriage and asked to be separated from the bamboo.\nAfrica.\nTanzania.\nTanzania possesses a large diversity of bamboo species.\nBozo.\nThe Bozo ethnic group of West Africa take their name from the Bambara phrase \"bo-so\", which means \"bamboo house\".\nSaint Lucia.\nBamboo is also the national plant of St. Lucia.\nHawaiian.\nHawaiian bamboo \"('ohe)\" is a \"kinolau\" or body form of the Polynesian creator god K\u0101ne.\nNorth America.\nArundinaria bamboos, known as giant cane or river cane, are a central part of the material cultures of Southeastern Native American nations, so much so that they have been called \"the plastic of the Southeastern Indians.\" Among the Cherokee, river cane has been used to make waterproof baskets, mats, fishing poles, flutes, blowguns, arrows, and to build houses, among other uses; the seed and young shoots are also edible. Traditional Cherokee double-woven baskets, crafted from river cane that has been split and dyed in various colors, are sometimes considered among the finest in the world. Since the North American bamboos are now rare, with 98% of their original extent eliminated, the Cherokee have initiated an effort to restore it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\"Bamboo \u2013 The Plant and its Uses\". Part of the Tropical Forestry book series (TROPICAL, volume 10), 2015."}
{"id": "39031", "revid": "50984158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39031", "title": "R. J. Mitchell", "text": "British aircraft designer (1895\u20131937)\nReginald Joseph Mitchell (20 May 1895 \u2013 11 June 1937) was a British aircraft designer who worked for the Southampton aviation company Supermarine from 1916 until 1936. He is best known for designing racing seaplanes, such as the Supermarine S.6B, and for leading the team that designed the Supermarine Spitfire.\nBorn in Butt Lane, Staffordshire, Mitchell attended Hanley High School and afterwards worked as an apprentice at a locomotive engineering works, whilst also studying engineering and mathematics at night. In 1916 he moved to Southampton to join Supermarine. He was appointed Chief Engineer in 1920 and Technical Director in 1927. Between 1920 and 1936 he designed 24 aircraft, which included flying boats and racing seaplanes, light aircraft, fighters and bombers. From 1925 to 1929 he worked on a series of racing seaplanes, built by Supermarine to compete in the Schneider Trophy competition, the final entry in the series being the Supermarine S.6B. The S.6B won the trophy in 1931. Mitchell was authorised by Supermarine to proceed with a new design, the Type 300, which went on to become the Spitfire.\nIn 1933, Mitchell underwent surgery to treat rectal cancer. He continued to work and earned his pilot's licence in 1934, but in early 1937, he was forced by a recurrence of the cancer to give up work. After his death that year, he was succeeded as chief designer at Supermarine by Joseph Smith.\nFamily and education.\nReginald Joseph Mitchell was born on 20 May 1895 at 115 Congleton Road, Butt Lane, in Staffordshire, England. He was the second eldest of five children, and the eldest of three brothers. His father Herbert Mitchell was a Yorkshireman who became headmaster of three Staffordshire schools in the Stoke-on-Trent area, before he retired from teaching. He then helped to establish a printing business, Wood, Mitchell and C. Ltd, in Hanley. Herbert Mitchell's wife Eliza Jane Brain was the daughter of a cooper. When Reginald was a child, the family lived in Normacot, now a suburb of Stoke-on-Trent.\nReginald (known to his family as \"Reg\") attended Queensberry Road Higher Elementary School from the age of eight, before moving on to Hanley High School. There he developed an interest in making and flying model aircraft. In 1911, after leaving school at the age of 16, he worked as an apprentice for Kerr Stuart &amp; Co. of Fenton, a railway engineering works. After completing his apprenticeship he worked in the drawing office at Kerr Stuart, whilst studying engineering and mathematics at a local technical college, where he displayed a talent for mathematics.\nAfter leaving Kerr Stuart in 1916, Mitchell worked for a period as a part-time teacher. He applied to join the armed forces on two occasions, but was on each occasion rejected because of his training as an engineer.\nReginald had a nephew; J. W. Mitchell, an artist who painted several scenes involving his uncle's spitfires, profits from his sales of his work were donated to the RAF Benevolent Fund.\nCareer at Supermarine.\nEarly career and promotion.\nIn 1916, Mitchell joined the Supermarine Aviation Works at Southampton, possibly for a probationary period. Since its formation in 1912, the company had specialised in building flying boats, producing its first aircraft, the Pemberton-Billing P.B.1, in 1914. During the First World War, Supermarine was taken over by the British Government, and during this period the company produced the first British single-seat flying boat fighter, the Supermarine Baby.\nOn joining the company, Mitchell was given the opportunity to develop skills in a number of roles, so as to gain experience of the aircraft industry. His basic engineering training would have helped him to become established, as he adjusted from working with locomotives to understanding aeroplanes. A competent mathematician, Mitchell's ability to think creatively and use his intuition when looking at a design was soon recognised. The earliest record of his work at Supermarine is as a draughtsman, and dates from 1916. By 1917, he had become assistant to the company's owner and designer,\u00a0Hubert Scott-Paine. He is likely to have played a role in the development of the Baby when in 1919 it was adapted for racing for the Schneider Trophy, and was renamed the Supermarine Sea Lion.\nIn 1918, Mitchell was promoted to become the works manager's assistant. When Supermarine's chief designer William Hargreaves left the company in the summer of 1919, he was replaced by Mitchell, who took up his new duties later that year, leading a team that had in 1918 consisted of six draughtsmen and a secretary. Following his promotion, the 19-year-old returned to Staffordshire and married his fianc\u00e9e Florence Dayson, an infant school headmistress, who was 11 years his senior. By 1921 he had become Supermarine's chief engineer. Following the departure of Scott-Paine in November 1923, Mitchell was able to negotiate a new contract, which led to greater influence in the company. The 10-year contract was a sign of his indispensability to\u00a0Supermarine.\nIt is unclear how Mitchell came about to become so quickly promoted when he was still a young man, as few documents relating to his early career have survived. However, his early promotion was not unusual at that time; other men of Mitchell's age held similar positions in other aircraft companies. Decades after his death, when approached for information about him, those surviving Supermarine colleagues who had known Mitchell were reluctant to recall their personal memories.\n1920s civilian and military aircraft designs.\nBetween 1920 and 1936, Mitchell designed 24 aeroplanes. His early projects often involved adapting Supermarine's earlier aircraft; in June 1920 the Air Ministry announced a civilian aircraft competition, and Supermarine's entry for the competition was the Commercial Amphibian, an adaptation by Mitchell of the company's Supermarine Channel. The Amphibian finished second, but was judged the best of the three entrants in terms of design and reliability. His redesigned Supermarine Baby, renamed the Supermarine Sea King, was exhibited the Olympia International Aero Exhibition in 1920, the first international exhibition to be held in the UK since the end of World War I. In 1922, the Chilean government bought a Channel, modified by Mitchell. That year he redesigned a version of the Commercial Amphibian, the Supermarine Sea Eagle.\nMitchell produced new designs for aircraft early in his career; he designed the Supermarine Seal II in 1920, and the triplane Flying Boat Torpedo Carrier the following year. The historian Ralph Pegram notes that the unbuilt Torpedo Carrier reveals the \"first true indication of Mitchell's thoughts as a designer\". In 1921 work began on the Supermarine Swan, a commercial carrier, but only the prototype was built. The Supermarine Seagull II\u2014later used as the basis for future designs\u2014began to receive production orders in 1922. The Amphibian Service Bomber was designed by Mitchell in 1924. Renamed the Supermarine Scarab, 12 aircraft were bought by the Spanish Navy; they remained in service until 1928.\nSupermarine's first design for a land aircraft, the Supermarine Sparrow, competed unsuccessfully during the Air Ministry's Light Air Competition of 1924, and subsequently failed to gain orders. A variant, the Supermarine Sparrow II, was used by Mitchell to test his different airfoil designs.\nWork on the Supermarine Southampton started in March 1924. It flew for the first time the following March, and entered service in July 1925. By the end of 1925, Mitchell's team had designed the Southampton II\u2014the Southampton but with a metal hull. The plane, more powerful, lighter, and more durable than its predecessor, flew for the first time in 1927. A paper by Mitchell on the use of the Southampton appeared in the March 1926 edition of \"Flight\" magazine. In 1928, a flight of Supermarine Southampton IIs left Felixstowe on 14 October for Australia, and returned to the UK on 11 December. The expedition provided Mitchell's design team with valuable information about operating aircraft in the tropics. The Southampton was one of the most successful flying boats of the between-war period, and established Britain as a leading developer of maritime aircraft. It was used to equip six\u00a0RAF\u00a0squadrons up to 1936.\nIn 1926, the Air Ministry issued specification 21/26 as a way to address the need for new fighter aircraft, and Mitchell's design team, which he had re-organised that year into separate drawing and technical offices, responded with a number of designs, including the Single Seat Fighter. By this time, Supermarine was moving away from wooden amphibious aircraft. The company concentrated instead on designing larger metal flying boats, such as the 3-Engined Biplane Flying Boat, designed in November 1927. The Supermarine Air Yacht, and a new design, the Southampton X (not related to other planes with the same name), was ordered in June 1928. Mitchell dispensed with the complicated curved surfaces for the wings and the hulls of the Air Yacht and the Southampton X, and as a result these aircraft appeared \"boxy\".\nSpecification R.6/28, issued in 1928, resulted in a series of designs by Supermarine for a six-engined flying boat, with one of designs being a radical departure for Mitchell\u2014it had a newly-designed cantilever wing with a large surface area and cross section. The aircraft was never built. From 1929 to 1931, he continued to design aircraft based on the Southampton and the Southampton X, such as the Supermarine Sea Hawk and its variant the Sea Hawk II, the Type 179, the Nanok and the Seamew.\nNew designs, production orders and patents (1929\u20131934).\nIn February 1929, Mitchell submitted patent GB\u00a0329411\u00a0A, \"Improvements in the Cooling System of Engines for Automotive Vehicles\", a condenser to be placed within the wings of an aircraft. The Air Ministry rejected Supermarine's proposal for such a wing-cooled aircraft, but in May 1929 a new specification allowed Mitchell to use his ideas again. A similar patent was submitted in 1931. The condenser was used in the Type 232, produced in April 1934, which was never put up for tender.\nDuring the early 1930s, many of Mitchell's ideas never went past the early design stages. Attempts by the company to sell a 5-engined flying boat failed when a contract was cancelled in early 1932, leading to job losses and wage cuts at Supermarine. However in 1933 the company's fortunes were revived when it received an order for 12 Scapas (previously the Southampton IV) under the specification R.19/33, the first contract for a new design by Mitchell since 1924. This order was followed by orders for the Supermarine Stranraer, which went into production in 1937.\nAfter the first Seagull V flew in June 1933, the Royal Australian Air Force showed an interest, and 24 planes were ordered. The same year the RAF made an initial order of 12 aircraft, now renamed the Supermarine Walrus. Following the issuance of Air Ministry specification 5/36, Mitchell worked on a redesigned version of the Walrus, which was given the name Sea Otter. Work on the Sea Otter was completed after Mitchell's death in 1937, and it first flew in September 1938.\nIn October 1934, Mitchell published an article in the \"Daily Mirror\", 'What is happening now in Air Transport?', in which he predicted that air transport would prove to be the safest form of transport.\nSchneider trophy races (1922\u20131931).\nMitchell and his design team worked on a series of racing seaplanes, built to compete in the Schneider Trophy competition. His team included Alan Clifton (later head of the Technical Office), Arthur Shirvall, and Joseph Smith. These men were fundamental to Supermarine's success, as was the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), which provided invaluable support, guidance and scientific expertise in the form of detailed reports. The competition helped to place Mitchell at the forefront of aviation design.\nSea Lion series (early 1920s).\nMitchell developed the Supermarine Sea King II to become the Sea Lion II, which competed for the 1922 Schneider Trophy in Naples. The Sea Lion II won the race, flying at an average speed of\u00a0.\nThere was not enough time for Supermarine to design a new flying boat for the 1923 competition, so the Sea Lion II was borrowed back from the Air Ministry to allow Mitchell to adapt it. He increased its maximum speed by , achieved with the assistance of D. Napier &amp; Son, who supplied the Lion III engine. To reduce the effects of drag forces, Mitchell reduced the wingspan from , modified the struts, floats and hull, and changed the way the engines were fitted.\nFor the 1923 contest, two of the three British entrants were irreparably damaged before the race, leaving the Sea Lion III to compete alone. The United States team, flying Curtiss\u00a0seaplanes, dominated the competition, with the winning pilot, David Rittenhouse, managing to reach a top speed of .\nSupermarine S.4 (1925).\nEven whilst the Sea Lion II was being modified at the Woolston works, Mitchell was working on a new plane, as Supermarine knew the American monoplane was the best design then available. The Supermarine S.4\u2014the name was designated by Mitchell, with \"S\" standing for \"Schneider\"\u2014was a joint Napier/Supermarine venture. The Supermarine team was backed by the Air Ministry, and had greater freedom than was given by the US government to their designers. The S.4 was described after Mitchell's death as \"his first outstanding success\". He used the practical experience gained when he designed its successor, the Supermarine S.5.\nMitchell was fully aware of the need to reduce drag to increase speed. His new design for was a mid-wing, cantilever floatplane. It was comparable to a French monoplane, the Bernard SIMB V.2, which broken the flight airspeed record in December 1924. The S.4 lacked the newly-designed surface radiators, at that time still unavailable, but it was aerodynamic and aesthetically pleasing. Trial speeds reached and created a sensation in the press.\nThe S.4 crashed before the 1925 race, for reasons that were never clearly established. On the day of the navigation trials it stalled before falling flat into the sea from . When the pilot Henri Biard was rescued by a launch, Mitchell, who was on board the rescue launch, jokingly asked the injured man: \"Is the water warm?\"\n1926 and 1927 competitions.\nThe Air Ministry, the Society of British Aircraft Constructors and the Royal Aeronautical Society (RAeS) decided against challenging for the Schneider Trophy in 1926, but Mitchell was able to confirm that Supermarine would be ready for the race. His work at the NPL started in November that year. From wind tunnel tests at the NPL he learned that the S.4's radiators had created a third of the aircraft's total drag, and without this it would have been the most streamlined aircraft in the world. British aircraft companies intended to produce entries for the 1926 race, but the nature of the specifications issued by the Air Ministry meant that no aircraft could be completed and tested in time to be entered.\nTwo Supermarine S.5 seaplanes were entered for the 1927 contest, which was held in Venice. Mitchell understood that a monoplane on twin floats produced lower drag than any other aircraft type of its day, and was convinced by wind tunnel tests at the NPL that the cantilever wing design was too heavy and should be abandoned. The NPL had demonstrated that flat-surfaced skin radiators reduced drag better than the corrugated variety preferred by American designers, so Mitchell used them to improve the S.5. He reduced the fuselage cross section area so that it was 35 per cent less than the area of the S.4\u2014and complained about the RAF's pilots being too large to fit into the resulting S.5's cockpit. The fuselage skin thickness was decreased by using duralumin.\nWitnessed by the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, along with a huge crowd gathered on the Venice Lido, the two Supermarine S.5s were the only seaplanes to finish the race, coming first and second. The third British entrant, a Gloster IV, along with the three Italian competitors flying Macchi M.52s, were forced to drop out of the race.\nMitchell had been elected to the RAeS in 1918. In 1927 he was awarded the society's Silver Medal. At the end of the year, he became the Technical Director at Supermarine. When the company was taken over by Vickers Ltd in 1928, he remained as Supermarine's chief designer\u2014one of the conditions of the takeover was that he stay as a designer for the next five years.\nSupermarine S.6 (1929).\nInterest in the competition waned after the 1927 race. There was no competition the following year, as the was persuaded by the Royal Aero Club to hold races every two years in the future.\nMitchell was among those who could see a more powerful engine than the Napier Lion was required for any aircraft that competed in future contests. The Air Ministry invited Rolls-Royce Ltd to design a new engine specifically for Supermarine's new seaplane, now designated the S.6. Rolls-Royce, under pressure to produce an engine in time and that matched S.6's streamlined shape, adopted the partially-developed Buzzard. Mitchell in turn had to amend some of his design to accommodate the increase in total weight caused by introducing a larger engine, for instance by repositioning the forward float struts, and redesigning the engine cowling. The Air Ministry ordered two S.6 seaplanes, both of which were built by August 1929. Modifications to the seaplanes were made by Mitchell so the engines could be used at maximum power, as issues were discovered: the radiators were found to be inadequate; high engine torque made the S.6 move in a circle; and the centre of gravity was incorrectly positioned.\nThe 1929 race at Calshot was won by Supermarine with the S.6 attaining an average speed of . Three of the four new aircraft were entered by the UK. The older Italian Macchi M.52R came second and Supermarine's backup, an S.5, took third place.\nSupermarine S.6B (1931).\nBritain's final entry in the series, the Supermarine S.6B, marked the culmination of Mitchell's quest to \"perfect the design of the racing seaplane\". It was sponsored by a wealthy philanthropist, Lady Houston, who donated \u00a3 after the British Government decided not to enter an RAF team for the 1931 contest.\nMitchell opted to design an improved version of the S.6, whilst making as few changes as possible. The improvements that were made included a more powerful engine, and provision was made for such effects as the increase in engine-produced heat and extra torque, and the greater quantities of cooling oil and fuel required. The S.6B was a larger seaplane than the S.6, and had to be given a more efficient cooling system, and a stronger frame.\nThe S.6B competed the course successfully, and won the 1931 race. As the Schneider Trophy rules included the stipulation that the contest would end when any one country managed to win the trophy three times in five years, the S.6B's victory won the contest outright for Britain. The aircraft went on to break the world air speed record when it reached a speed of that year. Mitchell was awarded the Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (CBE) on 29 December 1931 for services in connection with the Schneider Trophy contest.\nType 224.\nIn 1930, specification F7/30 was issued for a fighter aircraft able to be used by both day and night squadrons. Mitchell's proposed design, the Type 224, was one of three monoplane designs made into prototypes for the Air Ministry. The final design incorporated an open cockpit, four Vickers machine guns, and a Rolls-Royce Goshawk engine, along with a fixed undercarriage. Also included was an inverted gull wing, needed due to the demands of the engine's cooling system. The wing lacked flaps, a requirement for the aircraft to land at safe speeds.\nUnofficially named the Spitfire, the Type 224 first flew in February 1934. The aircraft looked clumsy, and was inefficient, in part because the cooling system failed to prevent the engine from overheating. The RAF decided that the Type 224's performance was unsatisfactory, and selected the Gloster Gladiator in preference.\nSupermarine Spitfire.\nWhilst the Type 224 was still being built in 1933, Mitchell was proceeding with the design of the Type 300. This was to become his masterpiece, the Supermarine Spitfire. He cleaned up the design of the Type 224, using the same engine but incorporating a shorter wing and a retractable undercarriage. The Air Ministry rejected Mitchell's design, but he modified it, for instance by making the wing thinner and shorter, by including the newly-designed Rolls-Royce Merlin engine, and by making use of an innovative new cooling system\u2014the latter being an example of his willingness to accept ideas from other people.\nFor a short period, design work continued using private funding, but in December 1934 the Air Ministry contracted Supermarine to construct a prototype that was based on Mitchell's design. Mitchell objected to the Air Ministry's insistence that the Spitfire be modified to have a tail wheel. At the time he was not told that, in preparation for a future war, the government had decided to build hard surface runways for the RAF, a decision that meant the modification to the Spitfire was necessary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"I don't give a bugger whether [the wing shape] is elliptical or not, so long as it covers the guns!\"\nR.J. Mitchell, quoted in Alfred Price, \"The Spitfire Story\"\nThe prototype, given the serial \"K5054\", first flew on 6 March 1936, at Eastleigh, Hampshire. Mitchell witnessed the flight. Despite being ill, he travelled to Eastleigh during the flight tests for \"K5054\". In June 1936, before the prototype had completed being trialled, the Air Ministry placed an order for 310 Spitfires.\nMany of the technical advances in the Spitfire were made by people other than Mitchell: the thin elliptical wings were designed by the Canadian aerodynamicist Beverley Shenstone, and the Spitfire shared similarities with the Heinkel He 70 Blitz. The under-wing radiators had been designed by the Royal Aircraft Establishment, and monocoque construction had been first developed in the United States. Mitchell's achievement lay in the merger of these different influences into a single design, originating from his \"unparalleled expertise in high-speed flight... and a brilliant practical engineering ability, exemplified in this instance by the incorporation of vital lessons learned from\u00a0Supermarine's\u00a0unsuccessful type 224 fighter\". The quality of the design enabled the Spitfire to be continually improved throughout World War II.\nIllness and final years.\nIn 1933, Mitchell underwent a permanent colostomy to treat rectal cancer, which left him permanently disabled. Despite this, he continued to work on the Spitfire and a four-engine bomber, the Type 317. Unusually for an aircraft designer in those days, he took flying lessons. He obtained his pilot's licence and made his first solo flight in July 1934.\nIn 1936 Mitchell was diagnosed again with cancer, and early the following year was forced by his illness to give up work. In his absence, his assistant Harold Payn led the design team at Supermarine. Mitchell flew to Vienna for specialist treatment, and remained there for a month, but returned home after the treatment proved to be ineffective. He died at home in Highfield, Southampton, on 11 June 1937 at the age of 42. He was cremated and his ashes were buried at South Stoneham Cemetery, Southampton.\nThe quality of the flying boats designed by Mitchell for the RAF established him as the foremost aircraft designer in Britain. His obituary published in \"The Journal of the Royal Aeronautical Society\" in 1937 described him as \"brilliant\" and \"one of the leading designers in the world\". The Society paid tribute to their colleague, describing him as being \"a quiet, subtle, not obvious genius\" who had \"an intuitive capacity for grasping the essentials, getting to the point and staying there\". Smith, who became Chief Designer at Supermarine after Mitchell's death, said of him that \"He was an inveterate drawer on drawings, particularly general arrangements... [which were] usually accepted when the thing was redrawn.\"\nPosthumous recognition.\nMitchell's career was dramatised in the British 1942 film \"The First of the Few\". He was portrayed by Leslie Howard, who also produced and directed the film.\nThe Mitchell Memorial Youth Theatre, now known as Mitchell Arts Centre, was opened in Stoke-on-Trent in 1957 after \u00a3 was raised by public subscription. Butt Lane Junior School, was renamed as the Reginald Mitchell County Primary School in 1959, and Hanley High School was renamed Mitchell High School in 1989. The R J Mitchell Primary School at Hornchurch, originally named the Mitchell Junior School when it opened on 2 December 1968, is also named in his honour. Supermarine Spitfires piloted by Commonwealth and European airmen flew from RAF Hornchurch.\nIn 1986, Mitchell was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum. The American philanthropist Sidney Frank unveiled a statue of Mitchell at the Science Museum, London, in 2005. The slate drawing board's surface depicts the drawing of the prototype Spitfire from June 1936. The stone sculpture was created by Stephen Kettle and given to the museum by the Sidney E. Frank Foundation.\nThere are plaques dedicated to Mitchell at his Southampton home, and his birthplace in Butt Lane. Papers relating to his work at Supermarine are preserved at the archives of the Royal Air Force Museum London. https:// tallest building is also named after Mitchell.\nA bronze statue of Mitchell was unveiled in Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, on 21 May 1995. The statue, by Colin Melbourne, was commissioned by Stoke-on-Trent City Council, and stands outside The Potteries Museum &amp; Art Gallery. The statue depicts Mitchell wearing a suit, holding a pen in his right hand and a book in his left.\nThe Potteries Museum &amp; Art Gallery, in Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, is home to a Mark XVI Spitfire (RW388), which was donated to Stoke-on-Trent in 1972 by the RAF, to honour the city's connection to Reginald Mitchell.\nSouthampton City Art Gallery holds an oil painting of Mitchell, painted in 1942 by Frank Ernest Beresford.\nPersonality.\nMitchell was by nature a reserved and modest man. He was a reticent public speaker who disliked presenting papers. According to one member of his department, \"he said nothing unless there was something worth saying\". He avoided publicity, and was not widely known to the general public until after his death.\nAccording to his son Gordon, Mitchell was resentful of authority being imposed on him or of the routines of the workplace, and was short-tempered and \"a difficult man to live with sometimes\". Often given full scope at Supermarine, he was a strict taskmaster who nevertheless struggled with the level of organisation needed for a company such as Supermarine. When the engineer Barnes Wallis was employed to improve the efficiency of Mitchell's department in 1930, Wallis had to be recalled after their personalities clashed. The \"ODNB\" describes Mitchell as being highly gifted and intelligent, but someone who was \"often stern and irascible towards those less gifted than himself\". He was devoted to his staff at Supermarine, to whom he showed kindness and humanity, and they in turn repaid him with loyalty and affection.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39032", "revid": "35751661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39032", "title": "Rolls-Royce Merlin", "text": "Aircraft engine family\nThe Rolls-Royce Merlin is a British liquid-cooled V-12 piston aero engine of 27-litre (1,650\u00a0cu in) capacity. Developed as a private venture by Rolls-Royce and first run in 1933, the engine became one of the most successful aircraft engines of World War II, most closely associated with the Hawker Hurricane and Supermarine Spitfire, although the majority of the production run was for the four-engined Avro Lancaster heavy bomber.\nInitially known as the PV-12, it was dubbed \"Merlin\" after the company convention of naming its four-stroke piston aero engines for birds of prey. The engine benefitted from the racing experiences of precursor engines in the 1930s. After several modifications, the first production variants of the PV-12 were completed in 1936. The first operational aircraft to enter service using the Merlin were the Fairey Battle, Hurricane, and Spitfire. Experience in use led to a series of rapidly applied developments that markedly improved the engine's performance and durability. Starting at for the first production models, most late-war versions produced just under . The final version, used in the de Havilland Hornet, had over .\nSome 50 versions of the Merlin were built by Rolls-Royce in Derby, Crewe, and Glasgow, as well as by Ford of Britain at their Trafford Park factory near Manchester. The Packard V-1650 was a version of the Merlin built in the United States. A de-rated version was the basis of the Rolls-Royce/Rover Meteor tank engine. After the war, the Merlin was largely superseded by the Rolls-Royce Griffon for military use, although new variants were designed and built for airliners and military transport aircraft. Production ceased in 1950 after a total of almost 150,000 engines had been delivered. \nMerlin engines remain in Royal Air Force service today with the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight, and power many restored aircraft in private ownership worldwide.\nDesign and development.\nOrigin.\nIn the early 1930s, Rolls-Royce started planning its future aero-engine development programme and realised there was a need for an engine larger than their 21-litre (1,296\u00a0cu in) Kestrel, which was being used with great success in a number of 1930s aircraft. Consequently, work was started on a new -class design known as the PV-12, with PV standing for \"Private Venture, 12-cylinder\", as the company received no government funding for work on the project. The PV-12 was first run on 15 October 1933 and first flew in a Hawker Hart biplane (serial number \"K3036\") on 21 February 1935. The engine was originally designed to use the evaporative cooling system then in vogue. This proved unreliable and when ethylene glycol from the U.S. became available, the engine was adapted to use a conventional liquid-cooling system. The Hart, as a Merlin testbed, completed over 100 hours of flying with the Merlin C and E engines.\nIn 1935, the Air Ministry issued a specification, F10/35, for new fighter aircraft with a minimum airspeed of . Fortunately, two designs had been developed: the Supermarine Spitfire and the Hawker Hurricane; the latter designed in response to another specification, F36/34. Both were designed around the PV-12 instead of the Kestrel, and were the only contemporary British fighters to have been so developed. Production contracts for both aircraft were placed in 1936, and development of the PV-12 was given top priority as well as government funding. Following the company convention of naming its piston aero engines after birds of prey, Rolls-Royce named the engine the \"Merlin\" after a small, Northern Hemisphere falcon (\"Falco columbarius\").\nTwo more Rolls-Royce engines developed just prior to the war were added to the company's range. The Rolls-Royce Peregrine was an updated, supercharged development of their V-12 Kestrel design, while the 42-litre (2,560 cu in) Rolls-Royce Vulture used four Kestrel-sized cylinder blocks fitted to a single crankcase and driving a common crankshaft, forming an X-24 layout. This was to be used in larger aircraft such as the Avro Manchester.\nAlthough the Peregrine appeared to be a satisfactory design, it was never allowed to mature since Rolls-Royce's priority was refining the Merlin. As a result, the Peregrine saw use in only two aircraft: the Westland Whirlwind fighter and one of the Gloster F.9/37 prototypes. The Vulture was fitted to the Avro Manchester bomber, but proved unreliable in service and the planned fighter using it \u2013 the Hawker Tornado \u2013 was cancelled as a result. With the Merlin itself soon pushing into the range, the Peregrine and Vulture were both cancelled in 1943, and by mid-1943 the Merlin was supplemented in service by the larger Griffon. The Griffon incorporated several design improvements and ultimately superseded the Merlin.\nDevelopment.\nInitially the new engine was plagued with problems such as failure of the accessory gear trains and coolant jackets. Several different construction methods were tried before the basic design of the Merlin was set. Early production Merlins were unreliable: common problems were cylinder head cracking, coolant leaks, and excessive wear to the camshafts and crankshaft main bearings.\nEarly engines.\nThe prototype, developmental, and early production engine types were the:\n The initial design using an evaporative cooling system. Two built, passed bench type testing in July 1934, generating at equivalent. First flown 21 February 1935.\n Two built, ethylene glycol liquid cooling system introduced. \"Ramp\" cylinder heads (inlet valves were at a 45-degree angle to the cylinder). Passed Type Testing February 1935, generating at equivalent.\n Development of Merlin B; crankcase and cylinder blocks became three separate castings with bolt-on cylinder heads. First flight in Hawker Horsley 21 December 1935, at .\n Similar to C with minor design changes. Passed 50-hour civil test in December 1935 generating a constant and a maximum rating of . Failed military 100-hour test in March 1936. Powered the Supermarine Spitfire prototype.\n Similar to C and E. First flight in Horsley 16 July 1936. This became the first production engine, and was designated as the Merlin I. The Merlin continued with the \"ramp\" head, but this was not a success and only 172 were made. The Fairey Battle I was the first production aircraft to be powered by the Merlin I and first flew on 10 March 1936.\n Replaced \"ramp\" cylinder heads with parallel pattern heads (valve stems parallel to the cylinder bore axis) scaled up from the Kestrel engine. 400-hour flight endurance tests carried out at RAE July 1937; acceptance test 22 September 1937. It was first widely delivered as the Merlin II in 1938, and production was quickly stepped up for Fairey Battle II.\n Merlin II with standardised de Havilland/Rotol SBAC propeller shaft, and dual accessory-drive. at 3,000\u00a0rpm at at +6.5\u00a0lb boost. Formed basis for the Rolls-Royce/Rover Meteor tank engine\n Racing engine for 1937/38 \"Speed Spitfire\" world speed record attempt. Merlin III with strengthened pistons, connecting rods, and gudgeon-pins, running on increased octane fuel, developed at 3,200\u00a0rpm and +27\u00a0lb boost, a power/weight ratio of 0.621\u00a0lb per horsepower. Completed 15-hour endurance run at , 3,200\u00a0rpm at +22\u00a0lb boost.\n Merlin with pressure-water cooling for Armstrong Whitworth Whitley IV.\n Merlin for Fairey Battle V.\n Medium-supercharged Merlin developed for Fairey Fulmar I, rated at 2,850\u00a0rpm at , at 3,000\u00a0rpm for take-off using 100-octane fuel.\n First Merlin with two-speed supercharger, in low gear at , in high gear at . First of Rolls-Royce unitised \"Power Plant\" installation designs for this engine in 1937 and used in Handley Page Halifax I, Vickers Wellington II, and Armstrong Whitworth Whitley V and VII.\n Merlin fitted with 0.477:1 reduction gear installed in some Spitfire IIs with three-bladed Rotol constant-speed propeller. Rated at at 3,000\u00a0rpm at .\n Merlin X with Stanley Hooker re-designed supercharger incorporating re-designed inlet and improved guide vanes on impeller with revised blower gear ratios; 8:15:1 for low gear, 9:49:1 for high gear. New larger SU twin choke updraught carburettor. Engine interchangeable with Merlin X. Rated at at 2,850\u00a0rpm in low gear at and +9\u00a0lb boost; at 2,850\u00a0rpm in high gear at at +9\u00a0lb boost. Revised Rolls-Royce unitised \"Power Plant\" installation design. Engine used in Bristol Beaufighter II, Boulton Paul Defiant II, Handley Page Halifax II and V, Hawker Hurricane II and IV, and Avro Lancaster I and III. First Merlin produced by Packard Motor Car Company as V-1650-1 and designated by Rolls-Royce as Merlin 28.\nProduction engines.\nThe Merlin II and III series were the first main production versions of the engine. The Merlin III was the first version to incorporate a \"universal\" propeller shaft, allowing either de Havilland or Rotol manufactured propellers to be used.\nThe first major version to incorporate changes brought about through experience in operational service was the XX, which was designed to run on 100-octane fuel. This fuel allowed higher manifold pressures, which were achieved by increasing the boost from the centrifugal supercharger. The Merlin XX also utilised the two-speed superchargers designed by Rolls-Royce, resulting in increased power at higher altitudes than previous versions. Another improvement, introduced with the Merlin X, was the use of a 70%\u201330% water-glycol coolant mix rather than the 100% glycol of the earlier versions. This substantially improved engine life and reliability, removed the fire hazard of the flammable ethylene glycol, and reduced the oil leaks that had been a problem with the early Merlin I, II and III series.\nThe process of improvement continued, with later versions running on higher octane ratings, delivering more power. Fundamental design changes were also made to all key components, again increasing the engine's life and reliability. By the end of the war the \"little\" engine was delivering over in common versions, and as much as in the Merlin 130/131 versions specifically designed for the de Havilland Hornet. Ultimately, during tests conducted by Rolls-Royce at Derby, an RM17SM (an improved version of the RM14SM 'low altitude' Merlin 100-Series with larger diameter supercharger rotors and different valve timing) achieved at 36\u00a0lb boost (103\"Hg) on 150-octane fuel with water injection.\nWith the end of the war, work on improving Merlin power output was halted and the development effort was concentrated on civil derivatives of the Merlin. Development of what became the \"Transport Merlin\" (TML) commenced with the Merlin 102 (the first Merlin to complete the new civil type-test requirements) and was aimed at improving reliability and service overhaul periods for airline operators using airliner and transport aircraft such as the Avro Lancastrian, Avro York (Merlin 500-series), Avro Tudor II and IV (Merlin 621), Tudor IVB and V (Merlin 623), TCA Canadair North Star (Merlin 724) and BOAC Argonaut (Merlin 724-IC). By 1951 the time between overhauls (TBO) was typically 650\u2013800 hours depending on use. By then single-stage engines had accumulated 2,615,000 engine hours in civil operation, and two-stage engines 1,169,000.\nIn addition, an exhaust system to reduce noise levels to below those from ejector exhausts was devised for the North Star/Argonaut. This \"cross-over\" system took the exhaust flow from the inboard bank of cylinders up-and-over the engine before discharging the exhaust stream on the outboard side of the UPP nacelle. As a result, sound levels were reduced by between 5 and 8 decibels. The modified exhaust also conferred an increase in horsepower over the unmodified system of , resulting in a 5 knot improvement in true air speed. Still-air range of the aircraft was also improved by around 4 per cent. The modified engine was designated the \"TMO\" and the modified exhaust system was supplied as kit that could be installed on existing engines either by the operator or by Rolls-Royce.\nPower ratings for the civil Merlin 600, 620, and 621-series was continuous cruising at , and for take-off. Merlins 622\u2013626 were rated at continuous cruising at , and for take-off. Engines were available with single-stage, two-speed supercharging (500-series), two-stage, two-speed supercharging (600-series), and with full intercooling, or with half intercooling/charge heating, charge heating being employed for cold area use such as in Canada. Civil Merlin engines in airline service flew 7,818,000 air miles in 1946, 17,455,000 in 1947, and 24,850,000 miles in 1948.\nBasic component overview (Merlin 61).\n\"From Jane's\":\n Twelve cylinders consisting of high-carbon steel liners set in two, two-piece cylinder blocks of cast \"R.R.50\" aluminium alloy having separate heads and skirts. Wet liners, ie. coolant in direct contact with external face of liners. Cylinder heads fitted with cast-iron inlet valve guides, phosphor bronze exhaust valve guides, and renewable \"Silchrome\" steel-alloy valve seats. Two diametrically opposed spark plugs protrude into each combustion chamber.\n Machined from \"R.R.59\" alloy forgings. Fully floating hollow gudgeon pins of hardened nickel-chrome steel. Three compression and one oil-control ring above the gudgeon pin, and one oil-control ring below.\n H-section machined nickel-steel forgings, each pair consisting of a plain and a forked rod. The forked rod carries a nickel-steel bearing block which accommodates steel-backed lead-bronze-alloy bearing shells. The \"small-end\" of each rod houses a floating phosphor bronze bushing.\n One-piece, machined from a nitrogen-hardened nickel-chrome molybdenum steel forging. Statically and dynamically balanced. Seven main bearings and six throws.\n Two aluminium-alloy castings joined together on the horizontal centreline. The upper portion bears the wheelcase, supercharger and accessories; and carries the cylinder blocks, crankshaft main bearings (split mild-steel shells lined with lead bronze alloy), and part of the housing for the airscrew reduction gear. The lower half forms an oil sump and carries the oil pumps and filters.\n Aluminium casting fitted to rear of crankcase. Houses drives to the camshafts, magnetos, coolant and oil pumps, supercharger, hand and electric starters, and the electric generator.\n Two inlet and two exhaust poppet valves of \"K.E.965\" steel per cylinder. Both the inlet and exhaust valves have hardened \"stellited\" ends; while the exhaust valves also have sodium-cooled stems, and heads protected with a \"Brightray\" (nickel-chromium) coating. Each valve is kept closed by a pair of concentric coil-springs. A single, seven-bearing camshaft, located on the top of each cylinder head operates 24 individual steel rockers; 12 pivoting from a rocker shaft on the inner, intake side of the head to actuate the exhaust valves, the others pivoting from a shaft on the exhaust side of the head to actuate the inlet valves.\nTechnical improvements.\nMost of the Merlin's technical improvements resulted from more efficient superchargers, designed by Stanley Hooker, and the introduction of aviation fuel with increased octane ratings. Numerous detail changes were made internally and externally to the engine to withstand increased power ratings and to incorporate advances in engineering practices.\nEjector exhausts.\nThe Merlin consumed an enormous volume of air at full power (equivalent to the volume of a single-decker bus per minute), and with the exhaust gases exiting at it was realised that useful thrust could be gained simply by angling the gases backwards instead of venting sideways.\nDuring tests, 70 pounds-force (310 N; 32\u00a0kgf) thrust at , or roughly was obtained, which increased the level maximum speed of the Spitfire by to . The first versions of the ejector exhausts featured round outlets, while subsequent versions of the system used \"fishtail\" style outlets, which marginally increased thrust and reduced exhaust glare for night flying.\nIn September 1937 the Spitfire prototype, \"K5054,\" was fitted with ejector type exhausts. Later marks of the Spitfire used a variation of this exhaust system fitted with forward-facing intake ducts to distribute hot air out to the wing-mounted guns to prevent freezing and stoppages at high altitudes, replacing an earlier system that used heated air from the engine coolant radiator. The latter system had become ineffective due to improvements to the Merlin itself which allowed higher operating altitudes where air temperatures are lower. Ejector exhausts were also fitted to other Merlin-powered aircraft.\nSupercharger.\nCentral to the success of the Merlin was the supercharger. A.C. Lovesey, an engineer who was a key figure in the design of the Merlin, delivered a lecture on the development of the Merlin in 1946; in this extract he explained the importance of the supercharger:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The impression still prevails that the static capacity known as the swept volume is the basis of comparison of the possible power output for different types of engine, but this is not the case because the output of the engine depends solely on the mass of air it can be made to consume efficiently, and in this respect the supercharger plays the most important role\u00a0... the engine has to be capable of dealing with the greater mass flows with respect to cooling, freedom from detonation and capable of withstanding high gas and inertia loads\u00a0... During the course of research and development on superchargers it became apparent to us that any further increase in the altitude performance of the Merlin engine necessitated the employment of a two-stage supercharger.\nAs the Merlin evolved so too did the supercharger; the latter fitting into three broad categories:\nThe Merlin supercharger was originally designed to allow the engine to generate maximum power at an altitude of about . In 1938 Stanley Hooker, an Oxford graduate in applied mathematics, explained \"...\u00a0I soon became very familiar with the construction of the Merlin supercharger and carburettor\u00a0... Since the supercharger was at the rear of the engine it had come in for pretty severe design treatment, and the air intake duct to the impeller looked very squashed\u00a0...\" Tests conducted by Hooker showed the original intake design was inefficient, limiting the performance of the supercharger. Hooker subsequently designed a new air intake duct with improved flow characteristics, which increased maximum power at a higher altitude of over ; and also improved the design of both the impeller, and the diffuser which controlled the airflow to it. These modifications led to the development of the single-stage Merlin XX and 45 series.\nA significant advance in supercharger design was the incorporation in 1938 of a two-speed drive (designed by the French company Farman) to the impeller of the Merlin X. The later Merlin XX incorporated the two-speed drive as well as several improvements that enabled the production rate of Merlins to be increased. The low-ratio gear, which operated from takeoff to an altitude of , drove the impeller at 21,597\u00a0rpm and developed at that height; while the high gear's (25,148\u00a0rpm) power rating was at . These figures were achieved at 2,850\u00a0rpm engine speed using +9 pounds per square inch (1.66\u00a0atm) (48\") boost.\nIn 1940, after receiving a request in March of that year from the Ministry of Aircraft Production for a high-rated () Merlin for use as an alternative engine to the turbocharged Hercules VIII used in the prototype high-altitude Vickers Wellington V bomber, Rolls-Royce started experiments on the design of a two-stage supercharger and an engine fitted with this was bench-tested in April 1941, eventually becoming the Merlin 60. The basic design used a modified Vulture supercharger for the first stage while a Merlin 46 supercharger was used for the second. A liquid-cooled intercooler on top of the supercharger casing was used to prevent the compressed air/fuel mixture from becoming too hot. Also considered was an exhaust-driven turbocharger, but although a lower fuel consumption was an advantage, the added weight and the need to add extra ducting for the exhaust flow and waste-gates meant that this option was rejected in favour of the two-stage supercharger. Fitted with the two-stage two-speed supercharger, the Merlin 60 series gained at over the Merlin 45 series, at which altitude a Spitfire IX was nearly faster than a Spitfire V.\nThe two-stage Merlin family was extended in 1943 with the Merlin 66, which had its supercharger geared for increased power ratings at low altitudes, and the Merlin 70 series that were designed to deliver increased power at high altitudes.\nWhile the design of the two-stage supercharger forged ahead, Rolls-Royce also continued to develop the single-stage supercharger, resulting in 1942 in the development of a smaller \"cropped\" impeller for the Merlin 45M and 55M; both of these engines developed greater power at low altitudes. In squadron service the LF.V variant of the Spitfire fitted with these engines became known as the \"clipped, clapped, and cropped Spitty\" to indicate the shortened wingspan, the less-than-perfect condition of the used airframes, and the cropped supercharger impeller.\nCarburettor developments.\nThe use of carburettors was calculated to give a higher specific power output, due to the lower temperature, hence greater density, of the fuel/air mixture compared to injected systems. Initially Merlins were fitted with float controlled carburettors. However, during the Battle of Britain it was found that if Spitfires or Hurricanes were to pitch nose down into a steep dive, negative \"g\"-force (\"g\") produced temporary fuel starvation causing the engine to cut-out momentarily. By comparison, the contemporary Bf 109E, which had direct fuel injection, could \"bunt\" straight into a high-power dive to escape attack. RAF fighter pilots soon learned to avoid this with a \"half-roll\" of their aircraft before diving in pursuit. A restrictor in the fuel supply line together with a diaphragm fitted in the float chamber, jocularly nicknamed \"Miss Shilling's orifice\", after its inventor, went some way towards curing fuel starvation in a dive by containing fuel under negative G; however, at less than maximum power a fuel-rich mixture still resulted. Another improvement was made by moving the fuel outlet from the bottom of the S.U. carburettor to exactly halfway up the side, which allowed the fuel to flow equally well under negative or positive g.\nFurther improvements were introduced throughout the Merlin range: 1943 saw the introduction of a Bendix-Stromberg pressure carburettor that injected fuel at 5 pounds per square inch (34\u00a0kPa; 0.34 bar) through a nozzle directly into the supercharger, and was fitted to Merlin 66, 70, 76, 77 and 85 variants. The final development, which was fitted to the 100-series Merlins, was an S.U. injection carburettor that injected fuel into the supercharger using a fuel pump driven as a function of crankshaft speed and engine pressures.\nImproved fuels.\nAt the start of the war, the Merlin I, II and III ran on the then standard 87-octane aviation spirit and could generate just over from its 27-litre (1,650-cu\u00a0in) displacement: the maximum boost pressure at which the engine could be run using 87-octane fuel was +6 pounds per square inch (141\u00a0kPa; 1.44\u00a0atm). However, as early as 1938, at the 16th Paris Air Show, Rolls-Royce displayed two versions of the Merlin rated to use 100-octane fuel. The Merlin R.M.2M was capable of at , at and on take-off; while a Merlin X with a two-speed supercharger in high gear generated at and at .\nFrom late 1939, 100-octane fuel became available from the U.S., West Indies, Persia, and, in smaller quantities, domestically, consequently, \"...\u00a0in the first half of 1940 the RAF transferred all Hurricane and Spitfire squadrons to 100 octane fuel.\" Small modifications were made to Merlin II and III series engines, allowing an increased (emergency) boost pressure of +12 pounds per square inch (183\u00a0kPa; 1.85\u00a0atm). At this power setting these engines were able to produce at while running at 3,000 revolutions per minute. Increased boost could be used indefinitely as there was no mechanical time limit mechanism, but pilots were advised not to use increased boost for more than a maximum of five minutes, and it was considered a \"definite overload condition on the engine\"; if the pilot resorted to emergency boost he had to report this on landing, when it was noted in the engine log book, while the engineering officer was required to examine the engine and reset the throttle gate. Later versions of the Merlin ran only on 100-octane fuel, and the five-minute combat limitation was raised to +18 pounds per square inch (224\u00a0kPa; 2.3\u00a0atm).\nIn late 1943 trials were run of a new \"100/150\" grade (150-octane) fuel, recognised by its bright-green colour and \"awful smell\". Initial tests were conducted using of tetraethyllead (T.E.L.) for every one imperial gallon of 100-octane fuel (or 1.43\u00a0cc/L or 0.18\u00a0U.S.\u00a0fl\u00a0oz/U.S.\u00a0gal), but this mixture resulted in a build-up of lead in the combustion chambers, causing excessive fouling of the spark plugs. Better results were achieved by adding 2.5% mono methyl aniline (M.M.A.) to 100-octane fuel. The new fuel allowed the five-minute boost rating of the Merlin 66 to be raised to +25 pounds per square inch (272\u00a0kPa; 2.7\u00a0atm). With this boost rating the Merlin 66 generated at sea level and at .\nStarting in March 1944, the Merlin 66-powered Spitfire IXs of two Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB) squadrons were cleared to use the new fuel for operational trials, and it was put to good use in the summer of 1944 when it enabled Spitfire L.F. Mk. IXs to intercept V-1 flying bombs coming in at low altitudes. 100/150 grade fuel was also used by Mosquito night fighters of the ADGB to intercept V-1s. In early February 1945, Spitfires of the Second Tactical Air Force (2TAF) also began using 100/150 grade fuel. This fuel was also offered to the USAAF where it was designated \"PPF 44-1\" and informally known as \"Pep\".\nProduction.\nProduction of the Rolls-Royce Merlin was driven by the forethought and determination of Ernest Hives, who at times was enraged by the apparent complacency and lack of urgency encountered in his frequent correspondence with the Air Ministry, the Ministry of Aircraft Production and local authority officials. Hives was an advocate of shadow factories, and, sensing the imminent outbreak of war, pressed ahead with plans to produce the Merlin in sufficient numbers for the rapidly expanding Royal Air Force. Despite the importance of uninterrupted production, several factories were affected by industrial action. By the end of its production run in 1950, 168,176 Merlin engines had been built; over 112,000 in Britain and more than 55,000 under licence in the U.S.\nDerby.\nThe existing Rolls-Royce facilities at Osmaston, Derby were not suitable for mass engine production although the floor space had been increased by some 25% between 1935 and 1939; Hives planned to build the first two or three hundred engines there until engineering teething troubles had been resolved. To fund this expansion, the Air Ministry had provided a total of \u00a31,927,000 by December 1939. Having a workforce that consisted mainly of design engineers and highly skilled men, the Derby factory carried out the majority of development work on the Merlin, with flight testing carried out at nearby RAF Hucknall. All the Merlin-engined aircraft taking part in the Battle of Britain had their engines assembled in the Derby factory. Total Merlin production at Derby was 32,377. The original factory closed in March 2008, but the company maintains a presence in Derby.\nCrewe.\nTo meet the increasing demand for Merlin engines, Rolls-Royce started building work on a new factory at Crewe in May 1938, with engines leaving the factory in 1939. The Crewe factory had convenient road and rail links to their existing facilities at Derby. Production at Crewe was originally planned to use unskilled labour and sub-contractors with which Hives felt there would be no particular difficulty, but the number of required sub-contracted parts such as crankshafts, camshafts and cylinder liners eventually fell short and the factory was expanded to manufacture these parts \"in house\".\nInitially the local authority promised to build 1,000 new houses to accommodate the workforce by the end of 1938, but by February 1939 it had only awarded a contract for 100. Hives was incensed by this complacency and threatened to move the whole operation, but timely intervention by the Air Ministry improved the situation. In 1940 a strike took place when women replaced men on capstan lathes, the workers' union insisting this was a skilled labour job; however, the men returned to work after 10 days.\nTotal Merlin production at Crewe was 26,065.\nThe factory was used postwar for the production of Rolls-Royce and Bentley motor cars and military fighting vehicle power plants. In 1998 Volkswagen AG bought the Bentley marque and the factory. Today it is known as Bentley Crewe.\nGlasgow.\nHives further recommended that a factory be built near Glasgow to take advantage of the abundant local work force and the supply of steel and forgings from Scottish manufacturers. In September 1939, the Air Ministry allocated \u00a34,500,000 for a new Shadow factory. This government-funded and -operated factory was built at Hillington starting in June 1939 with workers moving into the premises in October, one month after the outbreak of war. The factory was fully occupied by September 1940. A housing crisis also occurred at Glasgow, where Hives again asked the Air Ministry to step in.\nWith 16,000 employees, the Glasgow factory was one of the largest industrial operations in Scotland. Unlike the Derby and Crewe plants, which relied significantly on external subcontractors, it produced almost all the Merlin's components itself. Hillingdon required \"a great deal of attention from Hives\" from when it was producing its first complete engine; it had the highest proportion of unskilled workers in any Rolls-Royce-managed factory\u201d. Engines began to leave the production line in November 1940, and by June 1941 monthly output had reached 200, increasing to more than 400 per month by March 1942. In total 23,675 engines were produced. Worker absenteeism became a problem after some months due to the physical and mental effects of wartime conditions such as the frequent occupation of air-raid shelters. It was agreed to cut the punishing working hours slightly to 82 hours a week, with one half-Sunday per month awarded as holiday. Record production is reported to have been 100 engines in one day.\nImmediately after the war the site repaired and overhauled Merlin and Griffon engines, and continued to manufacture spare parts. Finally, following the production of the Rolls-Royce Avon turbojet and others, the factory was closed in 2005.\nManchester.\nThe Ford Motor Company was asked to produce Merlins at Trafford Park, Stretford, near Manchester, and building work on a new factory was started in May 1940 on a site. Built with two distinct sections to minimise potential bomb damage, it was completed in May 1941 and bombed in the same month. At first, the factory had difficulty in attracting suitable labour, and large numbers of women, youths and untrained men had to be taken on. Despite this, the first Merlin engine came off the production line one month later and it was building the engine at a rate of 200 per week by 1943, at which point the joint factories were producing 18,000 Merlins per year. In his autobiography \"Not much of an Engineer\", Sir Stanley Hooker states: \"...\u00a0once the great Ford factory at Manchester started production, Merlins came out like shelling peas\u00a0...\".\nSome 17,316 people worked at the Trafford Park plant, including 7,260 women and two resident doctors and nurses. Merlin production started to run down in August 1945, and finally ceased on 23 March 1946.\nTotal Merlin production at Trafford Park was 30,428.\nDetroit.\nAs the Merlin was considered to be so important to the war effort, negotiations were started to establish an alternative production line outside the UK. Rolls-Royce staff visited North American automobile manufacturers to select one to build the Merlin in the U.S. or Canada. Henry Ford rescinded an initial offer to build the engine in the U.S. in July 1940, and the Packard Motor Car Company was selected to take on the $130,000,000 Merlin order (equivalent to $ in 2024 dollars). Agreement was reached in September 1940, and the first Packard-built engine, a version of the Merlin\u00a0XX, designated the Merlin 28 (when supplied to the RAF) or the V-1650-1 (when supplied to the USAAF), ran in August 1941. Total Merlin production by Packard was 55,523.\nSix development engines were also made by Continental Motors, Inc.\nVariants.\nThis is a list of representative Merlin variants, describing some of the mechanical changes made during development of the Merlin. Engines of the same power output were typically assigned different model numbers based on supercharger or propeller gear ratios, differences in cooling system or carburettors, engine block construction, or arrangement of engine controls. Power ratings quoted are usually maximum \"military\" power. All but the Merlin 131 and 135 engines were \"right-hand tractor\", \"i.e.\" the propeller rotated clockwise when viewed from the rear. In addition to the mark numbers, Merlin engines were allocated experimental numbers by the Ministry of Supply (MoS) \u2013 e.g.: RM 8SM for the Merlin 61 and some variants \u2013 while under development; these numbers are noted where possible. Merlin engines used in Spitfires, apart from the Merlin 61, used a propeller reduction ratio of .477:1. Merlins used in bombers and other fighters used a ratio of .42:1.\n\"Data from Bridgman (Jane's) unless otherwise noted:\"\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at using + 6\u00a0psi boost (41 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 144 kPa or 1.41\u00a0atm); used 100% glycol coolant. First production Merlin II delivered 10 August 1937. Merlin II used in the Boulton Paul Defiant, Hawker Hurricane Mk.I, Supermarine Spitfire Mk.I fighters, and Fairey Battle light bomber.\n Merlin III fitted with \"universal\" propeller shaft able to mount either de Havilland or Rotol propellers. From late 1939, using 100-octane fuel and +12\u00a0psi boost (83 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 184 kPa or 1.82\u00a0atm), the Merlin III developed at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; using 87-octane fuel the power ratings were the same as the Merlin II. Used in the Defiant, Hurricane Mk.I, Spitfire Mk.I fighters, and Battle light bomber. First production Merlin III delivered 1 July 1938.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; maximum boost pressure +10\u00a0psi; this was the first production Merlin to use a two-speed supercharger; Used in Halifax Mk.I, Wellington Mk.II, and Whitley Mk.V bombers. First production Merlin X, 5 December 1938.\n ; fitted with Coffman engine starter; first version to use 70/30% water/glycol coolant rather than 100% glycol. Reinforced construction, able to use constant boost pressure of up to +12\u00a0psi using 100-octane fuel; Used in Spitfire Mk.II. First production Merlin XII, 2 September 1939.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; two-speed supercharger; boost pressure of up to +14\u00a0psi; Used in Hurricane Mk.II, Beaufighter Mk.II, Halifax Mk.II and Lancaster Mk.I bombers, and in the Spitfire Mk.III prototypes (\"N3297\" &amp; \"W3237\"). First production Merlin XX, 4 July 1940.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; a \"low altitude\" version of Merlin with cropped supercharger impellers for increased power at lower altitudes and a maximum boost pressure of +18\u00a0psi; fitted with Coffman engine starter; used mainly in Fleet Air Arm aircraft, mainly the Fairey Barracuda Mk.II torpedo bomber and Supermarine Seafire F. Mk.IIc fighters. Also Hurricane Mk.V and Spitfire P.R. Mk.XIII. First production Merlin 32, 17 June 1942.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; used in Spitfire Mk.V, PR.Mk.IV and PR.Mk.VII, Seafire Ib and IIc. Maximum boost pressure of +16\u00a0psi. First production Merlin 45, 13 January 1941.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; high-altitude version used in Spitfire H.F.Mk.VI. Adapted with a Marshall compressor (often called a \"blower\") to pressurise the cockpit. First production Merlin 47, 2 December 1941.\n 1,585\u00a0hp (1,182\u00a0kW) at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; low-altitude version with supercharger impeller \"cropped\" to in diameter. Permitted boost was +18\u00a0psi (125 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 225 kPa or 2.2\u00a0atm) instead of +16\u00a0psi (110 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 210 kPa or 2.08\u00a0atm) on a normal Merlin 50 engine. Merlin 50 series was first to use the Bendix-Stromberg \"negative-g\" carburettor.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at , at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; fitted with a new two-speed two-stage supercharger providing increased power at medium to high altitudes; +15\u00a0psi boost; used in Spitfire F Mk.IX, and P.R Mk.XI. First British production variant to incorporate two-piece cylinder blocks designed by Rolls-Royce for the Packard Merlin. Reduction gear ratio .42:1, with gears for pressurisation pump. First production Merlin 61, 2 March 1942.\n at 3,000\u00a0rpm at , at 3,000\u00a0rpm at ; strengthened two-speed two-stage development of Merlin 61; +18\u00a0psi boost; Reduction gear ratio .477:1; Merlin 63A did not have extra gears for pressurisation and incorporated a strengthened supercharger drive quill shaft. Used in Spitfire F Mk.VIII and F. Mk. IX.\n at using +18\u00a0psi boost (124 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 225 kPa or 2.2\u00a0atm); low-altitude version of Merlin 63A. Fitted with a Bendix-Stromberg anti-g carburettor; intercooler used a separate header tank. Used in Spitfire L.F. Mk.VIII and L.F. Mk.IX.\n at ; Fitted with a two-speed, two-stage supercharger and a Bendix-Stromberg carburettor. Dedicated \"high altitude\" version used in the Westland Welkin high-altitude fighter and some later Spitfire and de Havilland Mosquito variants. The odd-numbered mark drove a Marshall Roots-type blower for cockpit pressurising.\n ; redesigned \"slimline\" versions for the de Havilland Hornet. Engine design modified to decrease frontal area to a minimum and was the first Merlin series to use down-draught induction systems. Coolant pump moved from the bottom of the engine to the starboard side. Two-speed, two-stage supercharger and S.U. injection carburettor. Maximum boost was gauge; or an absolute pressure of 270 kPa or 2.7\u00a0atm). On the Hornet the Merlin 130 was fitted in the port nacelle: the Merlin 131, fitted in the starboard nacelle, was converted to a \"reverse\" or left-hand tractor engine using an additional idler gear in the reduction gear casing.\n ; derated for use at low altitude 130/131 variants used in Sea Hornet F. Mk. 20, N.F. Mk. 21 and P.R. Mk. 22. Maximum boost was lowered to +18\u00a0psi gauge (230\u00a0kPa or 2.2\u00a0atm absolute). Corliss throttle. The Merlin 135 was left-hand tractor.\n The prefix \"2\" indicates engines built by Packard, otherwise as Merlin 66, optimised for low-altitude operation. Fitted to the Spitfire Mk.XVI.\n continuous cruising using 2,650\u00a0rpm at +9\u00a0psi boost (62 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 165 kPa or 1.6\u00a0atm); capable of emergency rating of at 3,000\u00a0rpm using +20\u00a0psi boost (138 kPa gauge; or an absolute pressure of 241 kPa or 2.4\u00a0atm); civilian engine developed from Merlin 102; two-stage supercharger optimised for medium altitudes, and used an S.U. injection carburettor. \"Universal Power Plant\" (UPP) standardised annular radiator installation development of that used on Lancaster VI and Avro Lincoln. The Merlin 620\u2013621 series was designed to operate in the severe climatic conditions encountered on Canadian and long-range North Atlantic air routes. Used in Avro Tudor, Avro York, and the Canadair North Star.\nApplications.\nIn chronological order, the first operational aircraft powered by the Merlin to enter service were the Fairey Battle, Hawker Hurricane, and Supermarine Spitfire. Although the engine is most closely associated with the Spitfire, the four-engined Avro Lancaster was the most numerous application, followed by the twin-engined de Havilland Mosquito.\n\"List from Lumsden 2003\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPostwar.\nAt the end of World War II, new versions of the Merlin (the 600- and 700-series) were designed and produced for use in commercial airliners such as the Avro Tudor, military transport aircraft such as the Avro York, and the Canadair North Star which performed in both roles. These engines were basically military specification with some minor changes to suit the different operating environment.\nA Spanish-built version of the Messerschmitt Bf 109 G-2, the 1954 Hispano Aviaci\u00f3n HA-1112-M1L \"Buchon\", was built in Hispano's factory in Seville with the Rolls-Royce Merlin 500/45 engine of \u00a0\u2013 a fitting powerplant for the last-produced version of the famous Messerschmitt fighter, as the Bf 109 V1 prototype aircraft had been powered by the Rolls-Royce Kestrel V-12 engine in 1935.\nThe CASA 2.111 was another Spanish-built version of a German aircraft, the Heinkel He 111, that was adapted to use the Merlin after the supply of Junkers Jumo 211F-2 engines ran out at the end of the war. A similar situation existed with the Fiat G.59 when available stocks of the Italian licence-built version of the Daimler-Benz DB 605 engine ran short.\nThe Australian built Avro Lincoln from A73-51 used Australian built Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Merlin 102s.\nA total of 108 CAC Merlins were built by the time production ended.\nAlternative applications.\nA non-supercharged version of the Merlin using a larger proportion of steel and iron components was produced for use in tanks. This engine, the Rolls-Royce Meteor, in turn led to the smaller Rolls-Royce Meteorite. In 1943, further Meteor development was handed over to Rover, in exchange for Rover's gas turbine interests.\nIn 1938, Rolls-Royce started work on modifying some Merlins which were later to be used in British MTBs, MGBs, and RAF Air-Sea Rescue Launches. For these the superchargers were modified single-stage units and the engine was re-engineered for use in a marine environment. Some 70 engines were converted before priority was given to producing aero engines.\nExperiments were carried out by the Irish Army involving replacing the Bedford engine of a Churchill tank with a Rolls-Royce Merlin engine salvaged from an Irish Air Corps Seafire aircraft. The experiment was not a success, although the reasons are not recorded.\nSurviving engines.\nOne of the most successful of the World War II era aircraft engines, the Merlin continues to be used in many restored World War II vintage aircraft all over the world. The Royal Air Force Battle of Britain Memorial Flight is a notable current operator of the Merlin. In England the Shuttleworth Collection owns and operates a Merlin-powered Hawker Sea Hurricane IB and a Supermarine Spitfire VC\u00a0\u2013 Both can be seen flying at home displays throughout the summer months.\nEngines on display.\nPreserved examples of the Rolls-Royce Merlin are on display at the following museums:\nSpecifications (Merlin 61).\n\"Data from\" \"Jane's\".\nGeneral characteristics\nComponents\nPerformance\n* at 3,000 rpm at take-off.\n* at 3,000 rpm at , MS gear)\n* at 3,000 rpm at , FS gear)*Specific power: 0.96 hp/cu\u00a0in (43.6 kW/L)*Compression ratio: 6:1*Fuel consumption: Minimum 30 Imp\u00a0gal/h (136 L/h), maximum 130 Imp gal/h (591 L/h)*Power-to-weight ratio: 0.96 hp/lb (1.58 kW/kg) at maximum power.\nSee also.\nRelated development\nComparable engines\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39033", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39033", "title": "Air Ministry", "text": "Department of the Government of the United Kingdom (1918\u20131964)\nThe Air Ministry was a department of the Government of the United Kingdom with the responsibility of managing the affairs of the Royal Air Force and civil aviation that existed from 1918 to 1964. It was under the political authority of the Secretary of State for Air.\nOrganisations before the Air Ministry.\nThe Air Committee.\nOn 13 April 1912, less than two weeks after the creation of the Royal Flying Corps (which initially consisted of both a naval and a military wing), an Air Committee was established to act as an intermediary between the Admiralty and the War Office in matters relating to aviation. The new Air Committee was composed of representatives of the two war ministries, and although it could make recommendations, it lacked executive authority. The recommendations of the Air Committee had to be ratified by the Admiralty Board and the Imperial General Staff and, in consequence, the Committee was not particularly effective. The increasing separation of army and naval aviation from 1912 to 1914 only exacerbated the Air Committee's ineffectiveness and the Committee did not meet after the outbreak of the First World War.\nThe Joint War Air Committee.\nBy 1916 the lack of co-ordination of the Army's Royal Flying Corps and the Navy's Royal Naval Air Service had led to serious problems, not only in the procurement of aircraft engines, but also in the air defence of Great Britain. It was the supply problems to which an attempt at rectification was first made. The War Committee meeting on 15 February 1916 decided immediately to establish a standing joint naval and military committee to co-ordinate both the design and the supply of materiel for the two air services. This committee was titled the Joint War Air Committee, and its chairman was Lord Derby. It was also at the meeting on 15 February that Lord Curzon proposed the creation of an Air Ministry. As with the pre-war Air Committee, the Joint War Air Committee lacked any executive powers and therefore was not effective. After only eight sittings, Lord Derby resigned from the Committee, stating that \"It appears to me quite impossible to bring the two wings closer together ... unless and until the whole system of the Air Service is changed and they are amalgamated into one service.\"\nMembership.\nThe Joint War Air Committee was composed as follows:\nAdvisory Members were also appointed as required.\nThe Air Board.\nThe first Air Board.\nThe next attempt to establish effective co-ordination between the two air services was the creation of an Air Board. The first Air Board came into being on 15 May 1916 with Lord Curzon as its chairman. The inclusion of Curzon, a Cabinet Minister, and other political figures was intended to give the Air Board greater status than the Joint War Air Committee. In October 1916 the Air Board published its first report which was highly critical of the arrangements within the British air services. The report noted that although the Army authorities were ready and willing to provide information and take part in meetings, the Navy were often absent from Board meetings and frequently refused to provide information on naval aviation.\nThe second Air Board.\nIn January 1917 the Prime Minister David Lloyd George replaced the chairman Lord Curzon with Lord Cowdray. Godfrey Paine, who served in the newly created post of Fifth Sea Lord and Director of Naval Aviation, sat on the board and this high level representation from the Navy helped to improve matters. Additionally, as responsibility for the design of aircraft had been moved out of single service hands and given to the Ministry of Munitions, some of the problems of inter-service competition were avoided. \nThe Air Board initially met in the Hotel Cecil on the Strand, familiarly known as the \"Hotel Bolo\". This was a humorous reference to Bolo Pasha (shot for treason in 1918 by the French government) whose attempts to undermine the French war effort with German-funded newspaper propaganda were likened to the unhelpful rivalry between the RFC and the RNAS.\nEstablishment of the Air Ministry.\nDespite attempts at reorganization of the Air Board, the earlier problems failed to be completely resolved. In addition, the growing number of German air raids against Great Britain led to public disquiet and increasing demands for something to be done. As a result, Lloyd George, the British Prime Minister, established a committee composed of himself and General Jan Smuts, which was tasked with investigating the problems with the British air defences and organizational difficulties which had beset the Air Board.\nTowards the end of the First World War, on 17 August 1917, General Smuts presented a report to the War Council on the future of air power. Because of its potential for the 'devastation of enemy lands and the destruction of industrial and populous centres on a vast scale', he recommended a new air service be formed that would be on a level with the Army and Royal Navy. The new air service was to receive direction from a new ministry and on 29 November 1917 the Air Force Bill received Royal Assent and the Air Ministry was formed just over a month later on 2 January 1918. Lord Rothermere was appointed the first Air Minister. On 3 January, the Air Council was constituted as follows:\nThe Air Ministry continued to meet in the Hotel Cecil on the Strand. Later, in 1919, it moved to Adastral House on Kingsway. The creation of the Air Ministry resulted in the disestablishment of the Army Council's post of Director-General of Military Aeronautics.\nHistory \u2013 from 1918.\n1918\u20131921.\nIn 1919 the RAF and the Air Ministry came under immense political and inter service pressure for their very existence, particularly in a climate of significantly reduced military expenditure. The battle was kickstarted by the resignation in December 1918 of William Weir the President of the Air Council (the governing body of the Royal Air Force), who wished to return to his commercial activities.\nThis led the Prime Minister, Lloyd George, to create a Secretary of State for Air, but not as a Cabinet position, and on 9 January 1919 offered Winston Churchill the two posts of Secretary of State for War, which was a Cabinet position, and Secretary of State for Air both of which he accepted.\nThis combination under one person by was criticised in both the press and Parliament. However, Churchill re-iterated that the continued \"integrity, the unity, the independence of the Royal Air Force will be sedulously and carefully maintained\". During 1919 it was also decided that civil aviation was to be brought into the Air Ministry rather than being dealt with by either the Board of Trade or the Foreign Office.\nThe Army and the War Office had largely agreed to the continued existence of the RAF due, in part, to the enthusiasm for the air service by the Army's political leader Winston Churchill. However, one of the main difficulties for the RAF and Air Ministry in 1919 was the opposition by the Royal Navy to losing their own air service and subsequent lobbying that personnel for naval air purposes afloat be naval officers and ratings \u2013 this would have led to a recreation of the now disbanded Royal Naval Air Service. This negotiation led to the creation of RAF Coastal Area the predecessor of RAF Coastal Command to deal with its relationship with the Navy. Throughout 1919 there were discussions between Sir Hugh Trenchard Chief of the Air Staff and Sir Rosslyn Wemyss First Sea Lord as to the nature of the relationship between the Air Force and Air Ministry and the Navy and the Admiralty.\nIn 1919 the Air Ministry formally took control of supply, design and inspection of all aircraft (aeroplanes and airships) from the Ministry of Munitions. This helped put the existence of Air Ministry on a firmer footing.\nThroughout 1919 Churchill persistently supported an independent air force. He presented the White Paper, largely written by Sir Hugh Trenchard, on the future of the RAF on 12 December 1919. It was this White Paper that was to be the effective charter for the RAF and Air Ministry in subsequent years.\n1921\u20131927.\nIn February 1921 Lloyd George appointed Churchill to the Colonial Office and appointed his Chief Whip, Frederick Guest as Secretary of State for Air on 1 April. During his eighteen months in office he played \"a minor part in the desperate struggle to maintain the air force's institutional independence in the face of hostile attacks from the War Office and the Admiralty\". More importantly in the long term he was also responsible for the appointment of Sir Sefton Brancker to develop civil aviation.\nWith the fall of Lloyd George Sir Samuel Hoare became the Secretary of State for Air in October 1922 under Bonar Law. On Law's death Stanley Baldwin became Prime Minister and gave the position Cabinet status in May 1923, and Hoare remained in the post until January 1924, when a Labour government took power. Lord Thomson was made Secretary of State for Air. A supporter of airships, Thomson was responsible for the Imperial Airship Scheme, which involved the construction of R101 at the Royal Airship Works at Cardington.\nAfter the fall of the MacDonald government in November 1924 Hoare returned to the Air Ministry. He was interested in developing air links to the Empire and Dominion countries, particularly India and South Africa. He negotiated a subsidy from the Treasury for Imperial Airways to start a service from Cairo to India. Hoare, with his wife Lady Maud, flew on the inaugural 13-day flight to Delhi, leaving Croydon on 26 December 1926 and arriving on 8 January 1927. The air route to Cape Town, after much negotiation, was finalised in 1929, before he left office, but only commenced in 1932.\n1927\u20131929.\nHis time at the Air Ministry was marked by several important developments that were to confirm the status of the Royal Air Force as a separate entity, play a part in the growth of civil aviation and to develop the awareness of the public about aviation.\nAn early priority for Sir Hugh Trenchard, Chief of the Air Staff 1919\u20131930, was to establish the officer cadet training college at Cranwell as a permanent establishment. It was Hoare's job to negotiate with the Treasury for the necessary funds. After much resistance Hoare managed to include a provision for permanent buildings in his estimates for 1929. The foundation stone of the Royal Air Force College Cranwell was laid in 1929 and formally opened in 1934.\nTrenchard had conceived the idea of a university air officer training corps, a sort of Territorial Army for the R.A.F. Hoare and particularly his well connected Parliamentary Private Secretary the academic Sir Geoffrey Butler, then created University Air Squadrons, at Cambridge University then at Oxford University in October 1925, without, however the militarism of the Officer Training Corps and in close collaboration with scientific and engineering work of the Universities.\nThe Air Ministry was also responsible for civil aviation. Early on Hoare set up the Civil Air Transport Subsidies Committee under the Chairmanship of Sir Hubert Hambling to look at the system of subsidies to competing air lines. They reported in February 1923, favouring a single commercial company to run Britain's air routes. In March 1924 Imperial Airways was created from a merger of the four largest airlines.\nThe third aspect of Hoare's time at the Air Ministry (after the R.A.F. and civil airlines) was to make public opinion sympathetic to air power and air travel. His much publicised flight to India in 1926-7 was part of this. He also realised the importance of the Schneider Trophy and was instrumental in making sure that the R.A.F was involved. Britain's winning entries in 1927, 1929 and 1931 were flown by R.A.F. pilots and the teams partially subsidised by the Air Ministry.\nActivities.\nAircraft production.\nThe Air Ministry issued specifications for aircraft that British aircraft companies would supply prototypes to. These were then assessed, if ordered the Ministry assigned the aircraft name. (see List of Air Ministry specifications).\nThe ordering procedure used I.T.P. (Intention to Proceed) contract papers; these specified a maximum fixed price, which could (after investigation) be less. But when Lord Nuffield got the I.T.P. contract papers for a Wolseley radial aero engine, which would have required re-orientation of their offices with an army of chartered accountants, he decided to deal only with the War Office and the Admiralty, not the Air Ministry. So the aero engine project was abandoned in 1936, see Airspeed. Nevil Shute Norway wrote that the loss of such a technically advanced engine was a great loss to Britain as well as Airspeed, and blamed the over-cautious high civil servants of the Air Ministry. When he had asked Lord Nuffield to retain the engine, Nuffield said: \"I tell you, Norway ... I sent that I.T.P. thing back to them, and I told them they could put it where the monkey put the nuts!\"\nIn later years the actual production of aircraft was the responsibility of the Ministry of Aircraft Production (1940\u201346), the Ministry of Supply (1946\u201359), the Ministry of Aviation (1959\u201367) and finally the Ministry of Technology (1967\u201370).\nResearch and development.\nIn the 1920s and early 1930s research and development was more than 20% of the Air Ministry\u2019s total expenditure on aircraft and equipment, making it the largest research and development spending institution in Britain, until it was outstripped by private industry in the later 1930s.\nWeather forecasting.\nThe Air Ministry was responsible for weather forecasting over the UK, from 1919 it being the government department responsible for the Meteorological Office.\nAs a result of the need for weather information for aviation, the Meteorological Office located many of its observation and data collection points on RAF stations.\nWorld War II technology.\nIn the 1930s, the Air Ministry commissioned a scientific study of propagating electromagnetic energy which concluded that a death ray was impractical but detection of aircraft appeared feasible. Robert Watson-Watt demonstrated a working prototype and patented the device in 1935 (British Patent GB593017). The device served as the base for the Chain Home network of radars to defend Great Britain.\nBy April 1944, the ministry's air Intelligence branch had succeeded in its intelligence efforts regarding \"the beams, the Bruneval Raid, the Gibraltar barrage, radar, Window, heavy water, and the German nightfighters\" (R.V. Jones). Other World War II technology and warfare efforts included the branch's V-1 and V-2 Intelligence activities.\nAbolition.\nIn 1964 the Air Ministry merged with the Admiralty and the War Office to form the Ministry of Defence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39034", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39034", "title": "J. Robert Oppenheimer", "text": "American theoretical physicist (1904\u20131967)\nJ. Robert Oppenheimer (born Julius Robert Oppenheimer ; April 22, 1904 \u2013 February 18, 1967) was an American theoretical physicist who served as the director of the Manhattan Project's Los Alamos Laboratory during World War II. He is often called the \"father of the atomic bomb\" for his role in overseeing the development of the first nuclear weapons.\nBorn in New York City, Oppenheimer obtained a degree in chemistry from Harvard University in 1925 and a doctorate in physics from the University of G\u00f6ttingen in Germany in 1927, studying under Max Born. After research at other institutions, he joined the physics faculty at the University of California, Berkeley, where he was made a full professor in 1936.\nOppenheimer made significant contributions to physics in the fields of quantum mechanics and nuclear physics, including the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation for molecular wave functions; work on the theory of positrons, quantum electrodynamics, and quantum field theory; and the Oppenheimer\u2013Phillips process in nuclear fusion. With his students, he also made major contributions to astrophysics, including the theory of cosmic ray showers, and the theory of neutron stars and black holes.\nIn 1941, Oppenheimer was briefed about nuclear weapon design by Australian physicist Mark Oliphant. In 1942, Oppenheimer was recruited to work on the Manhattan Project, and in 1943 was appointed director of the project's Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico, tasked with developing the first nuclear weapons. His leadership and scientific expertise were instrumental in the project's success, and on July 16, 1945, he was present at the first test of the atomic bomb, Trinity. In August, the weapons were used on Japan in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, to date the only uses of nuclear weapons in conflict.\nIn 1947, Oppenheimer was appointed director of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, and chairman of the General Advisory Committee of the new United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). He lobbied for international control of nuclear power and weapons in order to avert an arms race with the Soviet Union, and later opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb, partly on ethical grounds. During the Second Red Scare, his stances, together with his past associations with the Communist Party USA, led to an AEC security hearing in 1954 and the revocation of his security clearance. He continued to lecture, write, and work in physics, and in 1963 received the Enrico Fermi Award for contributions to theoretical physics. The 1954 decision was vacated in 2022.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and education.\nOppenheimer was born Julius Robert Oppenheimer into a non-observant Jewish family in New York City on April 22, 1904, to Ella (n\u00e9e Friedman), a painter, and Julius Seligmann Oppenheimer, a successful textile importer. Robert had a younger brother, Frank, who also became a physicist. His father was born in Hanau, when it was still part of the Hesse-Nassau province of the Kingdom of Prussia, and as a teenager made his way to the United States in 1888, without money, higher education, or English. He was hired by a textile company and within a decade was an executive there, eventually becoming wealthy. In 1912, the family moved to an apartment on Riverside Drive near West 88th Street, Upper West Side, New York. Their art collection included works by Pablo Picasso, \u00c9douard Vuillard, and Vincent van Gogh.\nOppenheimer was initially educated at Alcuin Preparatory School. In 1911, he entered the Ethical Culture Society School, founded by Felix Adler to promote training based on the Ethical movement, whose motto was \"Deed before Creed\". Oppenheimer's father had been a member of the Society for many years, serving on its board of trustees. Oppenheimer was a versatile student, interested in English and French literature, and particularly mineralogy. He completed third and fourth grades in one year and skipped half of eighth grade. He took private music lessons by famous French flutist Georges Barr\u00e8re. During his final year of school, Oppenheimer became interested in chemistry. He graduated in 1921, but his further education was delayed a year by an attack of colitis contracted while prospecting in J\u00e1chymov during a family vacation in Czechoslovakia. He recovered in New Mexico, where he developed a love for horseback riding and the southwestern United States.\nOppenheimer entered Harvard College in 1922 at age 18. He majored in chemistry; Harvard also required studies in history, literature, and philosophy or mathematics. To compensate for the delay caused by his illness, he took six courses each term instead of the usual four. He was admitted to the undergraduate honor society Phi Beta Kappa and was granted graduate standing in physics on the basis of independent study, allowing him to bypass basic courses in favor of advanced ones. He was attracted to experimental physics by a course on thermodynamics taught by Percy Bridgman. Oppenheimer graduated from Harvard in 1925 with a Bachelor of Arts, \"summa cum laude\", after only three years of study.\nStudies in Europe.\nAfter being accepted at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1924, Oppenheimer wrote to Ernest Rutherford requesting permission to work at the Cavendish Laboratory, though Bridgman's letter of recommendation said that Oppenheimer's clumsiness in the laboratory suggested that theoretical, rather than experimental, physics would be his forte. Rutherford was unimpressed, but Oppenheimer went to Cambridge nonetheless; J. J. Thomson ultimately accepted him on the condition that he complete a basic laboratory course.\nOppenheimer was very unhappy at Cambridge and wrote to a friend: \"I am having a pretty bad time. The lab work is a terrible bore, and I am so bad at it that it is impossible to feel that I am learning anything.\" He developed an antagonistic relationship with his tutor, Patrick Blackett, a future Nobel laureate. According to Oppenheimer's friend Francis Fergusson, Oppenheimer once confessed to leaving a poisoned apple on Blackett's desk, and Oppenheimer's parents convinced the university authorities not to expel him. There are no records of either a poisoning incident or probation, but Oppenheimer had regular sessions with a psychiatrist in Harley Street, London.\nOppenheimer was a tall, thin chain smoker, who often neglected to eat during periods of intense concentration. Many friends said he could be self-destructive. Fergusson once tried to distract Oppenheimer from apparent depression by telling him about his girlfriend, Frances Keeley, and how he had proposed to her. Oppenheimer jumped on Fergusson and tried to strangle him. Oppenheimer was plagued by periods of depression throughout his life, and once told his brother, \"I need physics more than friends.\"\nIn 1926, Oppenheimer left Cambridge for the University of G\u00f6ttingen to study under Max Born; G\u00f6ttingen was one of the world's leading centers for theoretical physics. Oppenheimer made friends who went on to great success, including Werner Heisenberg, Pascual Jordan, Wolfgang Pauli, Paul Dirac, Enrico Fermi and Edward Teller. He was enthusiastic in discussions to the point of sometimes taking them over. Maria Goeppert presented Born with a petition signed by herself and others threatening a boycott of the class unless he made Oppenheimer quiet down. Born left it out on his desk where Oppenheimer could read it, and it was effective without a word being said.\nOppenheimer obtained his Doctor of Philosophy degree in March 1927 at age 23, supervised by Born. After the oral exam, James Franck, the professor administering it, reportedly said, \"I'm glad that's over. He was on the point of questioning \"me\".\" Oppenheimer published more than a dozen papers while in Europe, including many important contributions to the new field of quantum mechanics. He and Born published a famous paper on the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation, which separates nuclear motion from electronic motion in the mathematical treatment of molecules, allowing nuclear motion to be neglected to simplify calculations. It remains his most cited work.\nEarly career.\nTeaching.\nOppenheimer was awarded a United States National Research Council fellowship to the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in September 1927. Bridgman also wanted him at Harvard, so a compromise was reached whereby he split his fellowship for the 1927\u201328 academic year between Harvard in 1927 and Caltech in 1928. At Caltech, he struck up a close friendship with Linus Pauling; they planned to mount a joint attack on the nature of the chemical bond, a field in which Pauling was a pioneer, with Oppenheimer supplying the mathematics and Pauling interpreting the results. The collaboration, and their friendship, ended after Oppenheimer invited Pauling's wife, Ava Helen Pauling, to join him on a tryst in Mexico. Oppenheimer later invited Pauling to be head of the Chemistry Division of the Manhattan Project, but Pauling refused, saying he was a pacifist.\nIn the autumn of 1928, Oppenheimer visited Paul Ehrenfest's institute at the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, where he impressed by giving lectures in Dutch, despite having little experience with the language. There, he was given the nickname of \"Opje\", later anglicized by his students as \"Oppie\". From Leiden, he continued on to the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich to work with Wolfgang Pauli on quantum mechanics and the continuous spectrum. Oppenheimer respected and liked Pauli and may have emulated his personal style as well as his critical approach to problems.\nOn returning to the United States, Oppenheimer accepted an associate professorship from the University of California, Berkeley, where Raymond Thayer Birge wanted him so badly that he expressed a willingness to share him with Caltech.\nBefore he began his Berkeley professorship, Oppenheimer was diagnosed with a mild case of tuberculosis and spent some weeks with his brother Frank at a New Mexico ranch, which he leased and eventually purchased. When he heard the ranch was available for lease, he exclaimed, \"Hot dog!\", and he later called it \"Perro Caliente\" (\"hot dog\" in Spanish). Later, he used to say that \"physics and desert country\" were his \"two great loves\". He recovered from tuberculosis and returned to Berkeley, where he prospered as an advisor and collaborator to a generation of physicists who admired him for his intellectual virtuosity and broad interests. His students and colleagues saw him as mesmerizing: hypnotic in private interaction, but often frigid in more public settings. His associates fell into two camps: one saw him as an aloof and impressive genius and aesthete, the other as a pretentious and insecure poseur. His students almost always fell into the former category, adopting his walk, speech, and other mannerisms, and even his inclination for reading entire texts in their original languages. Hans Bethe said of him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Probably the most important ingredient he brought to his teaching was his exquisite taste. He always knew what were the important problems, as shown by his choice of subjects. He truly lived with those problems, struggling for a solution, and he communicated his concern to the group. In its heyday, there were about eight or ten graduate students in his group and about six Post-doctoral Fellows. He met this group once a day in his office and discussed with one after another the status of the student's research problem. He was interested in everything, and in one afternoon they might discuss quantum electrodynamics, cosmic rays, electron pair production and nuclear physics.\nOppenheimer worked closely with Nobel Prize-winning experimental physicist Ernest Lawrence and his cyclotron pioneers, helping them understand the data that their machines were producing at Berkeley's Radiation Laboratory, which eventually developed into today's Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. In 1936, Berkeley promoted him to full professor at an annual salary of $3,300 (). In return, he was asked to curtail his teaching at Caltech, so a compromise was reached whereby Berkeley released him for six weeks each year, enough to teach one term at Caltech.\nOppenheimer repeatedly attempted to get Robert Serber a position at Berkeley but was blocked by Birge, who felt that \"one Jew in the department was enough\".\nScientific work.\nOppenheimer did important research in theoretical astronomy (especially as related to general relativity and nuclear theory), nuclear physics, spectroscopy, and quantum field theory, including its extension into quantum electrodynamics. The formal mathematics of relativistic quantum mechanics also attracted his attention, although he doubted its validity. His work predicted many later finds, including the neutron, meson and neutron star.\nInitially, his major interest was the theory of the continuous spectrum. His first published paper, in 1926, concerned the quantum theory of molecular band spectra. He developed a method to carry out calculations of its transition probabilities. He calculated the photoelectric effect for hydrogen and X-rays, obtaining the absorption coefficient at the K-edge. His calculations accorded with observations of the X-ray absorption of the Sun, but not helium. Years later, it was realized that the Sun was largely composed of hydrogen and that his calculations were correct.\nOppenheimer made important contributions to the theory of cosmic ray showers. He also worked on the problem of field electron emission. This work contributed to the development of the concept of quantum tunneling. In 1931, he co-wrote a paper, \"Relativistic Theory of the Photoelectric Effect,\" with his student Harvey Hall, in which, based on empirical evidence, he correctly disputed Paul Dirac's assertion that two of the energy levels of the hydrogen atom have the same energy. Subsequently, one of his doctoral students, Willis Lamb, determined that this was a consequence of what became known as the Lamb shift, for which Lamb was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1955.\nWith Melba Phillips, the first graduate student to begin her PhD under Oppenheimer's supervision, Oppenheimer worked on calculations of artificial radioactivity under bombardment by deuterons. When Ernest Lawrence and Edwin McMillan bombarded nuclei with deuterons they found the results agreed closely with the predictions of George Gamow, but when higher energies and heavier nuclei were involved, the results did not conform to the predictions. In 1935, Oppenheimer and Phillips worked out a theory\u2014subsequently known as the Oppenheimer\u2013Phillips process\u2014to explain the results. This theory is still in use today.\nAs early as 1930, Oppenheimer wrote a paper that essentially predicted the existence of the positron. This was after a paper by Dirac proposed that electrons could have both a positive charge and negative energy. Dirac's paper introduced an equation, later known as the Dirac equation, that unified quantum mechanics, special relativity and the then-new concept of electron spin, to explain the Zeeman effect. Drawing on the body of experimental evidence, Oppenheimer rejected the idea that the predicted positively charged electrons were protons. He argued that they would have to have the same mass as an electron, whereas experiments showed that protons were much heavier than electrons. Two years later, Carl David Anderson discovered the positron, for which he received the 1936 Nobel Prize in Physics.\nIn the late 1930s, Oppenheimer became interested in astrophysics, most likely through his friendship with Richard Tolman, resulting in a series of papers. In the first of these, \"On the Stability of Stellar Neutron Cores\" (1938), co-written with Serber, Oppenheimer explored the properties of white dwarfs. This was followed by a paper co-written with one of his students, George Volkoff, \"On Massive Neutron Cores,\" which demonstrated that there was a limit, known as the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit, to the mass of stars beyond which they would not remain stable as neutron stars and would undergo gravitational collapse. In 1939, Oppenheimer and another of his students, Hartland Snyder, produced the paper \"On Continued Gravitational Contraction\", which predicted the existence of what later became termed black holes. After the Born\u2013Oppenheimer approximation paper, these papers remain his most cited, and were key factors in the rejuvenation of astrophysical research in the United States in the 1950s, mainly by John A. Wheeler.\nOppenheimer's papers were considered difficult to understand even by the standards of the abstract topics he was expert in. He was fond of using elegant, if extremely complex, mathematical techniques to demonstrate physical principles, though he was sometimes criticized for making mathematical mistakes, presumably out of haste. \"His physics was good\", said his student Snyder, \"but his arithmetic awful.\"\nAfter World War II, Oppenheimer published only five scientific papers, one of them in biophysics, and none after 1950. Murray Gell-Mann, a later Nobelist who, as a visiting scientist, worked with him at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1951, offered this opinion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He didn't have \"Sitzfleisch\", \"sitting flesh,\" when you sit on a chair. As far as I know, he never wrote a long paper or did a long calculation, anything of that kind. He didn't have patience for that; his own work consisted of little \"aper\u00e7us\", but quite brilliant ones. But he inspired other people to do things, and his influence was fantastic.\nPrivate and political life.\nOppenheimer's mother died in 1931, after which he grew closer to his father, who, though still residing in New York, became a frequent visitor to California. When his father died in 1937, leaving $392,602 (equivalent to $8.6 million in 2024) to be divided between Oppenheimer and his brother Frank, Oppenheimer promptly wrote a will bequeathing his estate to the University of California to fund graduate scholarships.\nPolitics.\nDuring the 1920s, Oppenheimer remained uninformed about world affairs. He claimed that he did not read newspapers or popular magazines and only learned of the Wall Street crash of 1929 while he was on a walk with Ernest Lawrence six months after the crash occurred. He once remarked that he never cast a vote until the 1936 presidential election. From 1934 on, he became increasingly concerned about politics and international affairs. In 1934, he earmarked three percent of his annual salary\u2014about $100 ()\u2014for two years to support German physicists fleeing Nazi Germany. During the 1934 West Coast Waterfront Strike, he and some of his students, including Melba Phillips and Serber, attended a longshoremen's rally.\nAfter the Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936, Oppenheimer hosted fundraisers for the Spanish Republican cause. In 1939, he joined the American Committee for Democracy and Intellectual Freedom, which campaigned against the persecution of Jewish scientists in Nazi Germany. Like most liberal groups of the era, the committee was later branded a communist front.\nMany of Oppenheimer's closest associates were active in the Communist Party in the 1930s or 1940s, including his brother Frank, Frank's wife Jackie, Kitty, Jean Tatlock, his landlady Mary Ellen Washburn, and several of his graduate students at Berkeley. Whether Oppenheimer was a party member has been debated. Cassidy states that he never openly joined the Communist Party USA (CPUSA), but Haynes, Klehr, and Vassiliev state that he \"was, in fact, a concealed member of the CPUSA in the late 1930s\". From 1937 to 1942, Oppenheimer was a member at Berkeley of what he called a \"discussion group\", which fellow members Haakon Chevalier and Gordon Griffiths later said was a \"closed\" (secret) unit of the Communist Party for Berkeley faculty.\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) opened a file on Oppenheimer in March 1941. It recorded that he attended a meeting in December 1940 at Chevalier's home that was also attended by the Communist Party's California state secretary, William Schneiderman, and its treasurer, Isaac Folkoff. The FBI noted that Oppenheimer was on the executive committee of the American Civil Liberties Union, which it considered a communist front organization. Shortly thereafter, the FBI added Oppenheimer to its Custodial Detention Index, for arrest in case of national emergency.\nWhen he joined the Manhattan Project in 1942, Oppenheimer wrote on his personal security questionnaire that he had been \"a member of just about every Communist Front organization on the West Coast.\" Years later, he claimed that he did not remember writing this, that it was not true, and that if he had written anything along those lines, it was \"a half-jocular overstatement\". He was a subscriber to the \"People's World\", a Communist Party organ, and testified in 1954, \"I was associated with the communist movement.\"\nIn 1953, Oppenheimer was on the sponsoring committee for a conference on \"Science and Freedom\" organized by the Congress for Cultural Freedom, an anti-communist cultural organization.\nAt his 1954 security clearance hearings, Oppenheimer denied being a member of the Communist Party but identified himself as a fellow traveler, which he defined as someone who agrees with many of communism's goals but is not willing to blindly follow orders from any Communist Party apparatus. According to biographer Ray Monk: \"He was, in a very practical and real sense, a supporter of the Communist Party. Moreover, in terms of the time, effort and money spent on party activities, he was a very committed supporter.\"\nRelationships and children.\nIn 1936, Oppenheimer became involved with Jean Tatlock, the daughter of a Berkeley literature professor and a student at Stanford University School of Medicine. The two had similar political views; she wrote for the \"Western Worker\", a Communist Party newspaper. In 1939, after a tempestuous relationship, Tatlock broke up with Oppenheimer. In August of that year, he met Katherine (\"Kitty\") Puening, a former Communist Party member. Kitty's first marriage had lasted only a few months. Her second, common-law, husband from 1934 to 1937 was Joe Dallet, an active member of the Communist Party killed in 1937 in the Spanish Civil War.\nKitty returned from Europe to the U.S., where she obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree in botany from the University of Pennsylvania. In 1938 she married Richard Harrison, a physician and medical researcher, and in June 1939 moved with him to Pasadena, California, where he became chief of radiology at a local hospital and she enrolled as a graduate student at the University of California, Los Angeles. She and Oppenheimer created a minor scandal by sleeping together after one of Tolman's parties, and in the summer of 1940 she stayed with Oppenheimer at his ranch in New Mexico. When she became pregnant, Kitty asked Harrison for a divorce and he agreed to it. On November 1, 1940, she obtained a quick divorce in Reno, Nevada, and married Oppenheimer.\nTheir first child, Peter, was born in May 1941, and their second, Katherine (\"Toni\"), was born in Los Alamos, New Mexico, on December 7, 1944. During his marriage, Oppenheimer rekindled his affair with Tatlock. Later, their continued contact became an issue in his security clearance hearings because of Tatlock's communist associations.\nThroughout the development of the atomic bomb, Oppenheimer was under investigation by both the FBI and the Manhattan Project's internal security arm for his past left-wing associations. He was followed by Army security agents during a trip to California in June 1943 to visit Tatlock, who was suffering from depression. Oppenheimer spent the night in her apartment. Tatlock killed herself on January 4, 1944, leaving Oppenheimer deeply grieved.\nAt Los Alamos, Oppenheimer began an emotional affair with Ruth Tolman, a psychologist and the wife of his friend Richard Tolman. The affair ended after Oppenheimer returned east to become director of the Institute for Advanced Study but, after Richard's death in August 1948, they reconnected and saw each other occasionally until Ruth's death in 1957. Few of their letters survive, but those that do reflect a close and affectionate relationship, with Oppenheimer calling her \"My Love\".\nMysticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Oppenheimer worked very hard [in the spring of 1929] but had a gift of concealing his assiduous application with an air of easy nonchalance. Actually, he was engaged in a very difficult calculation of the opacity of surfaces of stars to their internal radiation, an important constant in the theoretical construction of stellar models. He spoke little of these problems and seemed to be much more interested in literature, especially the Hindu classics and the more esoteric Western writers. Pauli once remarked to me that Oppenheimer seemed to treat physics as an avocation and psychoanalysis as a vocation.\n \u2014 Isidor Isaac Rabi\nOppenheimer's diverse interests sometimes interrupted his focus on science. He liked things that were difficult and since much of the scientific work appeared easy for him, he developed an interest in the mystical and the cryptic. After going to Harvard, he began to acquaint himself with the classical Hindu texts through their English translations. He also had an interest in learning languages and learned Sanskrit, under Arthur W. Ryder at Berkeley in 1933. He eventually read literary works such as the \"Bhagavad Gita\" and \"Meghaduta\" in the original Sanskrit, and deeply pondered them. He later cited the \"Gita\" as one of the books that most shaped his philosophy of life. He wrote to his brother that the \"Gita\" was \"very easy and quite marvelous\". He later called it \"the most beautiful philosophical song existing in any known tongue\", and gave copies of it as presents to his friends and kept a personal, worn-out copy on the bookshelf by his desk. He kept referring to it while directing the Los Alamos Laboratory, and quoted a passage from the \"Gita\" at the memorial service of President Franklin Roosevelt in Los Alamos. He nicknamed his car Garuda, the mount bird of the Hindu god Vishnu. \nOppenheimer never became a Hindu in the traditional sense; he did not join any temple nor pray to any god. He \"was really taken by the charm and the general wisdom of the Bhagavad-Gita,\" his brother said. It is speculated that Oppenheimer's interest in Hindu thought started during his earlier association with Niels Bohr. Both Bohr and Oppenheimer had been very analytical and critical about the ancient Hindu mythological stories and the metaphysics embedded in them. In one conversation with David Hawkins before the war, while talking about the literature of ancient Greece, Oppenheimer remarked, \"I have read the Greeks; I find the Hindus deeper.\" Oppenheimer sat on the Board of Editors of the book series \"World Perspectives\", which published a variety of books on philosophy. During the 1930s, while teaching at Berkeley, Oppenheimer became part of a group in the Bay Area that psychologist Siegfried Bernfeld convened to discuss psychoanalysis.\nHis close confidant and colleague Isidor Isaac Rabi, who had seen Oppenheimer throughout his Berkeley, Los Alamos, and Princeton years, wondering \"why men of Oppenheimer's gifts do not discover everything worth discovering\", reflected that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oppenheimer was overeducated in those fields which lie outside the scientific tradition, such as his interest in religion, in the Hindu religion in particular, which resulted in a feeling for the mystery of the universe that surrounded him almost like a fog. He saw physics clearly, looking toward what had already been done, but at the border he tended to feel there was much more of the mysterious and novel than there actually was ... [he turned] away from the hard, crude methods of theoretical physics into a mystical realm of broad intuition... In Oppenheimer the element of earthiness was feeble. Yet it was essentially this spiritual quality, this refinement as expressed in speech and manner, that was the basis of his charisma. He never expressed himself completely. He always left a feeling that there were depths of sensibility and insight not yet revealed. These may be the qualities of the born leader who seems to have reserves of uncommitted strength.\nIn spite of this, observers such as physicists Luis Alvarez and Jeremy Bernstein have suggested that if Oppenheimer had lived long enough to see his predictions substantiated by experiment, he might have won a Nobel Prize for his work on gravitational collapse, concerning neutron stars and black holes. In retrospect, some physicists and historians consider this his most important contribution, though it was not taken up by other scientists in his lifetime. The physicist and historian Abraham Pais once asked Oppenheimer what he considered his most important scientific contributions\u2014Oppenheimer cited his work on electrons and positrons, not his work on gravitational contraction. Oppenheimer was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Physics four times, in 1946, 1951, 1955, and 1967, but never won.\nManhattan Project.\nLos Alamos.\nDuring his visit to University of California, Berkeley in September 1941, Australian physicist Mark Oliphant briefed Oppenheimer about the U.K.'s atomic bomb program and it's MAUD report. On October 9, 1941, two months before the United States entered World War II, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved a crash program to develop an atomic bomb. On October 21, Ernest Lawrence brought Oppenheimer into what became the Manhattan Project. Oppenheimer was assigned to take over the project's specific bomb-design research by Arthur Compton at the Metallurgical Laboratory. On May 18, 1942, Gregory Breit resigned due to security concerns and skepticism towards the project. Not long after that, Arthur Compton asked Oppenheimer to take over work on fast neutron calculations from Breit, a task Oppenheimer threw himself into with full vigor. He was given the title \"Coordinator of Rapid Rupture\"; \"rapid rupture\" is a technical term that refers to the propagation of a fast neutron chain reaction in an atomic bomb. One of his first acts was to host a summer school for atomic bomb theory in Berkeley. The mix of European physicists and his own students\u2014a group including Serber, Emil Konopinski, Felix Bloch, Hans Bethe, and Edward Teller\u2014kept themselves busy by calculating what needed to be done, and in what order, to make the bomb.\nIn June 1942, the U.S. Army established the Manhattan Engineer District to handle its part in the atom bomb project, beginning the process of transferring responsibility from the Office of Scientific Research and Development to the military. In September, Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves Jr., was appointed director of what became known as the Manhattan Project. By October 12, 1942, Groves and Oppenheimer had decided that for security and cohesion, they needed to establish a centralized, secret research laboratory in a remote location.\nGroves selected Oppenheimer to head the project's secret weapons laboratory, although it is not known precisely when. On October 15, 1942, after a meeting in Chicago on the Manhattan Project Groves invited Oppenheimer to join himself, James C. Marshall and Kenneth Nichols on their return trip to New York on the 20th Century Limited. After dinner on the train, they discussed the project. After Oppenheimer left the train, none of the three could name another suitable scientist to head the project. Shortly afterwards Oppenheimer was appointed to head the Los Alamos Laboratory.\nThis decision surprised many, because Oppenheimer had left-wing political views and no record as a leader of large projects. Groves worried that because Oppenheimer did not have a Nobel Prize, he might not have had the prestige to direct fellow scientists, but Groves was impressed by Oppenheimer's singular grasp of the practical aspects of the project and by the breadth of his knowledge. As a military engineer, Groves knew that this would be vital in an interdisciplinary project that would involve not just physics but also chemistry, metallurgy, ordnance, and engineering. Groves also detected in Oppenheimer something that many others did not, an \"overweening ambition\", which Groves reckoned would supply the drive necessary to push the project to a successful conclusion. Oppenheimer's past associations were not overlooked, but on July 20, 1943, Groves directed that he receive a security clearance \"without delay irrespective of the information which you have concerning Mr Oppenheimer. He is absolutely essential to the project.\" Rabi considered Oppenheimer's appointment \"a real stroke of genius on the part of General Groves, who was not generally considered to be a genius\".\nOppenheimer favored a location for the laboratory in New Mexico, not far from his ranch. On November 16, 1942, he, Groves and others toured a prospective site. Oppenheimer feared that the high cliffs surrounding it would feel claustrophobic, and there was concern about possible flooding. He then suggested a site he knew well: a flat mesa near Santa Fe, New Mexico, which was the site of a private boys' school, the Los Alamos Ranch School. The engineers were concerned about the poor access road and the water supply but otherwise felt that it was ideal. The Los Alamos Laboratory was built on the site of the school, taking over some of its buildings, while many new buildings were erected in great haste. At the laboratory, Oppenheimer assembled a group of the top physicists of the time, whom he called the \"luminaries\".\nLos Alamos was initially supposed to be a military laboratory, and Oppenheimer and other researchers were to be commissioned into the Army. He went so far as to order himself a lieutenant colonel's uniform and take the Army physical test, which he failed. Army doctors considered him underweight at , diagnosed his chronic cough as tuberculosis, and were concerned about his chronic lumbosacral joint pain. The plan to commission scientists fell through when Rabi and Robert Bacher balked at the idea. James B. Conant, Groves, and Oppenheimer devised a compromise whereby the University of California operated the laboratory under contract to the War Department. It soon turned out that Oppenheimer had hugely underestimated the magnitude of the project: Los Alamos grew from a few hundred people in 1943 to over 6,000 in 1945.\nScientists were paid at the salary they were already receiving. However this meant that Oppenheimer, who had been paid by a state university, originally received much less than some of his subordinates. Groves decided to make an exception and increased his salary to be equal to that of the others (without consulting him).\nOppenheimer at first had difficulty with the organizational division of large groups but rapidly learned the art of large-scale administration after he took up permanent residence at Los Alamos. He was noted for his mastery of all scientific aspects of the project and for his efforts to control the inevitable cultural conflicts between scientists and the military. Victor Weisskopf wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oppenheimer directed these studies, theoretical and experimental, in the real sense of the words. Here his uncanny speed in grasping the main points of any subject was a decisive factor; he could acquaint himself with the essential details of every part of the work.\nHe did not direct from the head office. He was intellectually and physically present at each decisive step. He was present in the laboratory or in the seminar rooms, when a new effect was measured, when a new idea was conceived. It was not that he contributed so many ideas or suggestions; he did so sometimes, but his main influence came from something else. It was his continuous and intense presence, which produced a sense of direct participation in all of us; it created that unique atmosphere of enthusiasm and challenge that pervaded the place throughout its time.\nBomb design.\nAt this point in the war, there was considerable anxiety among the scientists that the German nuclear weapons program might be progressing faster than the Manhattan Project. In a letter dated May 25, 1943, Oppenheimer responded to a proposal by Fermi to use radioactive materials to poison German food supplies. Oppenheimer asked Fermi whether he could produce enough strontium without letting too many in on the secret. Oppenheimer continued, \"I think we should not attempt a plan unless we can poison food sufficient to kill a half a million men.\"\nIn 1943, development efforts were directed to a plutonium gun-type fission weapon called \"Thin Man\". Initial research on the properties of plutonium was done using cyclotron-generated plutonium-239, which was extremely pure but could be created only in tiny amounts. When Los Alamos received the first sample of plutonium from the X-10 Graphite Reactor in April 1944, a problem was discovered: reactor-bred plutonium had a higher concentration of plutonium-240 (five times that of \"cyclotron\" plutonium), making it unsuitable for use in a gun-type weapon.\nIn July 1944, Oppenheimer abandoned the Thin Man gun design in favor of an implosion-type weapon; a smaller version of Thin Man became Little Boy. Using chemical explosive lenses, a sub-critical sphere of fissile material could be squeezed into a smaller and denser form. The metal needed to travel only very short distances, so the critical mass would be assembled in much less time. In August 1944, Oppenheimer implemented a sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory to focus on implosion. He concentrated the development efforts on the gun-type device, but now with a simpler design that only had to work with highly enriched uranium, in a single group. This device became Little Boy in February 1945. After a mammoth research effort, the more complex design of the implosion device, known as the \"Christy gadget\" after Robert Christy, another student of Oppenheimer's, was finalized as Fat Man in a meeting in Oppenheimer's office on February 28, 1945.\nIn May 1945, an Interim Committee was created to advise and report on wartime and postwar policies regarding the use of nuclear energy. The Interim Committee established a scientific panel consisting of Oppenheimer, Arthur Compton, Fermi, and Lawrence to advise it on scientific issues. In its presentation to the Interim Committee, the panel offered its opinion not just on an atomic bomb's likely physical effects but also on its likely military and political impact. This included opinions on such sensitive issues as whether the Soviet Union should be advised of the weapon in advance of its use against Japan.\nTrinity.\nIn the early morning hours of July 16, 1945, near Alamogordo, New Mexico, the work at Los Alamos culminated in the test of the world's first nuclear weapon. Oppenheimer had code-named the site \"Trinity\" in mid-1944, saying later that the name came from John Donne's \"Holy Sonnets\"; he had been introduced to Donne's work in the 1930s by Jean Tatlock, who killed herself in January 1944.\nBrigadier General Thomas Farrell, who was present in the control bunker with Oppenheimer, recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dr. Oppenheimer, on whom had rested a very heavy burden, grew tenser as the last seconds ticked off. He scarcely breathed. He held on to a post to steady himself. For the last few seconds, he stared directly ahead and then when the announcer shouted \"Now!\" and there came this tremendous burst of light followed shortly thereafter by the deep growling roar of the explosion, his face relaxed into an expression of tremendous relief.\nOppenheimer's brother Frank recalled Oppenheimer's first words as \"I guess it worked.\"\nAccording to a 1949 magazine profile, while witnessing the explosion Oppenheimer thought of verses from the \"Bhagavad Gita\": \"If the radiance of a thousand suns were to burst at once into the sky, that would be like the splendor of the mighty one... Now I am become Death, the shatterer of worlds.\" In 1965 he recalled the moment this way:\nRabi described seeing Oppenheimer somewhat later: \"I'll never forget his walk ... like \"High Noon\"\u00a0... this kind of strut. He had done it.\" Despite many scientists' opposition to using the bomb on Japan, Compton, Fermi, and Oppenheimer believed that a test explosion would not convince Japan to surrender. At an August 6 assembly at Los Alamos, the evening of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Oppenheimer took to the stage and clasped his hands together \"like a prize-winning boxer\" while the crowd cheered. He expressed regret that the weapon was ready too late for use against Nazi Germany.\nOn August 17, however, Oppenheimer traveled to Washington to hand-deliver a letter to Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson expressing his revulsion and his wish to see nuclear weapons banned. In October he met with President Harry S. Truman, who dismissed Oppenheimer's concern about an arms race with the Soviet Union and belief that atomic energy should be under international control. Truman became infuriated when Oppenheimer said, \"Mr. President, I feel I have blood on my hands\", responding that he (Truman) bore sole responsibility for the decision to use atomic weapons against Japan, and later said, \"I don't want to see that son of a bitch in this office ever again.\"\nFor his services as director of Los Alamos, Oppenheimer was awarded the Medal for Merit by Truman in 1946.\nPostwar activities.\nOnce the public learned of the Manhattan Project after the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Oppenheimer\u2014suddenly a household name as the \"father of the atomic bomb\"\u2014became a national spokesman for science, emblematic of a new type of technocratic power; he appeared on the covers of \"Life\" and \"Time\". Nuclear physics became a powerful force as nations realized the strategic and political power that atomic weapons conferred. Like many scientists of his generation, Oppenheimer felt that security from atomic bombs could come only from a transnational organization such as the newly formed United Nations, which could institute a program to stifle a nuclear arms race.\nInstitute for Advanced Study.\nIn November 1945, Oppenheimer left Los Alamos to return to Caltech, but soon found that his heart was no longer in teaching. In 1947, he accepted an offer from Lewis Strauss to take up the directorship of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. This meant moving back east and leaving Ruth Tolman, the wife of his friend Richard Tolman, with whom he had begun an affair after leaving Los Alamos. The job came with a salary of $20,000 per annum, plus rent-free accommodation in the director's house, a 17th-century manor with a cook and groundskeeper, surrounded by of woodlands. He collected European furniture, and French Post-Impressionist and Fauvist artworks. His art collection included works by C\u00e9zanne, Derain, Despiau, de Vlaminck, Picasso, Rembrandt, Renoir, Van Gogh and Vuillard.\nOppenheimer brought together intellectuals at the height of their powers and from a variety of disciplines to answer the most pertinent questions of the age. He directed and encouraged the research of many well-known scientists, including Freeman Dyson, and the duo of Chen Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee, who won a Nobel Prize for their discovery of parity non-conservation. He also instituted temporary memberships for scholars from the humanities, such as T. S. Eliot and George F. Kennan. Some of these activities were resented by a few members of the mathematics faculty, who wanted the institute to stay a bastion of pure scientific research. Abraham Pais said that Oppenheimer himself thought that one of his failures at the institute was being unable to bring together scholars from the natural sciences and the humanities.\nDuring a series of conferences in New York\u2014the Shelter Island Conference in 1947, the Pocono Conference in 1948, and the Oldstone Conference in 1949\u2014physicists transitioned from war work back to theoretical issues. Under Oppenheimer's direction, physicists tackled the greatest outstanding problem of the pre-war years: infinite, divergent, and seemingly nonsensical expressions in the quantum electrodynamics of elementary particles. Julian Schwinger, Richard Feynman and Shin'ichiro Tomonaga tackled the problem of regularization, and developed techniques that became known as renormalization. Freeman Dyson was able to prove that their procedures gave similar results. The problem of meson absorption and Hideki Yukawa's theory of mesons as the carrier particles of the strong nuclear force were also tackled. Probing questions from Oppenheimer prompted Robert Marshak's innovative two-meson hypothesis: that there are actually two types of mesons, pions and muons. This led to Cecil Frank Powell's breakthrough and subsequent Nobel Prize for the discovery of the pion.\nOppenheimer served as director of the institute until 1966, when he gave up the position due to his failing health. As of 2023[ [update]], he is the longest-serving director of the institute.\nAtomic Energy Commission.\nAs a member of the Board of Consultants to a committee appointed by Truman, Oppenheimer strongly influenced the 1946 Acheson\u2013Lilienthal Report. In this report, the committee advocated the creation of an international Atomic Development Authority, which would own all fissionable material and the means of its production, such as mines and laboratories, and atomic power plants where it could be used for peaceful energy production. Bernard Baruch was appointed to translate this report into a proposal to the United Nations, resulting in the Baruch Plan of 1946. The Baruch Plan introduced many additional provisions regarding enforcement, in particular requiring inspection of the Soviet Union's uranium resources. It was seen as an attempt to maintain the United States' nuclear monopoly and rejected by the Soviets. With this, it became clear to Oppenheimer that an arms race was unavoidable, due to the mutual suspicion of the United States and the Soviet Union, which even Oppenheimer was starting to distrust.\nAfter the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) came into being in 1947 as a civilian agency in control of nuclear research and weapons issues, Oppenheimer was appointed as the chairman of its General Advisory Committee (GAC). From this position, he advised on a number of nuclear-related issues, including project funding, laboratory construction and even international policy\u2014though the GAC's advice was not always heeded. As chairman of the GAC, Oppenheimer lobbied vigorously for international arms control and funding for basic science, and attempted to influence policy away from a heated arms race.\nThe first atomic bomb test by the Soviet Union in August 1949 came earlier than Americans expected, and over the next several months, there was an intense debate within the U.S. government, military, and scientific communities over whether to proceed with the development of the far more powerful, nuclear fusion\u2013based hydrogen bomb, then known as \"the Super\". Oppenheimer had been aware of the possibility of a thermonuclear weapon since the days of the Manhattan Project and had allocated a limited amount of theoretical research work toward the possibility at the time, but nothing more than that, given the pressing need to develop a fission weapon. Immediately following the end of the war, Oppenheimer argued against continuing work on the Super at that time, due to both lack of need and the enormous human casualties that would result from its use.\nNow in October 1949, Oppenheimer and the GAC recommended against the development of the Super. He and the other GAC members were motivated partly by ethical concerns, feeling that such a weapon could only be strategically used, resulting in millions of deaths: \"Its use therefore carries much further than the atomic bomb itself the policy of exterminating civilian populations.\" They also had practical qualms, as there was no workable design for a hydrogen bomb at the time. Regarding the possibility of the Soviet Union developing a thermonuclear weapon, the GAC felt that the United States could have an adequate stockpile of atomic weapons to retaliate against any thermonuclear attack. In that connection, Oppenheimer and the others were concerned about the opportunity costs that would be incurred if nuclear reactors were diverted from materials needed for atom bomb production to the materials such as tritium needed for a thermonuclear weapon.\nA majority of the AEC subsequently endorsed the GAC recommendation, and Oppenheimer thought that the fight against the Super would triumph, but proponents of the weapon lobbied the White House vigorously. On January 31, 1950, Truman, who was predisposed to proceed with the development of the weapon anyway, made the formal decision to do so. Oppenheimer and other GAC opponents of the project, especially James B. Conant, felt disheartened and considered resigning from the committee. They stayed on, though their views on the hydrogen bomb were well known.\nIn 1951, Teller and mathematician Stanislaw Ulam developed the Teller\u2013Ulam design for a hydrogen bomb. This new design seemed technically feasible and Oppenheimer officially acceded to the weapon's development, while still looking for ways in which its testing or deployment or use could be questioned. As he later recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The program we had in 1949 was a tortured thing that you could well argue did not make a great deal of technical sense. It was therefore possible to argue also that you did not want it even if you could have it. The program in 1951 was technically so sweet that you could not argue about that. The issues became purely the military, the political and the humane problem of what you were going to do about it once you had it.\nOppenheimer, Conant, and Lee DuBridge, another member who had opposed the H-bomb decision, left the GAC when their terms expired in August 1952. Truman had declined to reappoint them, as he wanted new voices on the committee who were more in support of H-bomb development. In addition, various opponents of Oppenheimer had communicated to Truman their desire that Oppenheimer leave the committee.\nPanels and study groups.\nOppenheimer played a role on a number of government panels and study projects during the late 1940s and early 1950s, some of which thrust him into controversies and power struggles.\nIn 1948, Oppenheimer chaired the Department of Defense's Long-Range Objectives Panel, a body created by AEC liaison Donald F. Carpenter. It looked at the military utility of nuclear weapons, including how they might be delivered. After a year's worth of study, in spring 1952, Oppenheimer wrote the draft report of Project GABRIEL, which examined the dangers of nuclear fallout. Oppenheimer was also a member of the Science Advisory Committee of the Office of Defense Mobilization.\nOppenheimer participated in Project Charles during 1951, which examined the possibility of creating an effective air defense of the United States against atomic attack, and in the follow-on Project East River in 1952, which, with Oppenheimer's input, recommended building a warning system that would provide one-hour notice of an impending atomic attack against American cities. Those two projects led to Project Lincoln in 1952, a large effort on which Oppenheimer was one of the senior scientists. Undertaken at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, which had recently been founded to study issues of air defense, this in turn led to the Lincoln Summer Study Group, in which Oppenheimer became a key figure. Oppenheimer's and other scientists' urging that resources be allocated to air defense in preference to large retaliatory strike capabilities brought an immediate response of objection from the United States Air Force (USAF), and debate ensued about whether Oppenheimer and allied scientists, or the Air Force, was embracing an inflexible \"Maginot Line\" philosophy. In any case, the Summer Study Group's work eventually led to the building of the Distant Early Warning Line.\nTeller, who had been so uninterested in work on the atomic bomb at Los Alamos during the war that Oppenheimer had given him time instead to work on his own project of the hydrogen bomb, left Los Alamos in 1951 to help found, in 1952, a second laboratory at what would become the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Oppenheimer had defended the history of work done at Los Alamos and opposed the creation of the second laboratory.\nProject Vista looked at improving U.S. tactical warfare capabilities. Oppenheimer was a late addition to the project in 1951 but wrote a key chapter of the report that challenged the doctrine of strategic bombardment and advocated smaller tactical nuclear weapons which would be more useful in a limited theater conflict against enemy forces. Strategic thermonuclear weapons delivered by long-range jet bombers would necessarily be under the control of the U.S. Air Force, whereas the Vista conclusions recommended an increased role for the U.S. Army and U.S. Navy as well. The Air Force reaction to this was immediately hostile, and it succeeded in getting the Vista report suppressed.\nDuring 1952, Oppenheimer chaired the five-member State Department Panel of Consultants on Disarmament, which first urged that the United States postpone its planned first test of the hydrogen bomb and seek a thermonuclear test ban with the Soviet Union, on the grounds that avoiding a test might forestall the development of a catastrophic new weapon and open the way for new arms agreements between the two nations. But the panel lacked political allies in Washington, and the Ivy Mike shot went ahead as scheduled. The panel then issued a final report in January 1953, which, influenced by many of Oppenheimer's deeply felt beliefs, presented a pessimistic vision of the future in which neither the United States nor the Soviet Union could establish effective nuclear superiority but both sides could inflict terrible damage on the other.\nOne of the panel's recommendations, which Oppenheimer felt was especially important, was that the U.S. government practice less secrecy and more openness toward the American people about the realities of the nuclear balance and the dangers of nuclear warfare. This notion found a receptive audience in the new Eisenhower administration and led to the creation of Operation Candor. Oppenheimer subsequently presented his view on the lack of utility of ever-larger nuclear arsenals to the American public in a June 1953 article in \"Foreign Affairs\", and it received attention in major American newspapers.\nThus by 1953, Oppenheimer had reached another peak of influence, being involved in multiple different government posts and projects and having access to crucial strategic plans and force levels. But at the same time, he had become the enemy of the proponents of strategic bombardment, who viewed his opposition to the H-bomb, followed by these accumulated positions and stances, with a combination of bitterness and distrust. This view was paired with their fear that Oppenheimer's fame and powers of persuasion had made him dangerously influential in government, military, and scientific circles.\nSecurity hearing.\nThe FBI under J. Edgar Hoover had been following Oppenheimer since before the war, when he showed Communist sympathies as a professor at Berkeley and had been close to members of the Communist Party, including his wife and brother. They strongly suspected that he himself was a member of the party, based on wiretaps in which party members referred to him or appeared to refer to him as a communist, as well as reports from informers within the party. He had been under close surveillance since the early 1940s, his home and office bugged, his phone tapped and his mail opened.\nIn August 1943, Oppenheimer told Manhattan Project security agents that George Eltenton, whom he did not know, had solicited three men at Los Alamos for nuclear secrets on behalf of the Soviet Union. When pressed on the issue in later interviews, Oppenheimer admitted that the only person who had approached him was his friend Haakon Chevalier, a Berkeley professor of French literature, who had mentioned the matter privately at a dinner at Oppenheimer's house.\nThe FBI furnished Oppenheimer's political enemies with evidence that intimated communist ties. These enemies included Strauss, an AEC commissioner who had long harbored resentment against Oppenheimer both for his activity in opposing the hydrogen bomb and for his humiliation of Strauss before Congress some years earlier. Strauss had expressed opposition to exporting radioactive isotopes to other nations, and Oppenheimer had called them \"less important than electronic devices but more important than, let us say, vitamins.\"\nOn June 7, 1949, Oppenheimer testified before the House Un-American Activities Committee that he had associations with the Communist Party USA in the 1930s. He testified that some of his students, including David Bohm, Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, Philip Morrison, Bernard Peters, and Joseph Weinberg had been communists at the time they had worked with him at Berkeley. Frank Oppenheimer and his wife Jackie testified before HUAC that they had been members of the Communist Party USA. Frank was subsequently fired from his University of Minnesota position. Unable to find work in physics for many years, he became a cattle rancher in Colorado. He later taught high school physics and was the founder of the San Francisco Exploratorium.\nThe triggering event for the security hearing happened on November 7, 1953, when William Liscum Borden, who until earlier in the year had been the executive director of the United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, sent Hoover a letter saying that \"more probably than not J. Robert Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union.\" Eisenhower never exactly believed the allegations in the letter but felt compelled to move forward with an investigation, and on December 3, he ordered that a \"blank wall\" be placed between Oppenheimer and any government or military secrets.\nOn December 21, 1953, Strauss told Oppenheimer that his security clearance had been suspended, pending resolution of a series of charges outlined in a letter, and discussed his resigning by way of requesting termination of his consulting contract with the AEC. Oppenheimer chose not to resign and requested a hearing instead. The charges were outlined in a letter from Kenneth D. Nichols, general manager of the AEC. Nichols, who had thought highly of Oppenheimer's work on the earlier Long-Range Objectives Panel, said that \"in spite of [Oppenheimer's] record he is loyal to the United States.\" He nonetheless drafted the letter, but later wrote that he was \"not happy with the inclusion of a reference concerning Oppenheimer's opposition to the hydrogen bomb development.\"\nThe hearing that followed in April\u2013May 1954, which was held in secret, focused on Oppenheimer's past communist ties and his association during the Manhattan Project with suspected disloyal or communist scientists. It then continued with an examination of Oppenheimer's opposition to the H-bomb and stances in subsequent projects and study groups. A transcript of the hearings was published in June 1954, with some redactions. In 2014, the U.S. Department of Energy made the full transcript public.\nOne of the key elements in this hearing was Oppenheimer's earliest testimony about George Eltenton's approach to various Los Alamos scientists, a story that Oppenheimer confessed he had fabricated to protect his friend Haakon Chevalier. Unknown to Oppenheimer, both versions were recorded during his interrogations of a decade before. He was surprised on the witness stand with transcripts of these, which he had not been given a chance to review. In fact, Oppenheimer had never told Chevalier that he had finally named him, and the testimony had cost Chevalier his job. Both Chevalier and Eltenton confirmed mentioning that they had a way to get information to the Soviets, Eltenton admitting he said this to Chevalier and Chevalier admitting he mentioned it to Oppenheimer, but both put the matter in terms of gossip and denied any thought or suggestion of treason or thoughts of espionage, either in planning or in deed. Neither was ever convicted of any crime.\nTeller testified that he considered Oppenheimer loyal to the U.S. government, but that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a great number of cases, I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer act\u2014I understand that Dr. Oppenheimer acted\u2014in a way which for me was exceedingly hard to understand. I thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues and his actions frankly appeared to me confused and complicated. To this extent I feel that I would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand better, and therefore trust more. In this very limited sense I would like to express a feeling that I would feel personally more secure if public matters would rest in other hands.\nTeller's testimony outraged the scientific community, and he was virtually ostracized from academic science. Ernest Lawrence refused to testify, pleading an attack of ulcerative colitis, but an interview in which Lawrence condemned Oppenheimer was submitted in evidence.\nMany top scientists, as well as government and military figures, testified on Oppenheimer's behalf. Physicist Isidor Isaac Rabi said that the suspension of the security clearance was unnecessary: \"he is a consultant, and if you don't want to consult the guy, you don't consult him, period.\" But Groves testified that, under the stricter security criteria in effect in 1954, he \"would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer today\".\nAt the conclusion of the hearings, the board revoked Oppenheimer's clearance by a 2\u20131 vote. It unanimously cleared him of disloyalty, but a majority found that 20 of the 24 charges were either true or substantially true and that Oppenheimer would represent a security risk. Then on June 29, 1954, the AEC upheld the findings of the Personnel Security Board, by a 4\u20131 decision, with Strauss writing the majority opinion. In that opinion, he stressed Oppenheimer's \"defects of character\", \"falsehoods, evasions and misrepresentations\", and past associations with Communists and people close to Communists as the primary reasons for his determination. He did not comment on Oppenheimer's loyalty.\nDuring his hearing, Oppenheimer testified on the left-wing activities of ten of his colleagues and previous acquaintances, mostly in reference to activities in the late 1930s. These ten people's activities were already public knowledge through prior hearings and activities (such as Addis, Chevelier, Lambert, May, Pitman, and I. Folkoff) or already known to the FBI. Some believe that had his clearance not been stripped, he might have been remembered as someone who \"named names\" to save his own reputation, but as it happened, most in the scientific community saw him as a martyr to McCarthyism, an eclectic liberal unjustly attacked by warmongering enemies, symbolic of the shift of scientific work from academia into the military. Wernher von Braun told a Congressional committee: \"In England, Oppenheimer would have been knighted.\"\nIn a seminar at The Wilson Center in 2009, based on an extensive analysis of the Vassiliev notebooks taken from the KGB archives, John Earl Haynes, Harvey Klehr and Alexander Vassiliev confirmed that Oppenheimer never was involved in espionage for the Soviet Union, though Soviet intelligence tried repeatedly to recruit him. Further, he had several persons removed from the Manhattan Project who had sympathies to the Soviet Union. For their part, Jerrold and Leona Schecter conclude that based on \"The Merkulov Letter\", Oppenheimer must have been only a \"facilitator\", not a spy in the strict sense (although he would fall under that legal category in the U.S.).\nOn December 16, 2022, United States Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm vacated the 1954 revocation of Oppenheimer's security clearance. Her statement said, \"In 1954, the Atomic Energy Commission revoked Dr. Oppenheimer's security clearance through a flawed process that violated the Commission's own regulations. As time has passed, more evidence has come to light of the bias and unfairness of the process that Dr. Oppenheimer was subjected to while the evidence of his loyalty and love of country have only been further affirmed.\" Granholm's decision has drawn criticism.\nFinal years.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe frontiers of science are separated now by long years of study, by specialized vocabularies, arts, techniques, and knowledge from the common heritage even of a most civilized society; and anyone working at the frontier of such science is in that sense a very long way from home, a long way too from the practical arts that were its matrix and origin, as indeed they were of what we today call art.\nOppenheimer, \"Prospects in the Arts and Sciences\" in \"Man's Right to Knowledge\"\nStarting in 1954, Oppenheimer lived for several months of each year on the island of Saint John in the U.S. Virgin Islands. In 1957, he purchased a tract of land on Gibney Beach, where he built a spartan home on the beach. He spent considerable time sailing with his daughter Toni and wife Kitty.\nOppenheimer's first public appearance following the stripping of his security clearance was a lecture titled \"Prospects in the Arts and Sciences\" for the Columbia University Bicentennial radio show \"Man's Right to Knowledge\", in which he outlined his philosophy and his thoughts on the role of science in the modern world. He had been selected for the final episode of the lecture series two years prior to the security hearing, though the university remained adamant that he stay on even after the controversy.\nIn February 1955, the president of the University of Washington, Henry Schmitz, abruptly canceled an invitation to Oppenheimer to deliver a series of lectures there. Schmitz's decision caused an uproar among the students; 1,200 of them signed a petition protesting the decision, and Schmitz was burned in effigy. While they marched in protest, the state of Washington outlawed the Communist Party, and required all government employees to swear a loyalty oath. Edwin Albrecht Uehling, the chairman of the physics department and a colleague of Oppenheimer's from Berkeley, appealed to the university senate, and Schmitz's decision was overturned by a vote of 56 to 40. Oppenheimer stopped briefly in Seattle to change planes on a trip to Oregon and was joined for coffee during his layover by several University of Washington faculty, but Oppenheimer never lectured there. Oppenheimer gave two lectures on the \"Constitution of Matter\" at Oregon State University during this trip.\nOppenheimer was increasingly concerned about the danger that scientific inventions could pose to humanity. He joined with Albert Einstein, Bertrand Russell, Joseph Rotblat, and other eminent scientists and academics to establish what would eventually, in 1960, become the World Academy of Art and Science. Significantly, after his public humiliation, he did not sign the major open protests against nuclear weapons of the 1950s, including the Russell\u2013Einstein Manifesto of 1955, nor, though invited, did he attend the first Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs in 1957.\nIn his speeches and public writings, Oppenheimer continually stressed the difficulty of managing the power of knowledge in a world in which the freedom of science to exchange ideas was more and more hobbled by political concerns. Oppenheimer delivered the Reith Lectures on the BBC in 1953, which were subsequently published as \"Science and the Common Understanding\".\nIn 1955, Oppenheimer published \"The Open Mind\", a collection of eight lectures that he had given since 1946 on the subject of nuclear weapons and popular culture. Oppenheimer rejected the idea of nuclear gunboat diplomacy. \"The purposes of this country in the field of foreign policy\", he wrote, \"cannot in any real or enduring way be achieved by coercion.\"\nIn 1957, the philosophy and psychology departments at Harvard invited Oppenheimer to deliver the William James Lectures. An influential group of Harvard alumni led by Edwin Ginn that included Archibald Roosevelt protested the decision. 1,200 people attended Oppenheimer's six lectures, \"The Hope of Order\", in Sanders Theatre. In 1962, Oppenheimer delivered the Whidden Lectures at McMaster University, which were published in 1964 as \"The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for Physicists\".\nDeprived of political influence, Oppenheimer continued to lecture, write, and work on physics. He toured Europe and Japan, giving talks about the history of science, the role of science in society, and the nature of the universe. Oppenheimer was warmly received during his three-week lecture tour in Japan in 1960, just 15 years after the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. He indicated interest in seeing Hiroshima, but the Japan Committee for Intellectual Interchange, which sponsored the tour, decided it would be best not to stop at Hiroshima or Nagasaki, and Oppenheimer never went to either city. In 1963 he spoke about the importance of studying the history of science at the dedication of the Niels Bohr Library and Archives of the American Institute of Physics.\nOppenheimer continued to visit academic institutions throughout his final years. He remained a controversial figure to students, faculty, and communities. In November 1955, Oppenheimer became the inaugural week-long visiting fellow at the Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, New Hampshire.\nIn September 1957, France made Oppenheimer an Officer of the Legion of Honor, and on May 3, 1962, he was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society in Britain.\nEnrico Fermi Award.\nIn 1959, then-Senator John F. Kennedy voted to deny Lewis Strauss, Oppenheimer's greatest detractor in his security hearings, confirmation as Secretary of Commerce, effectively ending Strauss's political career. In 1962, Kennedy\u2015now President of the United States\u2015invited Oppenheimer to a ceremony honoring 49 Nobel Prize winners. At the event, AEC chairman Glenn Seaborg asked Oppenheimer whether he wanted another security hearing. Oppenheimer declined.\nIn March 1963, the General Advisory committee of the AEC selected Oppenheimer to receive its Enrico Fermi Award, an award Congress had created in 1954. Kennedy was assassinated before he could present the award to Oppenheimer, but his successor, Lyndon Johnson, did so in a December 1963 ceremony at which he cited Oppenheimer's \"contributions to theoretical physics as a teacher and originator of ideas, [and] leadership of the Los Alamos Laboratory and the atomic energy program during critical years.\" He called the signing of the award one of Kennedy's greatest acts as president. Oppenheimer told Johnson, \"I think it is just possible, Mr. President, that it has taken some charity and some courage for you to make this award today.\"\nKennedy's widow, Jackie, made a point of attending the ceremony so she could tell Oppenheimer how much her husband had wanted him to have the medal. Also present were Teller, who had recommended Oppenheimer receive the award in hopes that it would heal the rift between them, and Henry D. Smyth, who in 1954 had been the lone dissenter from the AEC's 4\u20131 decision to define Oppenheimer as a security risk.\nBut congressional hostility to Oppenheimer lingered. Senator Bourke B. Hickenlooper formally protested Oppenheimer's selection just eight days after Kennedy was killed, and several Republican members of the House AEC Committee boycotted the ceremony.\nThe rehabilitation represented by the award was symbolic, as Oppenheimer still lacked a security clearance and could have no effect on official policy, but the award came with a $50,000 tax-free stipend.\nDeath.\nIn late 1965, Oppenheimer was diagnosed with throat cancer, likely caused by chain smoking cigarettes for much of his life. After inconclusive surgery, he underwent unsuccessful radiation treatment and chemotherapy late in 1966. On February 18, 1967, he died in his sleep at his home in Princeton, aged 62 years. A memorial service was held a week later at Alexander Hall on the campus of Princeton University. The service was attended by 600 of his scientific, political, and military associates, including Bethe, Groves, Kennan, Lilienthal, Rabi, Smyth, and Wigner. His brother Frank and the rest of his family were there, as was the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the novelist John O'Hara, and George Balanchine, the director of the New York City Ballet. Bethe, Kennan and Smyth gave brief eulogies. Oppenheimer's body was cremated and his ashes placed in an urn, which Kitty dropped into the sea within sight of the Saint John beach house.\nIn October 1972, Kitty died from an intestinal infection complicated by a pulmonary embolism. She was 62. Oppenheimer's ranch in New Mexico was then inherited by their son Peter, and the beach property was inherited by their daughter Katherine \"Toni\" Oppenheimer Silber. Toni's two marriages ended in divorce. She obtained a temporary position as a translator at the United Nations in 1969, but the position required an FBI security clearance, which never came through due to the old charges against her father. She moved to the family beach house on Saint John and committed suicide by hanging there in 1977. She left the property to \"the people of Saint John.\" The house was built too close to the coast and was destroyed by a hurricane. As of 2007[ [update]], the Virgin Islands Government maintained a Community Center nearby.\nLegacy.\nWhen Oppenheimer was stripped of his political influence in 1954, he symbolized for many the folly of scientists who believed they could control the use of their research, and the dilemmas of moral responsibility presented by science in the nuclear age. The hearings were motivated by politics and personal enmities, and reflected a stark divide in the nuclear weapons community. One group passionately feared the Soviet Union as a mortal enemy, and believed having the most powerful weaponry capable of providing the most massive retaliation was the best strategy to combat that threat. The other group thought developing the H-bomb would not improve Western security and that using the weapon against large civilian populations would be genocide; they advocated instead a more flexible response to the Soviets involving tactical nuclear weapons, strengthened conventional forces, and arms control agreements. The first of these groups was the more powerful in political terms, and Oppenheimer became its target.\nRather than consistently oppose the \"Red-baiting\" of the late 1940s and early 1950s, Oppenheimer testified against former colleagues and students, before and during his hearing. In one incident, his damning testimony against former student Bernard Peters was selectively leaked to the press. Historians have interpreted this as an attempt by Oppenheimer to please his colleagues in the government and perhaps to divert attention from his own previous left-wing ties and those of his brother. In the end, it became a liability when it became clear Oppenheimer had really doubted Peters's loyalty, and recommending him for the Manhattan Project was reckless, or at least contradictory.\nPopular depictions of Oppenheimer view his security struggles as a confrontation between right-wing militarists (represented by Teller) and left-wing intellectuals (represented by Oppenheimer) over the moral question of weapons of mass destruction. Biographers and historians have often viewed Oppenheimer's story as a tragedy. National security advisor and academic McGeorge Bundy, who worked with Oppenheimer on the State Department Panel of Consultants, wrote: \"Quite aside from Oppenheimer's extraordinary rise and fall in prestige and power, his character has fully tragic dimensions in its combination of charm and arrogance, intelligence and blindness, awareness and insensitivity, and perhaps above all daring and fatalism. All these, in different ways, were turned against him in the hearings.\"\nThe question of scientists' responsibility toward humanity inspired Bertolt Brecht's drama \"Life of Galileo\" (1955), left its imprint on Friedrich D\u00fcrrenmatt's \"The Physicists\", and is the basis of John Adams's 2005 opera \"Doctor Atomic\", which was commissioned to portray Oppenheimer as a modern-day Faust. Heinar Kipphardt's play \"In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer\", after appearing on West German television, had its theatrical release in Berlin and Munich in October 1964. The 1967 Finnish television film \"Oppenheimerin tapaus\" (\"The Case of Oppenheimer\") is based on the same play and produced by the Yleisradio company. Oppenheimer's objections resulted in an exchange of correspondence with Kipphardt, in which Kipphardt offered to make corrections but defended the play. It premiered in New York in 1968, with Joseph Wiseman as Oppenheimer. \"New York Times\" theater critic Clive Barnes called it an \"angry play and a partisan play\" that sided with Oppenheimer but portrayed him as a \"tragic fool and genius.\" Oppenheimer had difficulty with this portrayal. After reading a transcript of Kipphardt's play soon after it began to be performed, Oppenheimer threatened to sue Kipphardt, decrying \"improvisations which were contrary to history and to the nature of the people involved.\" Later Oppenheimer told an interviewer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The whole damn thing [his security hearing] was a farce, and these people are trying to make a tragedy out of it. ...\u00a0I had never said that I had regretted participating in a responsible way in the making of the bomb. I said that perhaps he [Kipphardt] had forgotten Guernica, Coventry, Hamburg, Dresden, Dachau, Warsaw, and Tokyo; but I had not, and that if he found it so difficult to understand, he should write a play about something else.\nOppenheimer is the subject of many biographies, including \"American Prometheus\" (2005) by Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, which won the 2006 Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography. The 1980 BBC TV serial \"Oppenheimer\", starring Sam Waterston, won three BAFTA Television Awards. \"The Day After Trinity\", a 1980 documentary about Oppenheimer and the atomic bomb, was nominated for an Academy Award and received a Peabody Award. Oppenheimer's life is explored in Tom Morton-Smith's 2015 play \"Oppenheimer\", and the 1989 film \"Fat Man and Little Boy\", where he was portrayed by Dwight Schultz. Also in 1989, David Strathairn played Oppenheimer in the TV film \"Day One\". In the 2023 American film \"Oppenheimer\", directed by Christopher Nolan and based on \"American Prometheus\", Oppenheimer is portrayed by Cillian Murphy. The film won the Academy Award for best picture, and Murphy won for best actor.\nA centennial conference about Oppenheimer's legacy was held in 2004 at the University of California, Berkeley, alongside a digital exhibition on his life, with the conference proceedings published in 2005 as \"Reappraising Oppenheimer: Centennial Studies and Reflections\". His papers are in the Library of Congress.\nAs a scientist, Oppenheimer was remembered by his students and colleagues as a brilliant researcher and engaging teacher who founded modern theoretical physics in the United States. \"More than any other man\", Bethe wrote, \"he was responsible for raising American theoretical physics from a provincial adjunct of Europe to world leadership.\" Because his scientific attentions often changed rapidly, he never worked long enough on any one topic and carried it to fruition to merit the Nobel Prize, though his investigations contributing to the theory of black holes might have warranted the prize had he lived long enough to see them brought to fruition by later astrophysicists. An asteroid, 67085 Oppenheimer, was named in his honor on January 4, 2000, as was the lunar crater Oppenheimer in 1970.\nAs a military and public policy advisor, Oppenheimer was a leader in the shift toward technocracy in the interactions between science and the military, and in the emergence of \"big science\". During World War II, scientists became involved in military research to an unprecedented degree. Because of the threat fascism posed to Western civilization, they volunteered in great numbers for technological, and organizational, assistance to the Allied effort, resulting in powerful tools such as radar, the proximity fuze and operations research. As a cultured, intellectual, theoretical physicist who became a disciplined military organizer, Oppenheimer represented the shift away from the idea that scientists had their \"heads in the clouds\" and that knowledge of esoteric subjects like the composition of the atomic nucleus had no \"real-world\" applications.\nTwo days before the Trinity test, Oppenheimer expressed his hopes and fears in a quotation from Bhart\u1e5bhari's \"\u015aatakatraya\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39036", "revid": "15", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39036", "title": "Manhattan Engineer District", "text": ""}
{"id": "39037", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39037", "title": "Dowding", "text": ""}
{"id": "39038", "revid": "921080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39038", "title": "Hanford Site", "text": "Defunct American nuclear production site\nThe Hanford Site is a decommissioned nuclear production complex operated by the United States federal government on the Columbia River in Benton County in the U.S. state of Washington. It has also been known as SiteW and the Hanford Nuclear Reservation. Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project, the site was home to the Hanford Engineer Works and B\u00a0Reactor, the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. Plutonium manufactured at the site was used in the first atomic bomb, which was tested in the Trinity nuclear test, and in the Fat Man bomb used in the bombing of Nagasaki.\nDuring the Cold War, the project expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five large plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the more than 60,000 weapons built for the U.S. nuclear arsenal. Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced major technological achievements. The town of Richland, established by the Manhattan Project, became self-governing in 1958, and residents were allowed to purchase their properties. After sufficient plutonium had been produced, the production reactors were shut down between 1964 and 1971.\nMany early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate, resulting in the release of significant amounts of radioactive materials into the air and the Columbia River, resulting in higher rates of cancer in the surrounding area. The Hanford Site became the focus of the nation's largest environmental cleanup. A citizen-led Hanford Advisory Board provides recommendations from community stakeholders, including local and state governments, regional environmental organizations, business interests, and Native American tribes. Cleanup activity is still ongoing, with over 10,000 workers employed on cleanup activities.\nHanford hosts a commercial nuclear power plant, the Columbia Generating Station, and various centers for scientific research and development, such as the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, the Fast Flux Test Facility, and the LIGO Hanford Observatory. In 2015, it was designated as part of the Manhattan Project National Historical Park. Tourists can visit the site and B Reactor.\nGeography.\nThe Hanford Site occupies \u00a0\u2013 roughly equivalent to half the total area of Rhode Island\u00a0\u2013 within Benton County, Washington. It is a desert environment receiving less than of annual precipitation, covered mostly by shrub-steppe vegetation. The Columbia River flows along the site for approximately , forming its northern and eastern boundary. The Columbia and Yakima Rivers contain salmon, sturgeon, steelhead trout, and bass, and wildlife in the area includes skunks, muskrats, coyotes, raccoons, deer, eagles, hawks, and owls. The mountain cottontail is particularly abundant. The flora includes sagebrush, bitterbrush, a variety of grasses, prickly pear, and willow.\nThe original site was and included buffer areas across the river in Grant and Franklin counties. Some of this land has been returned to private use and is now covered with orchards, vineyards, and irrigated fields. The site is bordered on the southeast by the Tri\u2011Cities, a metropolitan area composed of Richland, Kennewick, Pasco, and smaller communities, and home to nearly 300,000 residents. Hanford is a primary economic base for these cities. In 2000 large portions of the original site were turned over to the Hanford Reach National Monument. The remainder was divided by function into three main areas: the nuclear reactors were located along the river in an area designated as the 100Area; the chemical separation complexes were located inland in the Central Plateau, designated as the 200Area; and support facilities were located in the southeast corner of the site, designated as the 300 Area.\nClimate.\nHanford is the site of Washington state's highest recorded temperature of , reached on June 29, 2021.\nEarly history.\nThe confluence of the Yakima, Snake, and Columbia rivers has been a meeting place for native peoples for centuries. The archaeological record of Native American habitation of this area stretches back over ten thousand years. Tribes and nations including the Yakama, Nez Perce, and Umatilla used the area for hunting, fishing, and gathering plant foods. Archaeologists have identified numerous Native American sites, including \"pit house villages, open campsites, fish farming sites, hunting/kill sites, game drive complexes, quarries, and spirit quest sites\", and two archaeological sites were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1976.\nIn 1855, Isaac Stevens, the governor of the Territory of Washington, negotiated with the Native American tribes to establish a reservation system, in which Native Americans could not occupy the area of the Hanford Site. Treaties were signed, but were often ignored, as the reservation system they mandated was not compatible with traditional food-gathering or family groupings. In September 1858 a military expedition under Colonel George Wright defeated the Native American tribes in the Battle of Spokane Plains to force compliance with the reservation system. Nonetheless, Native American use of the area continued into the 20th century. The Wanapum people were never forced onto a reservation, and they lived along the Columbia River in the Priest Rapids Valley until 1943.\nAfter gold was discovered in British Columbia, prospectors explored the Columbia River basin in search of gold, but with little success. Walla Walla, which had been established as a military post in 1858, became a center for mining supplies, and a general store was established at White Bluffs. A ranch was established in Yakima Valley by Ben Snipes in 1859, and the Northern Pacific Railroad was extended into the area beginning in 1879. The railroad engineers founded the towns of Kennewick and Pasco. Settlers moved into the region, initially along the Columbia River south of Priest Rapids. They established farms and orchards supported by small-scale irrigation projects, but most went bankrupt in the Panic of 1893. The Reclamation Act of 1902 provided for federal government participation in the financing of irrigation projects, and the population began expanding again, with small town centers at Hanford, White Bluffs and Richland established between 1905 and 1910. The Great Depression of the 1930s decreased the price of agricultural commodities and many farms were foreclosed on or abandoned. The economy was supported by the construction of the Grand Coulee Dam between 1933 and 1942, and the establishment of the Naval Air Station Pasco in 1942.\nManhattan Project.\nContractor selection.\nDuring World War II, the S-1 Section of the federal Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) sponsored a research project on plutonium. Research was conducted by scientists at the University of Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory. At the time, plutonium was a rare element that had only recently been synthesized in laboratories. It was theorized that plutonium was fissile and could be used in an atomic bomb. The United States government was concerned that Nazi Germany was developing a nuclear weapons program. The Metallurgical Laboratory physicists worked on designing nuclear reactors (\"piles\") that could irradiate uranium and transmute it into plutonium. Meanwhile, chemists investigated ways to separate plutonium from uranium.\nIn September 1942, Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves Jr. became the director of the Manhattan Project, as it came to be known. The project to build industrial-size plants for the manufacture of plutonium was codenamed the X\u201110 project. Groves engaged DuPont, a firm he had worked with in the past on the construction of explosives plants, to design, construct, and operate the plutonium manufacturing complex.\nTo avoid being labeled as merchants of death, as the company had been after World WarI, DuPont's executive committee insisted that it should receive no payment. For legal reasons, a Cost Plus Fixed Fee contract was agreed, with a fee of one dollar. The president of DuPont, Walter S. Carpenter Jr., was given assurances that the government was assuming all responsibility for the hazards involved in the project.\nSite selection.\nCarpenter expressed reservations about building the reactors at Oak Ridge, Tennessee; with Knoxville only away, a catastrophic accident might result in loss of life and severe health effects. Even a less deadly accident might disrupt vital war production, particularly of aluminum, and force the evacuation of the Manhattan Project's isotope separation plants. Spreading the facilities at Oak Ridge out more would require the purchase of more land and the expansion needed was still uncertain; for planning purposes, six reactors, and four chemical separation plants were envisioned.\nThe ideal site was described by eight criteria:\nThe most important of these criteria was the availability of electric power. The needs of war industries had created power shortages in many parts of the country, and use of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was ruled out because the Clinton Engineer Works was expected to use up all its surplus power. This led to consideration of alternative sites in the Pacific Northwest and Southwest, where there was surplus electrical power. Between December 18 and 31, 1942, just twelve days after the Metallurgical Laboratory team led by Enrico Fermi started up Chicago Pile\u00a01, the first nuclear reactor, a three-man party consisting of Colonel Franklin T. Matthias and DuPont engineers A. E. S. Hall and Gilbert P. Church inspected the most promising potential sites. Matthias reported to Groves that the Hanford Site was \"far more favorable in virtually all respects than any other\"; the survey party was particularly impressed by the fact that a high-voltage power line from Grand Coulee Dam to Bonneville Dam ran through the site, and there was an electrical substation on its edge. Groves visited the site on January 16, 1943, and approved the selection. The facility became known as the Hanford Engineer Works (HEW), and the site was codenamed SiteW.\nLand acquisition.\nThe Secretary of War, Henry L. Stimson, authorized the acquisition of the land on February 8, 1943. A Manhattan District project office opened in Prosser, Washington, on February 22, and the Washington Title Insurance Company opened an office there to furnish title certificates. Federal Judge Lewis B. Schwellenbach issued an order of possession under the Second War Powers Act the following day, and the first tract was acquired on March 10. Some 4,218 tracts totaling were to be acquired, making it one of the largest land acquisition projects in American history.\nMost of the land (some 88 percent) was sagebrush, where eighteen to twenty thousand sheep grazed. About eleven percent was farmland, although not all was under cultivation. Farmers felt that they should be compensated for the value of the crops they had planted as well as for the land itself. Because construction plans had not yet been drawn up, and work on the site could not immediately commence, Groves decided to postpone the taking of the physical possession of properties under cultivation to allow farmers to harvest the crops they had already planted. This reduced the hardship on the farmers, and avoided the wasting of food at a time when the nation was facing food shortages and the federal government was urging citizens to plant victory gardens. The War Department arranged with Federal Prison Industries for crops to be harvested by prisoners from the McNeil Island Penitentiary.\nThe harvest in the spring and summer of 1943 was exceptionally good, and high crop prices due to the war greatly increased land values. Litigation was needed to resolve disputes over the compensation due to the sellers. Discontent over the acquisition was apparent in letters sent from Hanford Site residents to the War and Justice Departments, and the Truman Committee began making inquiries. Stimson met with chairman of the committee, Senator Harry S. Truman, who agreed to remove the Hanford Site from the committee's investigations on the grounds of national security. Trial juries were sympathetic to the claims of the landowners and the payments awarded were well in excess of the government appraisals. When the Manhattan Project ended on December 31, 1946, there were still 237 tracts remaining to be settled.\nAbout 1,500 residents of Hanford, White Bluffs, and nearby settlements were relocated, as well as the Wanapum people, Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakima Nation, the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, and the Nez Perce Tribe.\nNative Americans were accustomed to fishing in the Columbia River near White Bluffs for two or three weeks in October. The fish they caught were dried and provided food for the winter. The Natives rejected offers of an annual cash payment, and a deal was struck allowing the chief and his two assistants to issue passes to fish at the site. This authority was later revoked for security reasons. Matthias gave assurances that Native American graves would be treated with respect, but it would be fifteen years before the Wanapum people were allowed access to mark the cemeteries. In 1997, the elders were permitted to bring children and young adults onto the site once a year to learn about their sacred sites.\nConstruction workforce.\nDuPont advertised for workers in newspapers for an unspecified \"war construction project\" in southeastern Washington, offering an \"attractive scale of wages\" and living facilities. Normally for a development in such an isolated area, employees would be accommodated on site, but in this case for security and safety reasons it was desirable to locate them at least away. Even the construction workforce could not be housed on site, because some plant operations would have to be carried out during start-up testing. The Army and DuPont engineers decided to create two communities: a temporary constructions camp and a more substantial operating village. Construction was expedited by locating them on the sites of existing villages to take advantage of the buildings, roads and utility infrastructure already in place. They established the construction camp on the site of the village of Hanford, and the operating village on that of Richland.\nThe construction workforce peaked at 45,096 on June 21, 1944. About thirteen percent were women, and non-whites made up 16.45 percent. African-Americans lived in segregated quarters, had their own messes and recreation areas, and were paid less than white workers. Three types of accommodation were provided at Hanford: barracks, hutments and trailer parking. The first workers to arrive lived in tents while they erected the first barracks. Barracks construction commenced on April 6, 1943, and eventually 195 barracks were erected: 110 for white men, 21 for black men, 57 for white women, and seven for black women. Hutments were prefabricated plywood and Celotex dwellings capable of accommodating ten to twenty workers each. Between them, the barracks and hutments held 39,050 workers. Many workers had their own trailers, taking their families with them from one wartime construction job to the next. Seven trailer camps were established, and at the peak of construction work 12,008 people were living in them.\nDuPont put the contract for building the village of Richland out to tender, and the contract was awarded to the lowest bidder, G. Albin Pehrson, on March 16, 1943. Pehrson produced a series of standard house designs based on the Cape Cod and ranch-style house design fashions of the day. Pehrson accepted the need for speed and efficiency, but his vision of a model late-20th-century community differed from the austere concept of Groves. Pehrson ultimately had his way on most issues, because he worked for DuPont, not the Army. The resulting compromise would handicap Richland for many years with inadequate sidewalks, stores, and shops, no civic center, and roads that were too narrow. Unlike Oak Ridge and Los Alamos, Richland was not surrounded by a high wire fence, thus Matthias asked DuPont to ensure that it was kept neat and tidy.\nConstruction.\nConstruction of the nuclear facilities proceeded rapidly. Before the end of the war in August 1945, the HEW built 554 buildings at Hanford, including three nuclear reactors (105\u2011B, 105\u2011D, and 105\u2011F) and three plutonium processing plants (221\u2011T, 221\u2011B, and 221\u2011U). The project required of roads, of railway, and four electrical substations. The HEW used of concrete and of structural steel.\nConstruction on B Reactor commenced in August 1943 and was completed on September 13, 1944. The reactor went critical in late September and, after overcoming neutron poisoning, produced its first plutonium on November 6, 1944. The reactors were graphite moderated and water cooled. They consisted of a , graphite cylinder lying on its side, penetrated horizontally through its entire length by 2,004 aluminum tubes containing of uranium slugs. They had no moving parts; the only sounds were those of the water pumps. Cooling water was pumped through the tubes at the rate of . This was enough water for a city of a million people.\nProduction process.\nUranium arrived at the Hanford Engineer Works in the form of billets. In the Metal Fabrication and Testing (300) Area they were extruded into rods and machined into cylindrical pieces, in diameter and long, known as \"slugs\". The initial charge of the three reactors required more than twenty thousand billets, and another two thousand were needed each month. Uranium is highly reactive with water, so to protect the slugs from corrosion by the cooling water they were canned in aluminum after being dipped into a molten bath of copper\u2013tin alloy, and the cap was arc welded on. A defective can could burst and jam in the reactor, stop the flow of cooling water, and force a complete shutdown of the reactor, so the canning process had to be precise.\nIrradiated fuel slugs were transported by rail on a special railroad car operated by remote control to huge remotely-operated chemical separation plants about away. The separation buildings were massive windowless concrete structures, long, high and wide, with concrete walls thick. Inside the buildings were canyons and galleries where a series of chemical processing steps separated the small amount of plutonium from the remaining uranium and fission products.\nItems were moved about with a long overhead crane. Once they began processing irradiated slugs, the machinery became so radioactive that it would be unsafe for humans ever to come in contact with it, so the engineers devised methods to allow for the replacement of components via remote control. Periscopes and closed-circuit television gave the operator a view of the process. They assembled the equipment by remote control as if the area was already radioactive. To receive the radioactive wastes from the chemical separations process, there were \"tank farms\" consisting of 64 single-shell underground waste tanks.\nThe first batch of plutonium was refined in the 221\u2011T plant from December 26, 1944, to February 2, 1945, and delivered to the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico on February 5, 1945. Two identical reactors, DReactor and FReactor, came online on December 5, 1944, and February 15, 1945, respectively, and all three reactors were running at full power (250 megawatts) by March 8, 1945. By April kilogram-quantity shipments of plutonium were headed to Los Alamos. Road convoys replaced the trains in May, and in late July shipments began being dispatched by air from the airport at Hanford.\nProduction activities.\nAlthough the reactors could be shut down in two-and-a-half seconds, they would still generate heat due to the decay of fission products. It was therefore vital that the flow of water should not cease. If the power failed, the steam pumps would automatically cut in and continue to deliver water at full capacity for long enough to allow an orderly shutdown. This occurred on March 10, 1945, when a Japanese balloon bomb struck a high-tension line between Grand Coulee and Bonneville. This caused an electrical surge in the lines to the reactors. A scram was automatically initiated and the safety devices shut the reactors down. The bomb failed to explode and the transmission line was not badly damaged. The Hanford Engineer Works was the only U.S. nuclear facility to come under enemy attack.\nHanford provided the plutonium for the bomb used in the 1945 Trinity nuclear test. Throughout this period, the Manhattan Project maintained a top-secret classification. Fewer than one percent of Hanford's workers knew they were working on a nuclear weapons project. Groves noted in his memoirs that \"We made certain that each member of the project thoroughly understood his part in the total effort; that, and nothing more.\" The existence and purpose of Hanford was publicly revealed through press releases on August 7 and 9, 1945, after the bombing of Hiroshima but before Hanford plutonium was used (in a Fat Man) during the bombing of Nagasaki on August 9.\nMatthias was succeeded as area engineer by Colonel Frederick J. Clarke in January 1946. DuPont would soon be gone too. Carpenter asked to be released from the contract. Groves informed Robert P. Patterson, who had succeeded Stimson as Secretary of War on September 21, 1945, Groves's choice of replacement was General Electric (GE), which took over operations at Hanford on September 1, 1946, and accepted a formal control on September 30. On December 31, 1946, the Manhattan Project ended and control of the Hanford Site passed to the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). The total cost of the Hanford Engineer Works up to that time was ).\nCold War.\nProduction problems.\nGE inherited serious problems. Running the reactors continuously at full power had resulted in the Wigner effect, swelling of the graphite due to the displacement of the atoms in its crystalline structure by collisions with neutrons. This had the potential to buckle the aluminum tubes used for the fuel and control rods and disable the reactors completely if a water pipe ruptured. The polonium-210 used in the Fat Man's neutron initiators had a half-life of only 138 days, so it was essential to keep a reactor running or the weapons would be rendered inoperative. The Army therefore shut down BReactor on March 19. In August 1946, Franklin was informed that irradiating the feed to produce over 200 grams of plutonium per metric ton of uranium was resulting in too much undesirable plutonium-240 in the product. The power level on Dand FReactors was reduced, which also extended their useful life. Some experiments were conducted with annealing the graphite. It was found in laboratory testing of samples that heating to retired the graphite by 24 percent, to by 45 percent and to by 94 percent, but the consequences of heating the reactors so much had to be considered before this was attempted.\nThe other problem was that the bismuth phosphate process used to separate the plutonium left the uranium in an unrecoverable state. The Metallurgical Laboratory had researched a promising new redox separation process, using hexone as a solvent. The AEC was concerned about the supply of uranium, and the General Advisory Committee of the AEC recommended that construction of a redox plant be given top priority.\nMeanwhile, the waste-settling tanks filled up with sludge, and attempts to transport it to the waste storage (241) areas were unsuccessful. It was therefore decided to bypass the waste settling tanks and send sludge directly to the 200\u00a0area, and construction of a bypass commenced in August 1946. GE invited bids for the construction of a new waste storage tank farm. Efforts were made to make better use of the available uranium. Turnings, cuttings, and shavings from the slug manufacture process had been sent to the Ames Laboratory in Iowa for briquetting. The equipment there was shipped to the Hanford Engineer Works. The briquettes, along with uranium scrap metal, was sent to the Metal Hydrides Company for recasting into billets.\nDuring 1947, tensions with the Soviet Union escalated as the Cold War set in. Clarke was succeeded by Carleton Shugg on September 2. Within days of arrival he demanded overtime be used to speed up construction work then in progress. The size of the nuclear stockpile was limited by plutonium production. There was enough for thirteen bombs at the end of 1947. Walter J. Williams, the AEC's director of production, worked with GE engineers to produce plans for three replacement reactors (called BR, DR, and FR). To save time and money, they would be built adjacent to the existing reactors, where they would be able to use their cooling water and separation facilities. Two more reactors would then be built on new sites.\nWhile this was being considered by the AEC, GE experimented with annealing, and found that if the reactors were run at and then slowly cooled, the graphite's crystalline structure could be restored. The reactors could be run at higher temperatures by increasing the power level. Some helium in the atmosphere surrounding the reactors was replaced with carbon dioxide, which conducted heat less efficiently. This allowed more heat to build up in the graphite. To reduce the incidence of cans jamming, their size was reduced from . More plutonium was produced by keeping the fuel elements in the reactor longer. Instead of pushing the entire tube out, half of it was, allowing elements to spend time in parts of the reactor where the neutron flux was less dense. The old reactors could now be run much longer. In December, the AEC approved a scaled-back construction plan, with only one replacement reactor, at siteD (called DR), and one reactor at a new site (called H). The new reactors used the same designs as the wartime ones, although they had more pure graphite to allow them to be run at higher power levels, and smaller graphite blocks surrounding the process tubes to restrict expansion.\nGrowth of Richland.\nThe population of Richland had already begun to increase again. In 1946 the Hanford Site had 4,479 operating employees and 141 construction workers. Two years later this had increased to 8,628 operating employees and 14,671 construction workers. Richland grew from 14,000 people in 1947 to 22,000 in 1950. To house the construction workers, a new construction camp was established called North Richland, which had a peak population of 13,000 in 1948. Many operating employees and construction workers also lived in Kennewick and Pasco. Shugg arranged for barracks to be brought by barge down the Columbia River from the old Naval Air Station Pasco. About 3,850 houses remained from the war; these were augmented by 800 houses and 64 apartments in 1947, and another 1,000 houses and apartments in 1948. Although the population stabilized, a housing shortage persisted into the 1950s. GE closed down the last of the dormitories in 1958. Richland had a newspaper, the \"Richland Villager\", and every resident received a free copy. Commercial concession holders were pressured to buy advertising space. The villagers paid low rents for their houses, and Village Services was available to help with unpacking, laying carpets or babysitting.\nThe adult population of Richland had an average education of 12.5 years, and 40 percent of the men had attended college, compared with 22 percent in the state of Washington as a whole, and the median annual family income in 1959 was ) compared with ). In 1950 26 percent of American families had an annual income of less than the poverty line of ). In the nearby towns of Pasco and Kennewick, 24.4 and 25.2 percent respectively were below the poverty line; in Richland, it was just 4.9 percent. The percentage of high school graduates in Richland was 74.3 percent, compared with 53.5 in Pasco and 54.6 in Kennewick. Women constituted a quarter of the workforce, and the number of working wives was much higher than the national average. Although GE liked to present an image of a middle-class community, most of the Hanford Site employees were working-class shift workers with high school education only.\nThere were few senior citizens in Richland\u00a0\u2013 in 1947 the AEC still required retirees to give up their homes\u00a0\u2013 but the birth rate in 1948 was 34 per 1,000, well above the national average of 20 per 1,000. This tapered off during the 1950s, but there remained a larger than usual number of school-age children. There were only seven black people in Richland in 1950; this increased to 189 by 1960, when they accounted for 1.3 percent of the population. Only two black people worked for the AEC at the Hanford Site in 1951, less than a dozen were employed by GE, and about 250 by the construction contractors. The use of eating and recreational facilities by black people was discouraged, but not prohibited. Black people were even less welcome in Kennewick; only four resided there in 1950 and five in 1960. Kennewick was a sundown town where there was a curfew for black people. They congregated in Pasco, where 1,213 black people lived in a ghetto on the town's eastern fringe. They had no sewerage or running water in 1948, because the town's leaders felt that the black community should provide the ) to pay for it. Black residents also did not qualify for Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans.\nSoon after taking over from the Army, the AEC had contemplated the future of the communities of Richland, Oak Ridge, and Los Alamos. The commissioners were eager to divest the AEC of the burden of their management. In 1947, AEC general manager Carroll L. Wilson commissioned Lyman S. Moore, the city manager of Portland, Maine, and an expert on municipal government, to produce a report on the management of the communities. He produced a road map to self-government. The first step was to overhaul the accounting system to produce comparable reports on housing, commercial operations, utilities, and government. It would then be possible to move to charging market rates for rents, utilities, and municipal services, and ultimately to establish self-government. There was scant enthusiasm for this in Richland, but the United States was engaged in an ideological conflict with the Soviet Union over the superiority of the American way. The AEC's September 1950 appropriation called upon it to take steps to impose democratic government and free enterprise on the AEC communities.\nThe first step was taken on October 1, 1953, when the AEC increased the rents in Richland by 25% to bring them into line with those in neighboring communities. In 1955, the town voted on disposal and incorporation; both measures were overwhelmingly defeated. Nonetheless, that year Congress passed Public Law 221, which provided for the transfer of government property in Richland to the townsfolk. Thousands of people attended protest rallies and sent angry letters and petitions to Congress. Congressional hearings were held, and prices set by the FHA were reduced. People who had been dispossessed by the acquisition process during the war petitioned to be allowed to buy their property back, but they were ignored. By July 1958, 4,200 homes had been sold. After receiving assurances that the AEC would continue to subsidize schools and municipal services through the 1960s, the citizens of Richland voted for incorporation, and the town became self-governing on December 12, 1958. In 1960 Richland received an All-America City Award.\nCamp Hanford.\nDuring the war the Hanford Site was patrolled by a Military Police detachment which, as of June 1945, had forty soldiers. In April 1947, they were replaced by GE security guards, who were issued M8 Greyhound armored cars. The Army was concerned that U.S. plutonium production was centered at one vulnerable site. In March 1950 the 5th Anti-aircraft Artillery Group arrived to provide air defenses, and established its headquarters in North Richland. The group consisted of four battalions, the 83rd, 501st, 518th, and 519th Anti-aircraft Artillery Battalions, each of which had four batteries of 120 mm anti-aircraft guns. Each battery had four guns, which were deployed in sandbagged revetments on a site with wooden, prefabricated metal and containing barracks, latrines, mess halls, motor pools, radars, and administrative facilities.\nThe military base was designated \"Camp Hanford\" in 1951. The following year the guns were augmented by Nike Ajax missiles, which were deployed at three sites on Wahluke Slope and one on what is now the Fitzner-Eberhardt Arid Lands Ecology Reserve. Each site had two underground missile storage magazines, twenty missiles, and eight missile launchers. The Nike Ajax missiles were later replaced with Nike Hercules missiles. The development of intercontinental ballistic missiles made the missiles obsolete, and Camp Hanford became an outpost of Fort Lewis on July 1, 1959. The missile batteries were disbanded in 1960, and Camp Hanford was closed on March 31, 1961.\nEarly expansion.\nCold War tensions escalated in April 1948 with the Berlin Airlift. Construction was under way on the new DRand HReactors, but the quickest way to increase production was to restart BReactor. This was authorized later that month. Shugg was recalled to Washington, DC, to serve as the AEC deputy general manager in August, and was succeeded by Frederick C. Schlemmer on September 16. In turn, he was succeeded by David F. Shaw on June 1, 1950.\nShaw was succeeded by James E. Travis in June 1955, and he remained the site manager until June 1965. It was also possible to improve productivity. Zirconium was added to the cans to stabilize them under high exposures, and tests confirmed that they could withstand three times the exposure used in 1946 without rupture. In March 1950, GE was authorized to run the reactors at 305 MW instead of 250. This cut the use of raw materials by half, and yielded forty percent more plutonium per operating dollar.\nThe Soviet Union detonated its first atomic bomb on August 29, 1949. The explosion was detected by a U.S. Air Force weather reconnaissance aircraft four days later. In response, President Harry S. Truman authorized a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb. Preliminary designs called for large amounts of tritium. This could be produced in a reactor using target slugs loaded with lithium deuteride and fuel rods containing enriched uranium. One or more reactors would have to be set aside for tritium production. HReactor was chosen, and started producing tritium in 1950. For the longer term, the AEC decided to construct new reactors, of a different design using enriched uranium and heavy water as a moderator, at a new site, which became the Savannah River Site. The outbreak of the Korean War in September 1951 prompted the AEC to authorize a sixth reactor at Hanford on January 23, 1951. Construction began in June. The new reactor was built in the Barea and called CReactor. The same basic graphite-moderated design was used, with improvements to give it a rated power of 750 MW. The new reactor became operational in November 1952.\nOn February 25, 1952, Truman authorized two more reactors at the Hanford Site. These were called K\u00a0West and K\u00a0East, and were sited at Coyote Rapids between the Band Dareas. They were known as \"Jumbo\" reactors for their much larger size. They still used the same graphite-moderator technology, but had improvements to allow them to operate at 1,800 MW. Each used of graphite, over a thousand tons more than the three wartime reactors, and had concrete shields instead of steel and masonite. They had more feed tubes and reduced spacing between them. Improvements in water-pump design allowed them to have eighteen pumps instead of the fifty in the wartime reactors, but were capable of pumping . As with the other reactors, the cooling water was collected in ponds, allowed to cool, and then tipped back into the river. An innovation was that heat from the cooling water was used to heat the work places. Each Jumbo reactor required about 300 operators to run it, compared with 400 for HReactor. This represented a saving of a million dollars a year (equivalent to $million in 2024). Although capable of being run at up to 4,400 MW, the AEC imposed an administrative limit of 4,000 MW on them. Since plutonium\u2011239 has a half-life of 24,100 years, AEC chairman Gordon Dean calculated that sufficient plutonium would be produced by the mid-1960s. With this in mind, the reactors were designed with a life of twenty years.\nSeparation facilities.\nIn addition to the new reactors there were also new separation facilities. The AEC had long been dissatisfied with the wasteful bismuth phosphate separation process. GE conducted research into an alternative, reduction-oxidation (REDOX) process. This used methyl isobutyl ketone (hexone) as a solvent. It was developed at the Hanford Site in the 3706 Building and tested in the 321 Building. The AEC approved the REDOX process in May 1949, and work began on the new plant the following year. Construction ran behind schedule, and it did not commence operation until January 1952. Known as the 202-S Building or the SPlant, it was long and wide, and could process up to twelve metric tons of uranium per day, compared with the Band TPlants' 1.5 tons per day. It also had the advantage of consolidating the separation activities in one building. Unlike the bismuth phosphate process, it produced uranium as a byproduct. The low flash point of hexone meant that special precautions had to be taken against the possibility of an explosion. The hexone could not be reused as it was highly water-soluble and was unstable in nitric acid. Removing the uranium meant that the waste products were highly radioactive. The facility operated until 1967 and processed approximately 22,400 metric tons of uranium fuel rods.\nThe U Plant was modified to use the REDOX process to recover uranium from the wastes left over from the bismuth phosphate process, but with a different solvent, tributyl phosphate. Due to the plant's layout, it could not use the tall columns and gravity flow that characterized the REDOX plant, so pulsed columns were used instead. The plutonium uranium reduction extraction (PUREX) process was developed at GE's Knolls Laboratory. The PUREX Plant, known as APlant or Building 202\u2011A, commenced operation in 1955. Like the UPlant it used pulsed columns and tributyl phosphate as a solvent.\nThe plant was long, high and wide. The processing canyon contained eleven processing areas. It operated from 1956 to 1972, and again from 1983 to 1988, when it reprocessed spent fuel rods from the reactors, and processed approximately 66,400 metric tons of uranium fuel rods. The B and T Plants were shut down after it became operational in 1956, having processed 8,100 metric tons of fuel rods. During the 1940s, the Hanford Site dumped into the Columbia River each day. This rose to per day between 1951 and 1953, and peaked at per day in 1959.\nPlutonium Finishing Plant.\nDuring World War II, Hanford produced plutonium nitrate (), which was shipped to Los Alamos, where it was turned into metallic plutonium and made into pits. After the war ended, the Los Alamos Laboratory moved to divest itself of production activities in order to devote itself to research. The Plutonium Finishing Plant was built at Hanford to carry out the purification and reduction of the plutonium to metallic form, known as \"buttons\", and then perform the casting, grinding, and lathing of the plutonium to turn it into pits.\nThe plant operated from 1949 to 1989. In 1953, it began shipping plutonium buttons to the new Rocky Flats Plant in Colorado, which fabricated pits. Between 1957 and 1961, nine different types of pits were produced at Hanford. Pit production ended in 1965, when the AEC decided that henceforth this work would be undertaken at the Rocky Flats Site. As demand for weapons-grade plutonium declined after 1964, the Plutonium Finishing Plant began producing mixed plutonium-oxide uranium-oxide (MOX) fuel for the Fast Flux Test Facility and reactor-grade plutonium.\nPlutonium was valuable, and reducing waste saved landfill and preserved the long-term radiological safety of the area by not burying quite so much highly contaminated waste. The Plutonium Finishing Plant reclaimed solid wastes in its RECUPLEX facility, combustible ones in the 232-Z Incinerator, and liquid ones in the 242-Z Waste Treatment Facility. A multi-purpose Plutonium Reclamation Facility opened in 1964.\nA serious accident occurred at the 242-Z Waste Treatment Facility in 1976, when the contents of a glove box containing americium and plutonium exploded, seriously injuring an operator, Harold McCluskey. This accident prompted a series of reviews and evaluations that led to a 1978 decision to close most of the Plutonium Finishing Plant's facilities.\nBefore the plant could be demolished, approximately 18 metric tons of plutonium-bearing material was stabilized between 1996 and 2004. Legacy plutonium from plant systems was removed by 2005, and all weapons-grade plutonium was shipped to the Savannah River Site by 2009. Demolition work on the plant began in July 2017 and was completed in January 2022.\nN Reactor.\nThe reactors had all been built for plutonium production, but with the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, the Eisenhower administration began shifting resources to nuclear power generation. By the late 1950s the reactors built during the war were approaching retirement age, and in 1957 GE commenced planning to build a new reactor that would be clean, safe, and efficient, and able to generate electric power as well as produce plutonium. Construction commenced in 1959, but the electric power features were not authorized until 1962, so while it was producing plutonium in 1964, electric power did not follow until 1966. Experts debated whether nuclear power would be economically competitive with hydroelectric power, and Congress debated whether the government should be in the electricity generation business. On November 28, 1961, the AEC reached an agreement with the Washington Public Power Supply System (WPPSS) for the latter to purchase its electricity.\nN Reactor was destined to be the last of its kind, but also had many new features as a product of 1960s technology. Its zirconium alloy-clad fuel slugs were long and in diameter. It had automated fuel-loading and unloading systems, a boron-ball scram system, and a state-of-the-art control room. It was the first American graphite-moderated power reactor, and the first American dual-purpose reactor, although other countries had them. The dual-purpose concept involved trade-offs that made both purposes less efficient: power required a steam turbine, but high water temperatures risked slug failure. The solution was to build a pressurized water reactor, in which the water was pressurized to allow it to remain liquid above . The reactor exceeded its original $145million budget (equivalent to $million in 2024) and cost $205million (equivalent to $million in 2024).\nThe Hanford Site was now home to nine nuclear reactors along the Columbia River, five reprocessing plants on the central plateau, and more than nine hundred support buildings and radiological laboratories around the site. Extensive modifications and upgrades were made to the original three World WarII reactors, and a total of 177 underground waste tanks were built. Hanford was at its peak production from 1956 to 1965. Over the forty years of operation the site produced about 67.4 metric tons of plutonium, of which 54.5 metric tons was weapons-grade plutonium, supplying the majority of the 60,000 weapons in the U.S. arsenal. In 1983 and 1984, 425 kilograms of weapons-grade plutonium was extracted from reactor-grade plutonium. Tritium, polonium\u2011210, thulium-170, iridium-192, and uranium-233 were also produced.\nDecommissioning.\nBy 1963 the AEC had estimated that it had sufficient plutonium for its needs for the foreseeable future, and planned to shut down the production reactors. To mitigate the economic impact, closures were carried out over a period of six years. The change of policy was not publicly announced; instead, each round of closures was accompanied by a statement that production needs could be met by the remaining facilities. The first round of closures was announced by President Johnson on January 8, 1964. DR, H, and FReactors were shut down in 1964 and, 1965. In 1967 the AEC announced that another reactor would be shut down. This was DReactor, which was shut down on June 25, 1967. BReactor followed on February 12, 1968.\nIn January 1969, AEC chairman Glenn Seaborg, under pressure from the newly elected Nixon administration to cut costs, announced that the three reactors built in the 1950s, C, KE, and KW, would be shut down in 1969 and 1970. The REDOX and PUREX facilities were placed on standby status in December 1967 and June 1972 respectively. Between 1967 and 1971, the number of workers employed at the Hanford Site plummeted from 8,500 to 5,500. The incremental closures did nothing to reduce the public outcry; if anything, the reverse was the case. The AEC was replaced by the Energy Research and Development Administration in 1974, and it in turn was succeeded by the United States Department of Energy (DOE) in 1977. The regulation and licensing of commercial reactors was devolved to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).\nThe closures left only N Reactor, which continued to operate as a dual-purpose reactor, providing power to the civilian electrical grid via the WPPSS. By 1966 it was producing 35 percent of the United States' nuclear-generated electricity. Costs were lower than anticipated, allowing the WPPSS to retire $25million budget (equivalent to $million in 2024) of the $122million (equivalent to $million in 2024) it had raised in bonds to finance the project. The Chernobyl disaster in the Soviet Union in April 1986 prompted multiple reviews of the safety of American reactors. Of all the reactors in the U.S., NReactor was the most similar to the ill-fated No.4 Reactor at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant, in that it was graphite-moderated, although NReactor used pressurized water rather than boiling water as a coolant. Like all the Hanford Site's reactors, it had no containment vessel and would never have passed the NRC's reactor safety requirements had they been applied to it. There was a public outcry, and the Government Accountability Office recommended closure. NReactor was shut down in January 1987. The PUREX plant reopened in 1983 to reprocess N Reactor reactor-grade fuel into weapon-grade fuel. This ended in December 1988, and it returned to standby status in October 1990. The uranium trioxide plant closed in 1995, the PUREX plant closed for good in 1997, and the BPlant in 1998. The TPlant remained in use, handling the storage, packaging, and decontamination of radioactive wastes. It became the longest operational nuclear facility in the world.\nAll but two of the Hanford production reactors were entombed (\"cocooned\") to allow the radioactive materials to decay, and the surrounding structures removed and buried. This involved the removal of hundreds of tons of asbestos, concrete, steel, and contaminated soil. The pumps and tunnels were dug up and razed, as were the auxiliary buildings. What was left were the core and shields. These were sealed up and a sloped steel roof added to draw off rainwater. Cocooning of CReactor commenced in 1996, and was completed in 1998. DReactor followed in 2002, FReactor followed in 2003, DRReactor in 2004. and HReactor in 2005. N Reactor was cocooned in 2012, and KE in 2022. KW is planned to be cocooned around 2030.\nOnly B Reactor will remain unenclosed. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1992. Some historians advocated converting it into a museum. It was designated a National Historic Landmark by the National Park Service on August 19, 2008, and, on November 10, 2015, it became part of the Manhattan Project National Historical Park alongside other sites at Oak Ridge and Los Alamos. The DOE offers free guided tours of the site which can be reserved via the department's website, and are open to all ages. Between 2009 and 2018, approximately eighty thousand people visited the site, bringing an estimated annual tourist income of two million dollars to the surrounding area.\nLater operations.\nAlthough uranium enrichment and plutonium breeding were slowly phased out, the nuclear legacy left an indelible mark on the Tri-Cities. Since World WarII, the area had developed from a small farming community to a booming \"Atomic Frontier\" to a powerhouse of the nuclear-industrial complex. Decades of federal investment created a community of highly skilled scientists and engineers. As a result of this concentration of specialized skills, the Hanford Site attempted to diversify its operations to include scientific research, test facilities, and commercial nuclear power production.\nWhen GE announced that it was ending the contract to run the Hanford Site in 1963, the AEC decided to separate the contract among multiple operators. The contract to run the research laboratory at the site was awarded to the Battelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, Ohio, on May 28, 1964, and the laboratory became the Pacific Northwest Laboratory on January 4, 1965. In 1995, it achieved national laboratory status and became The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Battelle's contract allowed it to perform research for government and private companies, so it was able to branch out into related areas. In 2022, the laboratory employed 5,314 staff and had an annual budget of $1.2billion.\nThe Fast Flux Test Facility (FFTF), was a national research facility that began operating in 1982 to develop and test fuels, materials, and components for the Clinch River Breeder Reactor project. The contract to construct and operate it was awarded to Westinghouse and 800 former Battelle employees who had been working on it were transferred. The Clinch River project was canceled by Congress in 1983, but the FFTF continued to operate, generating plutonium\u2011238 for nuclear power sources for NASA space missions and tritium for nuclear fusion research. It was shut down in 2009.\nThe Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is an interferometer searching for gravitational waves. The observatory at the Hanford Site was one of two, the other being in Livingston, Louisiana. The project was run as a cooperative venture by MIT and Caltech. The $211million price tag (equivalent to $million in 2024) generated debate about pork barreling and government funding of expensive Big Science projects, especially one as uncertain of success as LIGO. The Hanford Site was chosen from seventeen contenders for one of the two sites, mainly due to its relative isolation. In 2016 it was announced that gravitational waves had been detected. In 2018 the American Physical Society (APS) designated the two LIGO observatories as APS historic sites.\nDecommissioned United States naval reactors are stored in Trench 94, a trench in the 200 Area at the Hanford Site under the Ship-Submarine Recycling Program. Although the fuel has been removed and shipped to the Idaho National Laboratory, the section housing the reactor still has about remaining. This is expected to decline by three orders of magnitude in about 1,000 years. The reactors are stored in High Integrity Containers (HICs) designed to last for at least 300 years. They are shipped by barge up the Columbia River and then trucked overland to the Hanford Site.\nThe Columbia Generating Station is a 1,207 MW commercial nuclear power plant located on the Hanford Site north of Richland and operated by Energy Northwest, as the WPPSS has been known since 1998. Originally, five boiling water reactors were authorized in March 1973, but only one, WNP\u20112, was completed. It began producing power in May 1984. The WNP-1 Reactor was budgeted to cost $660million in 1973 (equivalent to $million in 2024) and be completed by 1980. By 1986, the estimated cost had blown out to $3.8billion (equivalent to $billion in 2024) and the reactor was still unfinished. Meanwhile, the estimated total cost of the entire project had increased from $4.1billion in 1973 (equivalent to $billion in 2024) to $24billion in 1986 (equivalent to $billion in 2024). A net billing agreement that Senator Henry M. Jackson helped steer through Congress ensured that the bonds issue to finance their construction carried a AAA bond credit rating and therefore sold easily, but electricity tariffs had to be increased to repay the bond holders.\nThe Hanford Reach was preserved as a salmon breeding ground. The end of plutonium production at the Hanford Site meant that it no longer required the areas around the old production sites. On June 9, 2000, President Bill Clinton designated almost of the Hanford Site as a national monument. The Hanford Reach National Monument is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service under an agreement with the DOE. On June 28, 2000, a fire burned of the monument.\nIn July 2024, the DOE announced it would construct a 1 GW solar array at the Hanford Site.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nBetween 1944 and 1971, pump systems drew as much as of cooling water from the Columbia River to dissipate the heat produced by the reactors. Before its release into the river, the used water was held in large tanks known as retention basins for up to six hours. Longer-lived isotopes were not affected by this retention, and several terabecquerels entered the river every day. The federal government kept knowledge about these radioactive releases secret. Another source of contaminated food came from Columbia River fish, an impact felt disproportionately by Native American communities who depended on the river for their customary diets. Radiation was later measured downstream as far west as the Washington and Oregon coasts. It was estimated that a person who had daily eaten of fish caught at Richland would have received an additional radiation dose of 1,300 millirems per year.\nThe plutonium separation process resulted in the release of radioactive isotopes into the air, which were carried by the wind throughout southeastern Washington and into parts of Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and British Columbia. Downwinders were exposed to radionuclides, particularly iodine-131, with the heaviest releases from 1945 to 1951. These radionuclides entered the food chain via dairy cows grazing on contaminated fields; hazardous fallout was ingested by communities who consumed radioactive food and milk. Most of these airborne releases were a part of Hanford's routine operations, while a few of the larger releases occurred in isolated incidents. In 1949 an intentional release known as the \"Green Run\" released of iodine\u2011131 over two days. A U.S. government report released in 1992 estimated that of iodine\u2011131 had been released into the river and air from the Hanford Site between 1944 and 1947.\nBeginning in the 1960s scientists with the U.S. Public Health Service published reports about radioactivity released from Hanford, and there were protests from the health departments of Oregon and Washington. In response to an article in the \"Spokane Spokesman Review\" in September 1985, the DOE announced it would declassify environmental records and, in February 1986, released 19,000 pages of previously unavailable historical documents about Hanford's operations. The Washington State Department of Health collaborated with the citizen-led Hanford Health Information Network to publicize data about the health effects of Hanford's operations. Their reports concluded that residents who lived downwind from Hanford or who used the Columbia River downstream were exposed to elevated doses of radiation that placed them at increased risk for cancer and other diseases, particularly forms of thyroid disease. A mass tort lawsuit was brought by two thousand Hanford downwinders. In 2005 two of six plaintiffs who went to trial were awarded $500,000 in damages. The DOE resolved the final cases in October 2015, paying out more than $60million in legal fees and $7million in damages.\nOf the 177 tanks at Hanford, 149 had a single shell. Historically single-shell tanks were used for storing radioactive liquid waste and designed to last twenty years. By 2005, some liquid waste was transferred from single-shell tanks to safer double-shell tanks. A substantial amount of residue remains in the older single-shell tanks with one containing an estimated of radioactive sludge, for example. It is believed that up to six of these \"empty\" tanks are leaking. Two tanks were reportedly leaking per year each, while the remaining four tanks were each leaking per year. In February 2013, Washington Governor Jay Inslee announced that a tank storing radioactive waste at the site had been leaking liquids on average of per year. He said that though the leak posed no immediate health risk to the public, it should not be an excuse for not doing anything. On February 22, 2013, he stated that six more tanks were leaking.\nOccupational health concerns.\nWhile major releases of radioactive material ended with the reactor shutdown in the 1970s and many of the most dangerous wastes are contained, there were continued concerns about contaminated groundwater headed toward the Columbia River and about workers' health and safety. In 1976, Harold McCluskey, a Hanford technician, received the largest recorded dose of americium following a laboratory accident in the Plutonium Finishing Plant. Due to prompt medical intervention, he survived the incident and died eleven years later of natural causes.\nSince 1987, workers have reported exposure to harmful vapors after working around underground nuclear storage tanks, with no solution found. More than forty workers in 2014 alone reported smelling vapors and became ill with \"nosebleeds, headaches, watery eyes, burning skin, contact dermatitis, increased heart rate, difficulty breathing, coughing, sore throats, expectorating, dizziness, and nausea... Several of these workers have long-term disabilities.\" Doctors checked workers and cleared them to return to work. Monitors worn by tank workers have found no samples with chemicals close to the federal limit for occupational exposure.\nIn August 2014, OSHA ordered the facility to rehire a contractor and pay $220,000 in back wages for firing the employee for whistleblowing on safety concerns at the site. On November 19, 2014, the attorney general of Washington, Bob Ferguson, said the state planned to sue the DOE and its contractor to protect workers from hazardous vapors at Hanford. A 2014 report by the DOE Savannah River National Laboratory initiated by 'Washington River Protection Solutions' found that DOE's methods to study vapor releases were inadequate, particularly, that they did not account for short but intense vapor releases. They recommended \"proactively sampling the air inside tanks to determine its chemical makeup; accelerating new practices to prevent worker exposures; and modifying medical evaluations to reflect how workers are exposed to vapors\".\nCleanup under Superfund.\nOrganization.\nDecades of manufacturing left behind of high-level radioactive waste stored within 177 storage tanks, an additional of solid radioactive waste, and areas of heavy technetium-99 and uranium-contaminated groundwater beneath three tank farms on the site as well as the potential for future groundwater contamination beneath currently contaminated soils. On June 25, 1988, the Hanford Site was divided into four areas and proposed for inclusion on the National Priorities List.\nOn May 15, 1989, the Washington Department of Ecology (WSDE), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the DOE entered into the Tri-Party Agreement, which provides a legal framework for environmental remediation at Hanford. By 2014, the agencies were engaged in the world's largest environmental cleanup, with many challenges to be resolved in the face of overlapping technical, political, regulatory, and cultural interests. The cleanup effort was focused on three outcomes: restoring the Columbia River corridor for other uses, converting the central plateau to long-term waste treatment and storage, and preparing for the future. In 2020, WSDE issued the DOE with a $1.065 million penalty for restricting WSDE from direct access to facility data required for regulatory oversight in accord with the Tri-Party Agreement; a settlement agreement being finalized in 2023.\nIn 2011, DOE, the federal agency charged with overseeing the site, \"interim stabilized\" 149 single-shell tanks by pumping nearly all the liquid waste out into 28 newer double-shell tanks. Solids, known as salt cake and sludge, remained. The DOE later found water intruding into at least 14 single-shell tanks and that one of them had been leaking about per year into the ground since about 2010. In 2012, the DOE also discovered a leak from a double-shell tank caused by construction flaws and corrosion in the tank's bottom, and that twelve other double-shell tanks had similar construction flaws. Since then, the DOE began monitoring single-shell tanks monthly and double-shell tanks every three years. The DOE also changed the methods by which they monitored the tanks. In March 2014, the DOE announced further delays in the construction of the Waste Treatment Plant, which affected the schedule for removing waste from the tanks.\nThe cleanup effort was managed by the DOE under the oversight of the two regulatory agencies. A citizen-led Hanford Advisory Board provides recommendations from community stakeholders, including local and state governments, regional environmental organizations, business interests, and Native American tribes. For the Native Americans, the cleanup took on a moral and religious aspect. A particular focus was the conservation of indigenous fauna and flora, such as the Umtanum desert buckwheat, which only grows in the area and was prized by Native Americans for its medicinal properties.\nCleanup activities.\nCiting the 2014 Hanford Lifecycle Scope Schedule and Cost report, the 2014 estimated cost of the remaining Hanford cleanup was $113.6billion\u00a0\u2013 more than $3billion per year for six years, with a lower cost projection of approximately $2billion per year until 2046.\nOriginally scheduled to be complete within thirty years, the cleanup was less than half finished by 2008. Of the four areas that were formally listed as Superfund sites on October 4, 1989, only one had been removed from the list. Intermittent discoveries of undocumented contamination have slowed the pace and raised the cost of cleanup. Cleanup activity was still ongoing in 2023, with over 10,000 workers employed on cleanup activities.\nThe most significant challenge was stabilizing the of high-level radioactive waste stored in the 177 underground tanks. By 1998 about a third of these tanks had leaked waste into the soil and groundwater. By 2008 most of the liquid waste had been transferred to more secure double-shelled tanks; however, of liquid waste, together with of salt cake and sludge, remains in the single-shelled tanks.\nDOE lacked information about the extent to which the 27 double-shell tanks may be susceptible to corrosion. Without determining the extent to which the factors that contributed to the leak in AY\u2011102 were similar to the other 27 double-shell tanks, DOE could not be sure how long its double-shell tanks can safely store waste. That waste was originally scheduled to be removed by 2018. By 2008, the revised deadline was 2040. By 2008, of radioactive waste was traveling through the groundwater toward the Columbia River. This waste was expected to reach the river in twelve to fifty years if cleanup does not proceed on schedule.\nUnder the Tri-Party Agreement, lower-level hazardous wastes are buried in huge lined pits that will be sealed and monitored with sophisticated instruments for many years. Disposal of plutonium and other high-level wastes is a more difficult problem that continues to be a subject of intense debate. As an example, plutonium\u2011239 has a half-life of 24,100 years, and a decay of ten half-lives is required before a sample is considered to cease its radioactivity. In 2000 the DOE awarded a $4.3billion contract to Bechtel, a San Francisco-based construction and engineering firm, to build a vitrification plant to combine the dangerous wastes with glass to render them stable. Construction began in 2002. The plant was originally scheduled to be operational by 2011, with vitrification completed by 2028.\nAccording to a 2012 study by the Government Accountability Office, there were a number of serious unresolved technical and managerial problems. In 2013 the estimated costs were $13.4billion with commencement of operations estimated to be in 2022 and about three decades of operation. A potential radioactive leak was reported in 2013; the cleanup was estimated to have cost $40billion, with $115billion more required. Another leak was reported in April 2021.\nIn May 2007 state and federal officials began closed-door negotiations about the possibility of extending legal cleanup deadlines for waste vitrification in exchange for shifting the focus of the cleanup to urgent priorities, such as groundwater remediation. Those talks stalled in October 2007. In early 2008, a $600million cut to the Hanford cleanup budget was proposed. Washington state officials expressed concern about the budget cuts, as well as missed deadlines and recent safety lapses at the site, and threatened to file a lawsuit alleging that the DOE was in violation of environmental laws. They appeared to step back from that threat in April 2008 after another meeting of federal and state officials resulted in progress toward a tentative agreement. Some of the radioactive waste at Hanford was supposed to be stored in the planned Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository, but after that project was suspended, Washington State sued, joined by South Carolina. Their first suit was dismissed in July 2011. In a subsequent suit, federal authorities were ordered to either approve or reject plans for the Yucca Mountain storage site.\nDuring excavations from 2004 to 2007, a sample of purified plutonium was uncovered inside a safe in a waste trench, and has been dated to about the 1940s, making it the second-oldest sample of purified plutonium known to exist. Analyses published in 2009 concluded that the sample originated at Oak Ridge, and was one of several sent to Hanford for optimization tests of the TPlant until Hanford could produce its own plutonium. Documents refer to such a sample, belonging to \"Watt's group\", which was disposed of in its safe when a radiation leak was suspected.\nAs of 2023, of the site's groundwater remains contaminated above federal standards, a reduction from in the 1980s.\nDuring the construction of the vitrification plant, designed to handle low-activity waste, a separate part of plant to separate low-activity from high-activity waste (principally, cesium isotopes) had also been started. Questions were raised about the planned separation technology in addition how to handle the high-level waste, so the separation facility was scrapped in favor of the Tank Side Cesium Removal (TSCR) system, a much smaller and more modular system using filtration and ion exchange columns to strip the high-level waste components, and sending low-activity back into the tank farms for later treatment at the low-activity vitrification plant. The high-level waste will be held in containers on site for future disposal, either via burial or vitrification. The TSCR technology is based on similar technology used in part of the cleanup of the Fukushima nuclear accident. TSCR started processing waste on January 26, 2022. The vitrification plant accepted its first batch of low-activity waste from the tank farms on October 8, 2025, ahead of the October 15, 2025 deadline, to start operations at the plant.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39039", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39039", "title": "Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory", "text": "Federal research center in Livermore, California, US\nLawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) is a federally funded research and development center in Livermore, California, United States. Established in 1952, the laboratory is sponsored by the United States Department of Energy and administered privately by Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC.\nThe lab was originally established as the University of California Radiation Laboratory, Livermore Branch in 1952 in response to the detonation of the Soviet Union's first atomic bomb during the Cold War. It later became autonomous in 1971 and was designated a national laboratory in 1981.\nLawrence Livermore Lab is primarily funded by the U.S. Department of Energy and it is managed privately and operated by Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC (a partnership of the University of California, Bechtel, BWX Technologies, Amentum, and Battelle Memorial Institute in affiliation with the Texas A&amp;M University System). In 2012, the synthetic chemical element livermorium (element 116) was named after the laboratory.\nThe Livermore facility was co-founded by Edward Teller and Ernest Lawrence, then director of the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley.\nOverview.\nLLNL is a research and development institution for science and technology applied to national security. Its principal responsibility is ensuring the safety, security and reliability of the nation's nuclear weapons through the application of advanced science, engineering, and technology. The laboratory also applies its special expertise and multidisciplinary capabilities towards preventing the proliferation and use of weapons of mass destruction, bolstering homeland security, and solving other nationally important problems, including energy and environmental needs, scientific research and outreach, and economic competitiveness.\nThe laboratory is located on a site at the eastern edge of Livermore. It also operates a remote experimental test site known as Site 300, situated about southeast of the main lab site. LLNL has an annual budget of about $3.25\u00a0billion and a staff of nearly 10,000 employees.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nLLNL was established in 1952, as the University of California Radiation Laboratory, Livermore Branch, an offshoot of the existing University of California Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley. The lab at Livermore was intended to spur innovation and provide competition to the nuclear weapon design laboratory at Los Alamos in New Mexico, home of the Manhattan Project that developed the first atomic weapons. The Livermore facility was co-founded by Edward Teller and Ernest Lawrence, director of the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley.\nThe new laboratory was sited at a former naval air station from World War\u00a0II. It was already home to several University of California Radiation Laboratory projects that were too large for its location in the Berkeley Hills above the UC campus, including one of the first experiments in the magnetic approach to confined thermonuclear reactions (i.e. fusion). About half an hour southeast of Berkeley, the Livermore site provided much greater security for classified projects than an urban university campus.\nLawrence tapped his former graduate student Herbert York, age 32, to run Livermore. Under York, the Lab had four main programs: Project Sherwood (the magnetic-fusion program), Project Whitney (the weapons-design program), diagnostic weapon experiments (both for the Los Alamos and Livermore laboratories), and a basic physics program. York and the new lab embraced the Lawrence \"big science\" approach, tackling challenging projects with physicists, chemists, engineers, and computational scientists working together in multidisciplinary teams. Lawrence died in August 1958 and shortly after, the university's board of regents named both laboratories for him, as the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory.\nHistorically, the Berkeley and Livermore laboratories have had very close relationships on research projects, business operations, and staff. The Livermore Lab was established initially as a branch of the Berkeley laboratory. The Livermore lab was not officially severed administratively from the Berkeley lab until 1971. To this day, in official planning documents and records, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory is designated as Site 100, Lawrence Livermore National Lab as Site 200, and LLNL's remote test location as Site 300.\nRenaming.\nThe laboratory was renamed Lawrence Livermore Laboratory (LLL) in 1971. On October 1, 2007 Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC (LLNS) assumed management of LLNL from the University of California, which had exclusively managed and operated the Laboratory since its inception 55 years before. The laboratory was honored in 2012 by having the synthetic chemical element livermorium named after it.\nThe LLNS takeover of the laboratory has been controversial. In May 2013, an Alameda County jury awarded over $2.7\u00a0million to five former laboratory employees who were among 430 employees LLNS laid off during 2008. The jury found that LLNS breached a contractual obligation to terminate the employees only for \"reasonable cause.\" The five plaintiffs also have pending age discrimination claims against LLNS, which will be heard by a different jury in a separate trial. There are 125 co-plaintiffs awaiting trial on similar claims against LLNS. The May 2008 layoff was the first layoff at the laboratory in nearly 40 years.\nOn March 14, 2011, the City of Livermore officially expanded the city's boundaries to annex LLNL and move it within the city limits. The unanimous vote by the Livermore city council expanded Livermore's southeastern boundaries to cover 15 land parcels covering that comprise the LLNL site. The site was formerly an unincorporated area of Alameda County. The LLNL campus continues to be owned by the federal government.\nMajor projects.\nNuclear weapons.\nFrom its inception, Livermore focused on new weapon design concepts; as a result, its first three nuclear tests were unsuccessful. The lab persevered and its subsequent designs proved increasingly successful. In 1957, the Livermore Lab was selected to develop the warhead for the Navy's Polaris missile. This warhead required numerous innovations to fit a nuclear warhead into the relatively small confines of the missile nosecone.\nDuring the Cold War, many Livermore-designed warheads entered service. These were used in missiles ranging in size from the Lance surface-to-surface tactical missile to the megaton-class Spartan antiballistic missile. Over the years, LLNL designed the warheads: W27 (Regulus cruise missile; 1955; joint with Los Alamos), W38 (Atlas/Titan ICBM; 1959), B41 (B52 bomb; 1957), W45 (Little John/Terrier missiles; 1956), W47 (Polaris SLBM; 1957), W48 (155-mm howitzer; 1957), W55 (submarine rocket; 1959), W56 (Minuteman ICBM; 1960), W58 (Polaris SLBM; 1960), W62 (Minuteman ICBM; 1964), W68 (Poseidon SLBM; 1966), W70 (Lance missile; 1969), W71 (Spartan missile; 1968), W79 (8-in. artillery gun; 1975), W82 (155-mm howitzer; 1978), B83 (modern strategic bomb; 1979), and W87 (LGM-118 Peacekeeper/MX ICBM; 1982). The W87 and the B83 are the only LLNL designs still in the U.S. nuclear stockpile.\nWith the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the end of the Cold War, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing and development of new nuclear weapon designs. To sustain existing warheads for the indefinite future, a science-based Stockpile Stewardship Program (SSP) was defined that emphasized the development and application of greatly improved technical capabilities to assess the safety, security, and reliability of existing nuclear warheads without the use of nuclear testing. Confidence in the performance of weapons, without nuclear testing, is maintained through an ongoing process of stockpile surveillance, assessment and certification, and refurbishment or weapon replacement.\nWith no new designs of nuclear weapons, the warheads in the U.S. stockpile must continue to function far past their original expected lifetimes. As components and materials age, problems can arise. Stockpile Life Extension Programs can extend system lifetimes, but they also can introduce performance uncertainties and require maintenance of outdated technologies and materials. Because there is concern that it will become increasingly difficult to maintain high confidence in the warheads for the long term, the Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Administration initiated the Reliable Replacement Warhead (RRW) Program. RRW designs could reduce uncertainties, ease maintenance demands, and enhance safety and security. In March 2007, the LLNL design was chosen for the Reliable Replacement Warhead. Since that time, Congress has not allocated funding for any further development of the RRW.\nPlutonium research.\nLLNL conducts research into the properties and behavior of plutonium to learn how plutonium performs as it ages and how it behaves under high pressure (e.g., with the impact of high explosives). Plutonium has seven temperature-dependent solid allotropes. Each possesses a different density and crystal structure. Alloys of plutonium are even more complex; multiple phases can be present in a sample at any given time. Experiments are conducted at LLNL and elsewhere to measure the structural, electrical and chemical properties of plutonium and its alloys and to determine how these materials change over time. Such measurements enable scientists to better model and predict plutonium's long-term behavior in the aging stockpile.\nThe Lab's plutonium research is conducted in a specially designed facility called the SuperBlock, with emphasis on safety and security. Work with highly enriched uranium is also conducted there. In March 2008, the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) presented its preferred alternative for the transformation of the nation's nuclear weapons complex. Under this plan, LLNL would be a center of excellence for nuclear design and engineering, a center of excellence for high explosive research and development, and a science magnet in high-energy-density (i.e., laser) physics. In addition, most of its special nuclear material would be removed and consolidated at a more central, yet-to-be-named site.\nOn September 30, 2009, the NNSA announced that about two thirds of the special nuclear material (e.g., plutonium) at LLNL requiring the highest level of security protection had been removed from LLNL. The move was part of NNSA's efforts initiated in October 2006 to consolidate special nuclear material at five sites by 2012, with significantly reduced square footage at those sites by 2017. The federally mandated project intended to improve security and reduce security costs, as part of NNSA's overall effort to transform the Cold War era \"nuclear weapons\" enterprise into a 21st-century \"nuclear security\" enterprise. The original date to remove all high-security nuclear material from LLNL, based on equipment capability and capacity, was 2014. NNSA and LLNL then developed a timeline to remove this material earlier, and accelerated the completion date to 2012.\nGlobal security program.\nThe Lab's work in global security aims to reduce and mitigate the dangers posed by the spread or use of weapons of mass destruction and by threats to energy and environmental security. Livermore has been working on global security and homeland security for decades, predating both the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. LLNL staff have been heavily involved in the cooperative nonproliferation programs with Russia to secure at-risk weapons materials and assist former weapons workers in developing peaceful applications and self-sustaining job opportunities for their expertise and technologies. In the mid-1990s, Lab scientists began devising improved biodetection capabilities, leading to miniaturized and autonomous instruments that can detect biothreat agents in a few minutes instead of the days to weeks previously required for DNA analysis.\nLivermore researchers address a spectrum of threats \u2013 radiological/nuclear, chemical, biological, explosives, and cyber. They combine physical and life sciences, engineering, computations, and analysis to develop technologies that solve real-world problems. Activities are grouped into five programs:\nOther programs.\nLLNL supports capabilities in a broad range of scientific and technical disciplines, applying capabilities to existing programs and developing new science and technologies to meet future national needs.\nLawrence Livermore National Laboratory has worked out several energy technologies in the field of coal gasification, shale oil extraction, geothermal energy, advanced battery research, solar energy, and fusion energy. Main oil shale processing technologies worked out by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory are LLNL HRS (hot-recycled-solid), LLNL RISE (\"in situ\" extraction technology) and LLNL radiofrequency technologies.\nKey accomplishments.\nOver its 60-year history, Lawrence Livermore has made many scientific and technological achievements, including:\nOn July 17, 2009 LLNL announced that the Laboratory had received eight R&amp;D 100 Awards \u2013 more than it had ever received in the annual competition. The previous LLNL record of seven awards was reached five times \u2013 in 1987, 1988, 1997, 1998 and 2006.\nAlso known as the \"Oscars of invention\", the awards are given each year for the development of cutting-edge scientific and engineering technologies with commercial potential. The awards raise LLNL's total number of awards since 1978 to 129.\nOn October 12, 2016, LLNL released the results of computerized modeling of Mars's moon Phobos, finding that it has a connection with keeping the Earth safe from asteroids.\nIn December, 2022 scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory announced, in a breakthrough for fusion power technology, that they have used the technique of inertial confinement fusion to achieve a net gain of energy. The National Ignition Facility (NIF) became the first fusion reactor to achieve breakeven on December 5, 2022, with an experiment producing 3.15 megajoules of energy from a 2.05 megajoule input of laser light for an energy gain of about 1.5.\nPremier computing ecosystem.\nThroughout its history, LLNL has been a leader in computers and scientific computing. Even before the Livermore Lab opened its doors, E.O. Lawrence and Edward Teller recognized the importance of computing and the potential of computational simulation. Their purchase of one of the first UNIVAC computers set the precedent for LLNL's history of acquiring and exploiting the fastest and most capable supercomputers in the world. A succession of increasingly powerful and fast computers have been used at the Lab over the years in support of the stockpile stewardship mission. LLNL researchers also use supercomputers to answer questions about subjects such as materials science simulations, climate change, reactions to natural disasters, and other physical phenomena.\nLLNL has a long history of developing high performance computing software and systems, focusing on creating highly complex physics models, visualization codes, and other unique applications tailored to specific research requirements. LLNL-developed software projects optimize the operation and management of the computer systems, including operating systems such as NLTSS or TOSS (Tri-Laboratory Operating System Stack), software build and installation tools such as Spack, and resource management packages such as Flux and SLURM. LLNL also initiated and continues leading the development of ZFS on Linux, the official port of ZFS to the Linux operating system.\nLivermore Valley Open Campus (LVOC).\nIn August 2009, a joint venture was announced between Sandia National Laboratories/California campus and LLNL to create an open, unclassified research and development space called the Livermore Valley Open Campus (LVOC). The motivation for the LVOC stems from current and future national security challenges that require increased coupling to the private sector to understand threats and deploy solutions in areas such as high performance computing, energy and environmental security, cyber security, economic security, and non-proliferation.\nThe LVOC is modeled after research and development campuses found at major industrial research parks and other U.S. Department of Energy laboratories with campus-like security, a set of business and operating rules devised to enhance and accelerate international scientific collaboration and partnerships with U.S. government agencies, industry and academia. Ultimately, the LVOC will consist of an approximately 110-acre parcel along the eastern edge of the Livermore Laboratory and Sandia sites, and will house additional conference space, collaboration facilities and a visitor center to support educational and research activities.\nObjectives of LVOC\nSponsors.\nLLNL's principal sponsor is the Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Administration (DOE/NNSA) Office of Defense Programs, which supports its stockpile stewardship and advanced scientific computing programs. Funding to support LLNL's global security and homeland security work comes from the DOE/NNSA Office of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation, as well as the Department of Homeland Security. LLNL also receives funding from DOE's Office of Science, Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, and Office of Nuclear Energy. In addition, LLNL conducts work-for-others research and development for various Defense Department sponsors, other federal agencies, including NASA, Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), National Institutes of Health, and Environmental Protection Agency, a number of California State agencies, and private industry.\nBudget.\nFor Fiscal Year 2009 LLNL spent $1.497\u00a0billion on research and laboratory operations activities:\nResearch/Science Budget:\nSite Management/Operations Budget:\nDirectors.\nThe LLNL director is appointed by the board of governors of Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC (LLNS) and reports to the board. The laboratory director also serves as the president of LLNS. Over the course of its history, the following scientists have served as LLNL director:\nOrganization.\nThe LLNL director is supported by a senior executive team consisting of the deputy director, the deputy director for science and technology, principal associate directors, and other senior executives who manage areas/functions directly reporting to the laboratory director.\nThe director's office is organized into these functional areas/offices:\nThe laboratory is organized into four principal directorates, each headed by a principal associate director:\nThree other directorates are each headed by a principal associate director who reports to the LLNL director:\nCorporate management.\nThe LLNL director reports to the Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC (LLNS) board of governors, a group of key scientific, academic, national security and business leaders from the LLNS partner companies that jointly own and control LLNS. The LLNS board of governors has a total of 16 positions, with six of these governors constituting an executive committee. All decisions of the board are made by the governors on the executive committee. The other governors are advisory to the executive committee and do not have voting rights.\nThe University of California is entitled to appoint three governors to the executive committee, including the chair. Bechtel is also entitled to appoint three governors to the executive committee, including the vice chair. One of the Bechtel governors must be a representative of Babcock &amp; Wilcox (B&amp;W) or the Washington Division of URS Corporation (URS), who is nominated jointly by B&amp;W and URS each year, and who must be approved and appointed by Bechtel. The executive committee has a seventh governor who is appointed by Battelle; they are non-voting and advisory to the executive committee. The remaining board positions are known as independent governors (also referred to as outside governors), and are selected from among individuals, preferably of national stature, and can not be employees or officers of the partner companies.\nThe University of California-appointed chair has tie-breaking authority over most decisions of the executive committee. The board of governors is the ultimate governing body of LLNS and is charged with overseeing the affairs of LLNS in its operations and management of LLNL.\nLLNS managers and employees who work at LLNL, up to and including the president and laboratory director, are generally referred to as laboratory employees. All laboratory employees report directly or indirectly to the LLNS president. While most of the work performed by LLNL is funded by the federal government, laboratory employees are paid by LLNS, which is responsible for all aspects of their employment, including providing health care benefits and retirement programs.\nWithin the board of governors, authority resides in the executive committee to exercise all rights, powers, and authorities of LLNS, excepting only certain decisions that are reserved to the parent companies. The LLNS executive committee is free to appoint officers or other managers of LLNS and LLNL, and may delegate its authorities as it deems appropriate to such officers, employees, or other representatives of LLNS/LLNL. The executive committee may also retain auditors, attorneys, or other professionals as necessary. For the most part the executive committee has appointed senior managers at LLNL as the primary officers of LLNS. As a practical matter most operational decisions are delegated to the president of LLNS, who is also the laboratory director. The positions of president laboratory director and deputy laboratory director are filled by joint action of the chair and vice chair of the executive committee, with the University of California nominating the president and laboratory director and Bechtel nominating the deputy laboratory director.\nThe current LLNS chairman is Norman J. Pattiz, founder and chairman of Westwood One, America's largest radio network, who also currently serves on the board of regents of the University of California. The vice chairman is J. Scott Ogilvie, president of Bechtel Systems &amp; Infrastructure, Inc., who also serves on the board of directors of Bechtel Group, Inc. (BGI) and on the BGI Audit Committee.\nPublic protests.\nThe Livermore Action Group organized many mass protests, from 1981 to 1984, against nuclear weapons which were being produced by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Peace activists Ken Nightingale and Eldred Schneider were involved. On June 22, 1982, more than 1,300 anti-nuclear protesters were arrested in a nonviolent demonstration. More recently, there has been an annual protest against nuclear weapons research at Lawrence Livermore. In August 2003, 1,000 people protested at Livermore Labs against \"new-generation nuclear warheads\". In the 2007 protest, 64 people were arrested. More than 80 people were arrested in March 2008 while protesting at the gates.\nOn July 27, 2021, the Society of Professionals, Scientists, and Engineers \u2013 University of Professional &amp; Technical Employees Local 11, CWA Local 9119, went on a three-day strike over unfair labor practices.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
